Mr. Seger (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank South Africa for having organized
this debate. I would also like to state that Switzerland
associates itself with the statement to be made by the
representative of Austria on behalf of the Human
Security Network. In our national capacity, however,
we would like to bring the following three points to the
attention of the Council.

There is a great deal to say on this issue, in
particular on the critical role of the International Court
of Justice in maintaining a world order based on law,
5
but given the limited time available, we should like to
draw the Security Council's attention to three points
that we believe to be of particular relevance.

First, we welcome the October 2011 report of the
Secretary-General on the rule of law and transitional
justice (S/20ll/634*). The report rightly stresses the
need for a holistic approach to conflict and post-
conflict situations. The principles on combating
impunity that were formulated by the Sub-Commission
on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
between 1994 and 2005 are the cornerstone of such an
approach. Those principles state that dealing with the
past in an effective and lasting way must include
processes of truth-telling, justice, reparations to
victims and institutional reforms, aimed at ensuring
that past abuses do not recur. More needs to be done so
that a coherent approach is pursued systematically
across United Nations activities and is felt in the field.

In that context, we believe that it is particularly
important to draw the attention of the Security Council
to the new mandate of the Special Rapporteur on the
promotion of truth, justice, reparations and guarantees
of non-recurrence, established by the Human Rights
Council by consensus in September 2011. That new
special procedure was put in place to contribute to the
fight against impunity, to enable States to better fulfil
their obligations and to give a voice to victims and
ensure that their rights are respected. We call on the
Security Council to actively consider the work of the
Special Rapporteur, and we hope that the Rapporteur
will receive the full support of the Council.

Secondly, we wish to draw the attention of the
Security Council to the conclusions of the World
Bank's_World Development Report 2011 on conflicts,
security and development. In our view, the report
highlights several crucial aspects that must be part of
discussions on justice and the rule of law. In particular,
it points to the links between conflict, impunity and the
weakening of Government structures, while also
emphasizing the clear links between the economy,
development and the rule of law.

The report also states that justice and the rule of
law are essential in the prevention of conflicts and the
consolidation of peace. An investment by the Security
Council in the rule of law is therefore not only a good
investment in the maintenance of peace, it is also a
good investment in development.
We recommend that the conclusions of the report
be carefully considered by the Council. Much remains
to be learned about exactly how the rule of law can and
must be strengthened in post-conflict situations. By
systematically including the strengthening of justice
and the rule of law in its mission objectives, the
Security Council could itself help to move this issue
forward by insisting on regular evaluations of the
progress achieved. I would cite the recent positive
example of resolution 2027 (2011), on Burundi, in
which this approach was highlighted.

Thirdly, the Secretary-General's report calls on
the United Nations to make its measures more
predictable, effective and transparent. Recourse to
international legal mechanisms should not be exempted
from those requirements. That is why we believe that
the Security Council should develop a predictable and
coherent approach with regard to the situations that it
refers to the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), while supporting past decisions.

The ICC is a court of law; as the Court is a
judicial body, the principles of equality and of
objectivity play an even more important role than
elsewhere. The implications for the action of the
Security Council are basically twofold. First, if the
Security Council refers a case to the Court in a given
situation, it must also do so when dealing with other
comparable cases. Secondly, once it has referred a
case, it must continue to give its full support, including
its financial support, to the work of the Court, while
respecting its independence and its decision-making
autonomy.

