Mr. Molefe (South Africa): South Africa would like
to thank Bolivia for organizing this important quarterly
open debate on the situation in the Middle East with
a particular focus on the Palestinian/Israeli situation.
We would also like to extend our appreciation to the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
for his informative briefing.

South Africa is deeply concerned about the
deteriorating situation in Palestine, which has been
allowed to grow worse as a result of the complete lack
ofprogress in the peace process. At the heart of finding
a genuine resolution to the conflict is the need for the
parties to come together to decide the most contentious
issues between them. That can only be achieved
after a process of trust has been built and a genuine
commitment to peace has been shown. A resolution on
final status issues, including the status of Jerusalem,
the fate of Palestinian refugees and Israeli settlements,
as well borders and security issues, cannot be imposed
by external parties. Peace negotiations are delicate
and challenging processes that require that trust and
goodwill be developed between the parties in order to
be successful. We stress that the fate of the parties to
such processes cannot be decided by external actors.

Unfortunately, the expansion of Israeli settlements
and the continued military belligerence on the part of
the Israeli Defence Force does nothing to create the
trust and goodwill needed to move the process forward.
It only furthers the negative externalities, such as the
perpetuation of the Palestinian refugee crisis.

In that regard, we wish to once again recognize the
importance of the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), which has provided crucial socioeconomic
assistance to Palestinian refugees for decades. Cuts
in the budget of UNRWA threaten the lives of many
vulnerable people and undermine any confidence
in achieving a resolution to the conflict. Punishing
civilians by cutting off humanitarian funding cannot
in any way be conceived as moving the peace process
forward. By reducing funding, it is almost as if we
were insinuating that people chose to live in conditions
such as those. South Africa welcomes recent pledges
made to support UNRWA, and it affirms that such
humanitarian support creates the conditions that could
one day assist the full-fledged self-determination and
ultimate prosperity of the Palestinian people.

The vast majority of Palestine's population have
lived their entire lifetime under Israeli occupation.
For over half a decade, Palestinians have been denied
their dignity and fundamental rights to free movement,
education, health care and even the right to life. The
longer we proceed without progress in the Middle East
peace process, the more unmanageable the negative
impacts will be, not only for the people of Palestine,
but also for the region and the world.

The people of Palestine continue to look to the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, to help them realize their right to self-
determination. After all, we, the United Nations,
agreed in 1947 to establish two independent States, the
independent State of Israel and the free and independent
State ofPalestine, living side by side. The State ofIsrael
was established, but 71 years later the Palestinian State
is just a dream. We must do all we can to consolidate
our solidarity and work towards a just and sustainable
solution for the Palestinian people.

South Africa wishes to emphasize the importance
of the greater inclusion of women in the peace process,
because there is a growing recognition that the activism
of women and their leadership accelerate initial peace
efforts and that marginalizing women only weakens the
prospects for peace. We also acknowledge the role of
women's non-violent activism for peace in both societies
and believe that those initiatives should be drawn on to
create the much needed good will and commitment to
boosting the prospects for peace.

It is clear that peace and security throughout the
Middle East will not be attained without peace between
IsraelandPalestine,asitremainsacentralsourceofdiscord
and conflict among the diverse peoples of the region.
We reaffirm that the responsibility for attaining
peace is primarily in the hands of the people of
Palestine and Israel. We, as part of the international
community, should support and encourage the parties
in that endeavour. The international legal framework
for those negotiations has been set. They include the
relevant General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab Peace
Initiative and the Quartet road map, to name but a few.
However, we should also acknowledge that the situation
cannot continue as usual and that a much needed impetus
is required to get the peace process back on track.

In conclusion, my delegation believes that
dialogue and negotiation remain the only way to find
a lasting solution in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Furthermore, I would like to reiterate my delegation's
commitment to continuing to work on this matter within
the United Nations and other multilateral forums to
seek ways of countering in a fair and equitable manner
the threat posed to international peace and security by
this conflict.

