Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I congratulate
Ambassador Gary Quinlan of Australia on assuming
the chairmanship of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). I thank him for his
first briefing before the Council on the 90-day report
of the Committee and for the commendable work he is
doing at the helm of the Committee. I also commend
the Panel of Experts created by resolution 1929 (2010)
for its valuable support to the work of the Committee.

Rwanda believes that it is the right of every country
to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
However, it is clear that the nuclear programme of the
Islamic Republic of Iran is of particular concern for the
international community. Iran is party to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and
a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). Therefore, it shall fulfil all its obligations under
the NPT, fully cooperate with the IAEA and comply
with all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council.
We are particularly concerned about the regional
dimension of the crisis. The continued enrichment of
uranium, violation of Security Council resolutions,
lack of adequate cooperation with the IAEA, slow
path of negotiations and legitimate security concerns
of countries of the region are all elements that could
transform this crisis into an additional conflict that the
Middle East does not deserve. In that respect, it is of
paramount importance that the Islamic Republic of Iran
take all the necessary measures that could convince
the international community of the peaceful nature
of its nuclear programme. That confidence-building
approach is the only way to ensure that the United
Nations and the larger international community lift the
sanctions that continue to harm the Iranian people.

To conclude, we reiterate our support to the
negotiations between the five permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany and the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the purpose of which is to find a
diplomatic and political solution to the Iranian nuclear
crisis. We commend the constructive talks that the two
sides recently held in Almaty, Kazakhstan, and we
hope that the next talks, scheduled for next month, will
reach tangible results.

