Mr. Bichler (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to speak on behalf of the European
Union. The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania;
the candidate countries Turkey and Croatia; the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, and Serbia and Montenegro;
and the European Free Trade Association countries,
Iceland and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, associate themselves with this
statement.

The European Union thanks you, Sir, for
organizing today's debate, which has enabled us to
focus on the African dimension of the Security
Council's work. This month, the Security Council has
addressed African issues virtually every day.
Unfortunately, there are good reasons for that. Large
parts of Africa remain in the grip of armed conflicts,
compromising the long-term stability of the entire
continent, not to mention the unjustifiable suffering
that such conflicts inflict on its peoples. The great
majority of the more than 65,000 people working in
United Nations peacekeeping operations are deployed
in Africa. A new mission is being deployed to the
Sudan, while others are to be reinforced or approved in
the near future.

The European Union believes that fostering
lasting peace and security in Africa - prerequisites for
lasting economic and social development - is one of
the major tasks of the international community in
general and of the Security Council in particular. We
attach great importance to our multidimensional
partnership with Africa and with its people. At their
22-23 March meeting at Brussels, the heads of State or
Government placed emphasis on the special importance
of Africa in 2005.

The Security Council bears primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Its important contribution to peace and security in
Africa would certainly be enhanced by increased
cooperation and coordination within the partnerships
forged among the United Nations, the European Union,
the African Union and subregional organizations with
regard to the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts and of their root causes. New flexible
partnership models have already proven most valuable
in that regard, as evidenced by the African missions to
Burundi and to the Sudan.

Moreover, the European Union believes that, in
addition to partnerships and practical cooperation,
institutional links between the United Nations and the
African Union should be strengthened, especially in
the sphere of peace and security. In view of the great
number of conflicts in Africa and their increasing
complexity, such institutional links could optimize the
effectiveness of the international community's efforts
by making use of the comparative advantages of
regional and subregional organizations and of their
complementarity vis-a-vis the United Nations system.
Here, the European Union is pleased that in a 19
November 2004 presidential statement
(S/PRST/2004/44), the Security Council invited the
Secretary-General to explore new means of
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

Less than three years after its creation, the
African Union has made considerable progress as a
credible and legitimate interlocutor for the continent of
Africa and has gained the respect of the international
community. The African Union has steadfastly
shouldered its responsibilities as leader in addressing
some of the numerous armed conflicts that Africa has
long had to endure. That determination is illustrated by
its recent efforts to stabilize the situation in Darfur.

As a direct extension of the presidential statement
of 20 July 2004 (S/PRST/2004/27) on cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in stabilization processes, the European Union is firmly
resolved to strengthen its dialogue with the African
Union, to forge institutional ties and to formulate an
operational programme, especially as regards peace
and security.

In November 2004 the European Union adopted
an action plan for support to peace and security in
Africa, which sets out practical ways and means to
help African organizations establish their own capacity
for the prevention and management of conflict. In
addition to human and financial support, the European
Union has provided logistical, technical and political
support to most peace and mediation processes in
Africa. Military observers of States members of the
European Union are participating in all United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Africa, and we provide
support to a number of peacekeeping missions
approved and led by the African Union or by
subregional organizations. To expedite financial
support for such operations, and at the request of the
African Union, the European Union created the Peace
Support Operation Facility for Africa, a development
mechanism funded in the amount of €200 million and
fully operational since June 2004.

Let me conclude by making brief mention of four
specific areas where the European Union believes the
Security Council should act quickly and resolutely to
prevent the prolongation of armed conflicts and of
human suffering. First, there is a need to put an end to
impunity. Secondly, arms embargoes must be more
scrupulously respected. Thirdly, the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons must be combated. And
finally, programmes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration must be effectively supported.

While responsibility for progress in Africa lies
first and foremost with the leaders and peoples of the
continent, I repeat that the European Union advocates
strengthened relations and broadened partnerships
among the United Nations, the African Union and
subregional organizations, especially in the spheres of
international peace and collective security. For its part,
the European Union is prepared to enhance its relations
with the African Union with a view to establishing a
true strategic and institutional partnership based on the
principles of Africa's ownership of its own destiny, full
and complete cooperation, equality and legitimacy.

