Mr. Alyemany (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
wise conduct of the work of the Council this month, and
to thank you for giving us this opportunity to speak to
the Council.

Almost two and a half years since the bloody coup
in Yemen - led by Houthi militias allied with our
country's former President and supported by Iran, a State
that is a sponsor of terrorism around the world - my
country is currently dealing with an extremely serious
and complex health and humanitarian situation. Today
Yemen is making headlines because of the death,
poverty and disease that the militias have brought on us
since September 2014. The environmental health and
humanitarian situation in regions under the control of
the coup's leaders has been complicated even further
by an outbreak of cholera that has killed hundreds
of Yemenis.
Despite the international community's appeals and
the intensified efforts of the World Health Organization,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the World Food Programme and the King
Salman Center for Humanitarian Aid and Relief, the
militias continue to reject cooperation and subjugate
our people to dangerous blackmail. They believe that
making these health and humanitarian disasters as bad
as possible will force the international community to
come up with a solution that will enable them to sue for
a political compromise.

Today it is more urgent than ever to achieve
peace in Yemen, based on the three locally,
regionally and internationally agreed-on terms of
reference - the Initiative of the Gulf Cooperation
Council and its Implementation Mechanism, the
national dialogue outcomes and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2216 (2015).
They remain the main drivers of the efforts of the United
Nations and the Secretary-General's Special Envoy for
Yemen, all of which the Yemeni Government fully
supports with a view to making progress towards peace.

Our Government continues to be ready to make all
necessary concessions, however difficult, to achieve
the peace that the great and resilient Yemeni people
deserve, because we believe that war is the choice of
fools and peace the choice of the brave. We therefore
stressed in our communique' of 3 June that we would
continue to support the efforts of Special Envoy Ismail
Ould Cheikh Ahmed, and when he met with our
President in May we emphasized our support for his
latest proposals and ideas. They include the withdrawal
of militias from Hudaydah governorate, as discussed
in last year's peace consultations in Kuwait, and the
establishment of a technical committee of economic
and financial experts to help the Government establish
an appropriate and urgently needed mechanism to
pay employee salaries and address the problem of
livelihoods in regions controlled by the coup leaders,
in order to provide the income needed to cover such
expenses. In its presidential statement of 15 June
(S/PRST/2017/7), the Security Council stressed its
support for the Special Envoy and his recommendations
for peace. Unfortunately, however, the Houthi-Saleh
coalition has rejected those proposals.

I have outlined the position of the Yemeni
Government - its quest for sustainable peace and
an end to a war that was never of our choosing, but
was imposed on us - to the Council over and over
again. The Houthi militias have turned a blind eye
to all the options for peace and all the sacrifices and
concessions that our President has made in an effort
to avoid a foolish war in which the biggest loser is
the great Yemeni people. Despite all of this, we will
continue to extend our hand and choose the path of a
just, comprehensive and peaceful solution based on
the terms of reference - one that paves the way for a
genuine peace and does not lead to a fool's war, accept
blackmail or reward the coup leaders, terrorists and
gangs for violating our State's national sovereignty.

The only way to reach a sustainable solution to the
crisis and the war is by addressing their root causes. I
must emphasize how crucial we consider the current
cooperation between our Government and the United
Nations and all its agencies in Yemen. I would like to
take this opportunity to express our deep gratitude to
all the United Nations workers in Yemen who continue
to fulfil their noble humanitarian responsibilities in
dealing with the cholera outbreak, despite the desperate
conditions. We are expecting an important visit from
Mr. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF, and
Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the World
Food Programme, in the next few days.

However, I feel compelled to note the inadequate
performance ofthe Office ofthe Resident Coordinator, a
subject that we have continually brought up in our letters
to the Secretariat, most recently in our communique of
26 June, which calls the Resident Coordinator's work
unprofessional, biased and politicized, ignoring as it
does the tragic situation that the militias have caused,
particularly in Taiz, which has now been under siege
for more than two years, as well as the deaths and
displacement of women, children and the elderly in the
indiscriminate shelling in June of civilian services and
hospital facilities by the Houthi militias.

The Yemeni coalition monitoring human rights
violations has documented 917 violations by Houthis,
resulting in 187 civilians killed and another 205
injured, as well as 236 kidnapped and 33 who have
been the victims of forced disappearance. We continue
to document a growing number of children recruited
by Houthis, and the Office of the Special Envoy has
updated us on those numbers. It is distressing to see
the numbers, which grow daily, of children among the
victims in Taiz and other regions, and ofthe disappeared
and those who are detained in Houthi prisons. And yet
the conscience of the international community has not
yet driven it to raise its voice in protest at such violations
of human rights, and the deafening silence continues,
as if it were normal to consider that international
humanitarian law does not apply in Yemen and that the
international community does not care about Yemenis.

Under the leadership of President Mansour, the
Government of Yemen considers it vital to mobilize
international and Arab support in order to address the
deteriorating humanitarian situation and the cholera
outbreak in every region of Yemen. The challenges that
we have been facing exceed our capacity to address
them. We therefore call on the international community
to provide assistance and devote greater attention to this
issue. To date only 33.3 per cent of the United Nations
humanitarian response plan for Yemen 2017 has been
funded, despite the fact that we are in the second half
of the year. I therefore appeal to the human conscience
and to all States Members of the United Nations to
swiftly cover the remaining requirements of the plan
for the current year. We call upon those States that
made pledges at the Geneva conference to rapidly fulfil
their commitments to the United Nations, so that we can
overcome the cholera epidemic and famine in Yemen.

Allow me to express our thanks and appreciation to
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, donor countries,
the Friends of Yemen, the King Salman Centre for
Humanitarian Aid and Relief, UNICEF, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme
and other relief agencies in the brotherly United Arab
Emirates and Kuwait for swiftly responding to the
consequences of the humanitarian situation and the
cholera outbreak in Yemen.

In conclusion, I should like to stress once again
that a sustainable, effective and genuine solution to
the situation in Yemen requires that the reasons for the
coup be addressed and national political reconciliation
ensured, as well as a return to legitimacy, the restoration
of State institutions and the normalization of living
conditions through a peace process that puts an end to
the hijacking of our State by Tehran-backed militias.
This requires also that the international community
bring pressure to bear on the Houthis and Mr. Saleh
to resume, and genuinely engage in, the dialogue for
peace and make concessions for the sake of Yemen.
We appreciate the efforts of the Security Council
and the group of 18, and we thank the Kingdom of
Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and other
States of the Arab coalition for their efforts to support
legitimacy in Yemen. We call upon all members of the
Security Council to continue to make unified efforts to
end the Yemeni crisis by taking a firm stance against
the masterminds cf the coup and to bring greater

pressure to bear on them in order to ensure that they
comply with all resolutions of international legitimacy
and international humanitarian law.

