The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Italy.
Italy shares deep historical, cultural, economic,
historical and strategic ties with the whole Horn of
Africa and is deeply committed to the full restoration of
peace and stability in the region. Therefore, we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2385 (2017) and we thank the
penholder, the United Kingdom, for its excellent work.
We spared no efforts in negotiating the text adopted
today in order to introduce some provisions that could
reflect the evolution of the situation and open the way
for reviews of the sanctions regime in the near future,
allowing us to fully support this text.

Regarding Somalia, the resolution condemns the
violations of the arms embargo, which undermine
Somali sovereignty and territorial integrity. Moreover,
for the first time, the Security Council has recognized
Somalia's progress in arms control and has committed
to revising the embargo once Mogadishu has met all
the conditions.

Turning to Eritrea, in the operative part of the
resolution the Security Council recognizes for the first
time that there is no conclusive evidence of the alleged
support of Eritrea to Al-Shabaab, as the Monitoring
Group on Somalia and Eritrea has been stating for
four years. Furthermore, the Security Council is
committed to reviewing the sanctions on Eritrea again,
starting in the next semester. To this end, Eritrea
should enhance its cooperation with the Committee
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
concerning Somalia and Eritrea and the Monitoring
Group, in particular by facilitating a visit of the Chair
of committee. Cooperation with both the sanctions
committee and the Monitoring Group is not an option;
it is mandatory requirement in order to open more
doors in the coming months.

Sanctions are an instrument, not an end. Like
every instrument, they must be revised when new
circumstances require it. Somalia and Eritrea should
seize the opportunities offered by the resolution
adopted today.

I resume my functions as President of the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

