Mr. Mukerji (India): Mr. President, let me begin by
congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of April. I would
also like to express our appreciation for the convening
of today's quarterly open debate, which will allow the
Council to take stock of recent developments in the
Middle East, including the State of Palestine. I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Jeffrey Feltman
for his comprehensive briefing.

The Middle East peace process is passing through
its most difficult phase in recent times. For more than
two years, the parties have not held a single official
meeting. The efforts of the international community,
including those of the Quartet, have failed to make
any impact on the ground. In the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, the intensification of settlement activities
is quickly eroding the very foundation of a two-
State solution. The plight of ordinary Palestinians is
worsening every day due to roadblocks and related
occupation infrastructure that put restrictions on the
free movement of persons and goods.

The blockade of Gaza has also continued to cause
a great deal of hardship for the Palestinians. The
plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails requires
immediate attention. Meanwhile, the Palestinian
Authority is facing one of its worst financial crises,
which threatens to erode the progress made in building
Palestinian State institutions. If the present situation
persists, the international community will risk seeing
a serious destabilization of the region. It is therefore
imperative that efforts aimed at breaking the deadlock
and resuming the peace process be reinvigorated.

Any political process, to be meaningful, must
put an end to Israeli settlement activities. Continuing
settlement activities are a violation of international law
and harmful to the peace process. We join others in
urging Israel to stop settlement activities in order for
the Palestinian side to come to the negotiating table.

We have noted that Israel has recently taken
measures to allow the flow of basic goods into Gaza.
Still, the continuing blockade remains in force and
is adversely affecting essential services, economic
activities and infrastructure development. We continue
to call for the complete lifting of the blockade. The
parties should also fully implement the provisions of
the ceasefire agreement reached in November 2012.

The Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, at its recent
meeting in Brussels last month, underscored the urgent
need to close the Palestinian Government's financing
gap, estimated at $1.2 billion for the current year. In
that context, it is important that the international
community continue to respond to the financial needs
of the Palestinian authority.

Since the time of Mahatma Gandhi, India's
support for the Palestinian cause has been strong and
unwavering. India was the first non-Arab country to
recognize the State of Palestine. Since then, India's
bonds of friendship with the Palestinian people have
been strengthened and reinvigorated by regular
interactions. As a member of the Security Council in
2011 and 2012, India supported Palestine's bid for full
and equal membership of the United Nations. Continuing
that support, India co-sponsored the General Assembly
resolution 67/19 in November 2012, which upgraded
the status of Palestine to non-member observer State.
India has consistently supported a negotiated solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian issue with a view to achieving
a sovereign, independent, viable and united State of
Palestine, living within secure and recognized borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital, side by side and
at peace with Israel, as endorsed in various Security
Council resolutions and the Quartet road map.

India has also partnered with Palestine in
socioeconomic development and has extended material
assistance to the Palestinian Authority. As in previous
years, India pledged an amount of $10 million in 2012
as budgetary support to Palestine. India also annually
contributes $1 million to the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East. India is in the process of implementing projects,
bilaterally and through the India, Brazil and South
Africa Fund, including in the fields of information and
communication technology, vocational training and
school construction.

In conclusion, let me express our deep concern at the
deterioration of the situation in Syria. We believe that
the joint communique of the Action Group (S/2012/523, annex), adopted in June 2012, provides a good basis for
resolution of the Syrian crisis. A Syrian-led political
process that meets the legitimate aspirations of all
sectors of Syrian society is the only way to resolve
the crisis and must be seriously pursued by all parties
concerned.

