Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes the adoption, by unanimity, of resolution 2532 (2020), which acknowledges that the unprecedented extent of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. COVID-19 necessitates a firm recommitment to the values of multilateralism in order to address the interlocking health, socioeconomic, political and security challenges of the crisis, and to stimulate a sustainable and inclusive recovery that serves the interests of all nations and peoples. To that end, our delegation considers it an obligation to support this resolution, which lays the foundation for an immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council's agenda, thereby allowing conflict-affected countries the time and space to repair their societal fractures and rebuild in order to best respond to COVID-19. Given the disproportionate implications of the pandemic on the developing world, including those resulting from lockdown measures, supply chain disruptions, a sharp decline in remittances and a general decrease in travel, trade and other economic activities, we must cast our collective gaze towards building capacities, reducing inequalities and promoting social and economic justice for all, in accordance with the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Otherwise, we can expect the further escalation of social tensions in many conflict-affected societies. We must also address the urgent humanitarian needs exacerbated by the pandemic. As such, we welcome calls for a sustained humanitarian pause for at least 90 consecutive days in order to enable the safe, unhindered and sustained delivery of humanitarian assistance, in accordance with the principles of international law. We also emphasize the appeal for peacekeeping operations to provide critical support, within their mandates and capacities, to host-country authorities, and further call for an immediate end to all unilateral coercive economic measures that impede national efforts to respond to the pandemic and undermine multilateral cooperation at a time when it is most crucial. As the current pandemic, the likes of which we have not experienced in over a century, continues to wreak havoc on our societies and our economies, we must renew our collective commitment to global health cooperation by crafting effective networks that facilitate rapid early detection, prevention, treatment and response. We must also recommit to providing social protections for the most vulnerable.
