Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Zarif, for his briefing. I
welcome the presence and statement of His Excellency
Mr. Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia in today's meeting. I have
also listened attentively to the statement of Mr. Hoxhaj.

China respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia and appreciates Serbia's reasonable
concerns about the question of Kosovo. Council
resolution 1244 (1999) is the important legal basis for
settling the question of Kosovo. China's View is that,
in addressing the issue of Kosovo, it is imperative to
uphold the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, work within the framework of the
relevant Council resolutions and find an appropriate
solution that is acceptable to both parties through
dialogue and negotiation.

The security situation in Kosovo has remained
mostly peaceful of late. However, violent incidents
continue to take place in the north. China believes that
all relevant parties should undertake concrete measures
to protect the legitimate rights of all communities in
Kosovo and promote intercommunal reconciliation.
At the same time, all parties should adopt a prudent
attitude, stay the course in resolving disputes and
differences through dialogue and avoid any actions that
may lead to complication or escalation of the situation.

China appreciates Serbia's active efforts in seeking
a political settlement regarding the question of Kosovo.
China welcomes and supports the continued efforts
of both Belgrade and Pristina towards maintaining
and furthering the high-level political dialogue and
in implementing the bilateral agreements already
achieved. China believes that the continued efforts
of both sides to promote a pragmatic, positive and
constructive dialogue process and seek a lasting
solution to the question of Kosovo will contribute to the
maintenance of peace and security in the Balkans and
all of Europe. The search for an appropriate settlement
of the question of Kosovo through efforts to strengthen
the harmonious coexistence of all communities and
simultaneous economic and social development in
Kosovo is in line with the common objective of the
international community and the aim of our concerted
efforts.

China appreciates the work of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
under the leadership of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif. We support the continued
implementation of the Security Council's mandate
by the Mission. We hope that various international
presences, including UNMIK, the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force,
will work in accordance with their respective mandates
to strengthen coordination and cooperation and play
a positive and constructive role in promoting an
appropriate settlement of the question of Kosovo.

