Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I would first like to thank
Special Representative Yamamoto and Ms. Ghizaal
Haress for their insightful briefings. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988
(2011) for their briefings.

My remarks today will cover three themes: regional
and international support for Afghanistan, women's
and girls' rights and the elections.

First, on regional engagement, I would like to
recognize the success of the recent Geneva Ministerial
Conference on Afghanistan, which is a testament
to the world's continued support for the people of
Afghanistan. Special Representative Yamamoto
and Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal, the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan to the United Nations,
contributed to the success of the Conference. I thank
them. The Conference highlighted the solidarity of
the international community as we stand with the
Afghan people and the Afghan Government in their
efforts to bring peace and prosperity to their country.
Furthermore, we urge the Taliban to respond to the
Afghan Government's offer of peace and to negotiate
peace for the people of Afghanistan.

I am also glad to note the successful adoption by the
General Assembly on 6 December of resolution 73/88,
on Afghanistan, which demonstrated the international
community's enduring support for Afghanistan. At
this time, I want to highlight the important role of
Afghanistan's neighbours in supporting peace efforts,
improving regional interconnectivity and promoting
economic development opportunities with Afghanistan.

Secondly, I would like to emphasize Canada's
support for the meaningful inclusion of Afghan women
and girls in decision-making processes. As you said so
well yourself, Mr. President, in your statement on behalf
of Cote d'Ivoire, we know that no country can achieve
true peace and prosperity without the full participation
of all of its citizens, especially women and girls, as well
as ethnic and religious minorities. That is why we have
partnered with Oxfam Canada on the Amplify Change
project, which supports the participation of Afghan
women and girls in decision-making processes. To
date, Oxfam has helped 680 women and 600 men better
understand and safeguard women's legal rights. That
work has also included religious and political leaders
from the provinces of Balkh, Nangarhar and Herat, and
uses both an Islamic perspective focused on sharia laws
and secular laws.

Canada commends President Ghani for reaffirming,
at the Geneva Ministerial Conference, that the
Government of Afghanistan intends to continue to
defend the constitutionally protected rights of Afghan
women. Canada also commends the leadership of First
Lady of Afghanistan Rula Ghani on the empowerment
of women and girls. Leadership at the top is making
a difference. The success of many women in recent
parliamentary elections may be related to those
efforts and leadership. So far, 28 per cent of elected
parliamentarians are women - a number that is higher
than in many democracies and higher than in my own
country, Canada. In our last federal election in 2015,
only 26 per cent of elected parliamentarians were
women. Of course, that did not prevent Prime Minister
Trudeau from forming the first gender-balanced
cabinet in our history. But still, it shows that the people
of Afghanistan ought to be congratulated.

(spoke in French)
I would like to congratulate the Afghanistan's
Independent Election Commission on its gender
equality policies and on its concrete efforts to increase
the political participation of women. I also note the
tremendous efforts of civil society actors, such as
the Transparent Election Foundation of Afghanistan
and the Afghan Women's Education Center, for their
courage in promoting the rights of women and girls, as
well as those of ethnic and religious minorities, during
the electoral process.

We also welcome the work of the United Nations and
other partners to distribute ballots in rural areas ahead
of the elections. We encourage the Afghan national
authorities to continue to actively address irregularities
and to promote and protect the rights of those in rural
communities, especially women candidates and voters,
to participate in public affairs. Their inclusion is
essential to the integrity of the elections.

Afghanistan recently went through an important
democratic process during the October parliamentary
elections. I commend the bravery of the Afghan people
who, defying intimidation and threats of violence,
went to the polls to cast their votes. I also recognize
the courage of the Afghan elections officials and the
security sector personnel who supported the elections
process. We look forward to the presidential election
in 2019, and we hope that the lessons learned from the
October parliamentary elections will be applied to the
presidential election.

(spoke in English)

The next presidential election, to be held in 2019, is
crucial to the future of Afghanistan. It is important that
lessons be learned from the recent legislative elections.
Shortcomings must be addressed. Some initiatives must
be taken to ensure that the presidential election is free,
fair and credible. All stakeholders have an important
role to play to ensure that the country is ready. The

Independent Election Commission, the Electoral
Complaints Commission, the Government, the political
parties, civil society and the international community
must all come together to ensure that Afghans can vote
freely and in security. Canada stands ready to help.

