Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
presidency of the Security Council this month, as well
as to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. I
would also like to offer our deep condolences to the
Government and the people of Japan and to the families
of the earthquake victims there.

Our region is dealing with many political and
intellectual challenges and a very complex reality.
Words are simply inadequate to express the fear and
suffering that the peoples of the region are enduring,
whether in the occupied Palestinian territory, Syria,
Yemen or other countries. The increasing gravity of the
conflicts is forcing us to ask whether the international
community's intervention, through the resolutions and
international instruments adopted at the United Nations,
is enough. Have we failed to ensure lasting stability?

Jordan made major efforts during its membership
of the Security Council to try to arrive at realistic
solutions to the conflicts in the Middle East. We have
often voiced our vision in that regard, emphasizing that
the main issue is still the question of Palestine and the
lack ofajust and lasting solution to it, which continues
to undermine previous efforts to resolve the problem
of the Middle East. We cannot ignore the inherent link
between a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
peace in the region. We need a comprehensive approach
to its various aspects and a genuine effort on the part
of the international community to reach a lasting
solution that will prevent violence and extremism from
exploiting this vacuum and expanding the crisis to the
entire region and the rest of the world.

Israel's daily illegal violations - its demolitions
of homes, forced expulsions and displacements of
residents and attempts to change the status quo, first and
foremost through methodical colonial expansion - are
outrageous. We condemn them and urge the Council to
live up to its responsibility and to take steps immediately
to end the colonization in the West Bank and Jerusalem,
which is a violation of international law. Israel's actions
on the ground run counter to its declarations and stated
positions and hinder every effort to re-launch the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.

We therefore reaffirm the need for serious efforts
to pursue negotiations on a two-State solution within
defined parameters, including a specific timetable
for arriving at an agreement on an independent
Palestinian State, within the June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, based on the relevant
international initiatives and the Arab Peace Initiative.
This should also aim to guarantee the supreme vital
interests of Jordan, which are linked to all the aspects
ofa definitive solution. Jerusalem, the Al-Aqsa Mosque
and the Al-Haram Al-Sharif have a very particular
significance for His Majesty King Abdullah II ibn
Al Hussein, owing to the historical custodianship of
Jordan, which is the guarantor of the Muslim and
Christian holy sites and has spared no effort to defend
them against the Israeli authorities' unilateral and
illegal acts of aggression towards the Holy City.

As it has always done, Jordan will firmly
oppose all who try to violate the holy sites. Under its
custodianship, Jordan will continue to explore every
possibility for taking diplomatic and legal steps to end
Israel's violations and acts of aggression. We consider
its actions to be null and void, particularly because
they are carried out by an occupying Power that by its
very nature cannot be held accountable for its acts. Any
regional or international initiative to resolve the conflict
will remain mere empty words if we do not demonstrate

the political will and international commitment needed

to move forward. We continue to await a serious display

of commitment and engagement to peace on the part of

Israel, and we demand that Israel end its activities in

the occupied territory. This is not just a demand by the
Palestinians; it is an international demand with the goal
of saving a people who are being deprived of their basic
rights to dignity and security.

I turn now to the crisis in Syria, which has caused
unspeakable destruction and displaced millions of
people. We must redouble our efforts to support
the United Nations and to ensure the success of the
current negotiations on a political agreement based
on the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 2254 (2015). Jordan reiterates its support
for the efforts of Mr. Staffan de Mistura and the
International Syria Support Group. We hope the
negotiations will enable the parties to achieve a political
transition and assure the establishment of a constitution
and secure governance that can help to restore security
and stability to Syria and enable its refugees to return
and begin a new era in their country's history.

The numbers and flows of refugees from Syria
to its neighbours and to Europe continue to increase
and are living proof of the enormous humanitarian
tragedy in Syria, which threatens to blow up the
entire region. Jordan will continue to take the high
moral and humanitarian ground and to fulfil its duty
to Syria's refugees. The heavy burden we have taken
on is exhausting our limited resources. It is therefore
essential that the international community abide by its
commitments, live up to its responsibilities and provide
us with assistance in accordance with its pledges at the
London conference in February, so as to enable Jordan
and the other countries hosting refugees to cope with
their growing burden. Jordan proposed a comprehensive
new approach at the conference for dealing with the
humanitarian crisis of the Syrian refugees, focused
on finding durable solutions based on international
development. We call on the international community
to support our appeal for the period from 2016 to 2018.

While it is essential to fight terrorist groups, it is
also crucial that we deal with the underlying causes of
their activity. We have become victims and hostages to
their activities in the region, which are preventing our
countries from achieving their aspirations as they find
themselves still living under the threat of terrorism. We
must unite the international efforts to eradicate such
groups, which exploit religion, and point out that their
Takfiri views have nothing to do with the Muslim faith;
on the contrary, they are targeting the Muslim faith.
The activities of such terrorists not only hurt Islam,

they represent an attack on all monotheistic religions
and the humanist principles that hold human life sacred
and privilege mind and logic.

It is therefore essential that international efforts be
concerted to confront such groups, in particular Da'esh.
We need to strengthen young people's involvement
in society, so that they can resist the influence of
extremist thought and terrorism. That is what we have
done through the adoption of resolution 2250 (2015),
with regard to youth, peace and security.

