Mr. Adekanye (Nigeria): I have the honour to
address the Security Council on behalf of the Chairman
of the African Union, President Olusegun Obasanjo of
Nigeria, on the issue of the African Union (AU)
mediation mission in Cote d'Ivoire, led by President
Thabo Mbeki of South Africa. I am glad that this
meeting is taking place under the presidency of China,
a country with which Nigeria enjoys very warm
relations.

May I also seize this opportunity to thank the
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs of South Africa,
Mr. Aziz Pahad, for his very detailed and informative
report. It is indeed gratifying that Mr. Pahad is
appearing before the Council for the second time in 30
days. This is testimony to the commitment of the
African Union and, in particular, of its mediation
mission to peace and stability in Cote d'Ivoire.

Nigeria identifies with the briefing just made by
Mr. Pahad and, in that regard, is grateful to President
Mbeki for the efforts he has exerted and for his
commitment to peace, which, happily, have resulted in
the Pretoria Agreement. Those efforts point to an
unwavering faith in the capacity of the AU to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict in Cote d'Ivoire.

The latest agreement signed in Pretoria by all the
parties to the conflict marks an important milestone in
the AU's efforts to find a peaceful solution to the
crisis. We welcome the reaffirmation by the parties to
the conflict of their commitment to the peace process,
as provided for in earlier Agreements, namely the
Linas-Marcoussis and Accra II and III Agreements. We
note also that they have undertaken to follow and
implement the road map elaborated by the AU
mediator and endorsed by the African Union as well as
to commit themselves to the October 2005 elections.
Furthermore, in the Agreement the parties

"solemnly declare the immediate and final
cessation of all hostilities and the end of the war
throughout the national territory."

These are indeed important undertakings, freely
entered into by the parties.

Undoubtedly, the Agreement addresses whatever
gaps existed in earlier ones. To reinforce this, concrete
actions are needed. First, the leaders of the various
parties to the conflict must go beyond merely
appending their signatures to the document. They must
display practical leadership qualities, including the
political will to accommodate dissension. They must
also show a readiness, when necessary, to make
sacrifices for the common good. The long-suffering
people of C6te d'Ivoire must no longer be made to pay
the price for political differences among the parties.

We believe that the Pretoria Agreement offers the
Ivorian leadership an opportunity to demonstrate their
oft-repeated commitment to the interests of their fellow
citizens by ensuring the faithful implementation of its
provisions. It is also incumbent on the leadership to
mobilize support at the grass-roots level for such peace
efforts.

Secondly, the United Nations presence in Cote
d'Ivoire should be strengthened and become visible
throughout the length and breadth of the country. That
would bolster confidence and trust among the parties
as well as enhance public perception of the impartiality
and effectiveness of the Blue Berets.

Thirdly, a well-funded DDR programme would
wean the population, particularly the youth, away from
violence and facilitate their reintegration into the
political mainstream of Ivorian life.

Fourthly, C6te d'Ivoire, at this critical time,
continues to require the support and assistance of the
international community, including its neighbours, to
ensure the success of the Agreement. I want to assure
you, Mr. President, that, as the African mediation
mission in Cote d'Ivoire has amply demonstrated,
countries in our regions are determined, for their part,
to coordinate such support.

The Security Council has in the past
demonstrated its resolve by supporting regional
initiatives for a peaceful solution to crises in Africa.
Nigeria therefore pays warm tribute to the Council in
that regard, and in particular for the adoption of
resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire as well as the
establishment of the United Nations Operation in Cote
d'Ivoire. We will continue to count on the Council for
even more support in the coming months.

Towards that end, we call on the Council to
support the efforts of the African Union on Cote
d'Ivoire by giving its endorsement of the Pretoria
Agreement and of the ruling on article 35 of the
Ivorian Constitution, the principal bone of contention
in the conflict. An explicit position on the part of the
Council would be consistent with the fact that the
parties have agreed to abide by such a ruling on the
part of the African Union.

It is also necessary for the Council to consider an
urgent review of the current mandate of UNOCI and to
expand it, so that United Nations peacekeepers can
actualize the commitments undertaken by the parties
under the Agreement. These would entail the
commitment of additional resources and logistics
commensurate with the situation on the ground.

Such favourable consideration by the Council
would serve the cause of peace, so that the next
briefing by the African Union can focus on the ground
gained, and not on a relapse in the peace process due to
an ineffectual United Nations presence. It is our hope
that the international community as a whole will not
miss this opportunity to halt and reverse the Ivorian
crisis. We are confident that the gravity of the situation
will be matched by commensurate action by the
Council.

