Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe
for his briefing and for United Nations continued
support to achieve peace in the Middle East.

The United States shares the concerns of the
international community about the very difficult
current situation in Gaza and the plight of the
Palestinian people, a plight that warrants our attention.
As we do so, we should not lose sight of how that
situation came to be, nor of what we are working to
achieve, that is - Gaza as an integral part of a future
Palestinian State.

I want to make clear that the United States will
not abandon the people of Gaza. We will continue to
provide humanitarian aid to help meet the basic needs
of the Gazans. But we believe that the current situation
is the result of Hamas policies and actions, especially
the ongoing rain of rockets into southern Israel despite
a complete Israeli withdrawal in 2005. Therefore,
Hamas is ultimately responsible for the current
situation.

The United States condemns in the strongest
terms the ongoing firing of rockets and mortars from
Gaza into Israel by terror groups. These attacks on
innocent Israeli civilians must stop. We expect the
Government of Israel, when responding to these
attacks, to take all possible steps to avoid civilian
casualties and to minimize the impact on innocent
civilians in Gaza.

The Government of Israel has stated that it will
not allow a humanitarian crisis to develop in Gaza and
has said that it will ensure the continued flow of
humanitarian supplies, so that the most basic needs of
Gazans will continue to be met. The Israelis have said
that they understand the need to permit fuel and
electricity in Gaza. In our private discussions with the
Israeli leadership, we have stressed the importance of
avoiding a humanitarian crisis in Gaza. We do not want
innocent Gazans to suffer. We also believe that Prime
Minister Salam Fayyad's idea of allowing the
Palestinian Authority to have a greater role at the
border crossings could be examined.

Hamas, which violently seized power in June, is
seeking to exploit the current situation, a situation of
its own making. The Council should not fall into that
trap. If Hamas cared more about the well-being and the
future of Gazans than it did about its own political
agenda, it would put an end to the ongoing rocket
attacks on Israel and relinquish its illegitimate control
of Gaza to the Palestinian Authority, under the
leadership of President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad.

We look forward to Gaza being reunited with the
West Bank under the legitimate and responsible
leadership of the Palestinian Authority. Until that time,
the international community should focus its efforts on
supporting the legitimate leaders of the Palestinian
Authority - President Abbas and Prime Minister
Fayyad.

The aspirations of the Israeli and Palestinian
peoples to peace and security will never be realized
through violence. A better future for both peoples can
be realized only through negotiations and peaceful
means. That is why President Bush just completed a
trip to the Middle East, in order to reinforce the full
support of the United States for a negotiated peace
settlement.

As we deal with the current situation in Gaza, we
must maintain focus on the long-term goal of
establishing a Palestinian State that is democratic,
contiguous, independent and viable. Achieving that
goal is so important to the United States that we have
invested a significant amount of political capital. In
addition to the personal efforts of President Bush and
Secretary Rice, the President has appointed Lieutenant
General William Fraser to monitor and facilitate
progress on the Road Map, Lieutenant General Keith
Dayton to help the Palestinians as they work to
professionalize their security forces, and General Jim
Jones to work with the parties and regional partners to
develop some ideas for a security concept for a future
Palestinian State.

It is our judgement that efforts to achieve peace
between Israel and the Palestinians must progress
along four tracks. First, both sides need to fulfil their
commitments under the Road Map, as the parties
reaffirmed at Annapolis. For the Israelis, that includes
ending settlement expansion and removing
unauthorized outposts. For the Palestinians, it includes
confronting terrorists and dismantling their
infrastructure.

Secondly, the Palestinians need to build their
economy and political and security institutions, with
the help of Israel and the international community.
Quartet Representative Tony Blair is making important
progress on Palestinian economic reform and
institution-building, and he has established good
working relationships with Prime Minister Fayyad and
Israeli Defence Minister Barak.

The third track is the international track. The
international community has shown, both in Paris and
in Annapolis, that they fully support this effort. The
United States appreciates the Arab Peace Initiative and
believes that THE Arab States that are committed to
regional peace should reach out to Israel.

Finally, the parties' bilateral negotiations are
essential in establishing a peace settlement that ends
the occupation that began in 1967. The only way to
have a lasting peace is for both sides to come together
to make difficult choices and implement them, in order
to establish trust. The United States believes that
President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert will make
such choices, because they both value the importance
of democracy in creating conditions of security and
stability. It is our hope that their teams will negotiate
seriously and touch upon all of the difficult core issues
between them.

It is important to sustain the momentum for the
two-State vision that was generated in Annapolis in
November and further built upon at the donor
conference in Paris in December. We remain
committed to the creation of a Palestinian State. A
Palestinian State will enhance stability in the Middle
East and will contribute to the security of the people of
Israel. And, as President Bush said, the establishment
of the State of Palestine is long overdue. The
Palestinian people deserve it.

We know that the members of the Council share
that vision. We will look for their support as we
continue our work to realize a better future for the
Palestinians, the Israelis and all the peoples of the
Middle East.

