Mr. Kadangha-Bariki (Togo) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Ambassador Quinlan for his
briefing on the activities of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and to commend
him on the outstanding work he has done as head of the
Committee.

We take note of the 22 May report (GOV/2013/27)
of the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) on the implementation of
the safeguards agreement under the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), as well
as the final report (see S/2013/331, annex) of the Panel
of Experts established by resolution 1929 (2010).

The exchanges in March (see S/PV.6930) on the
nuclear issue in the Islamic Republic of Iran led us
to conclude that overall, the crisis of confidence
between that country and the international community
continued to grow. Four months later, the situation has
not improved. The reports of the IAEA and the Panel
of Experts are unequivocal: the pending issues - such
as access to all the relevant information, documents,
sites, materials and personnel in Iran - have not been
settled. The most recent talks between the IAEA and
Iran, held in Vienna on 15 May, have not enabled them
to come to an agreement on a document on a structured
approach. Moreover, the Agency reports that activities
related to uranium enrichment have continued.

Regarding the other enrichment-related activities
discussed in paragraph 27 of its report, the IAEA
indicates that it has not received any concrete response
to its demands for descriptive information on the
announcements that Iran has made on the subject
of the construction of 10 new uranium-enrichment
installations. The lack of any response clouds the outlook
for cooperation between Iran and the IAEA, and it is no
surprise that the Agency would conclude that it is not
in a position to carry out the necessary verifications or
produce a complete report. All those factors, combined
with the lack of necessary cooperation, have led the
Agency to conclude that Iran's activities could have
possible military dimensions.

The erosion of trust between the international
community and Iran is basically due to the latter's lack
of cooperation. Togo would like to once more appeal to
the Islamic Republic of Iran's sense of responsibility
and call on it to step up its dialogue with the IAEA
and the entire international community, and to grant
access to every site, particularly Parchin. The talks
between Iran and the five permanent members of the
Security Council and Germany in recent months, aimed
mainly at encouraging Iran to renounce its nuclear
programme and send its stock of 20-per cent enriched
uranium abroad, have not produced results. We hope
that the negotiations to come will enable progress to
be made in the context of maintaining international
peace and security. It is crucial that Iran respect
and fully implement the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council and the IAEA Board of Governors.
It is nonetheless firmly established that every country,
including Iran, has the right to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful means within the framework of the IAEA
safeguards agreement.

On 15 and 16 May the Government of Togo, in
conjunction with the Institute of Security Studies,
based in South Africa, and the United Nations Regional
Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Africa, whose
headquarters is in Lome, organized a regional seminar
for West and Central African States on the lessons and
prospects of the implementation of United Nations
sanctions. The meeting enabled the 15 or so delegations
to be better equipped to understand the Iranian nuclear
issue and informed on best practices for implementing
related sanctions. In parallel with the seminar, the Panel
of Experts established by resolution 1929 (2010) held
consultations with Togolese authorities. The exchanges
were frank and fruitful and demonstrated our country's
willingness to cooperate fully with the Panel, although
the Togolese officials emphasized on the importance of
strengthening national capacities in the area. The latter
aspect emerges clearly in paragraph 136 of the Panel's
report.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate my
country's gratitude for the Panel's very valuable efforts
towards a settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. Their
competence is unquestionable, and that strengthens our
conviction that the Council should attach even greater
value not only to the question of competence but also to
geographical distribution when it comes to nominating
members of subsidiary bodies.

