The Secretary-General: The Council meets at
the outset of a very important few weeks for the cause
of peace in the Middle East. In this regard, I welcome
and appreciate the participation of many distinguished
ministers in this meeting, and I appreciate the initiative
of the Russian presidency.

After the inconclusive results of last year's
negotiations and the bloodshed in Gaza, the past three
months have witnessed almost no progress on the two
key resolutions, resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), recently adopted by this Council. I hope that
this meeting today will help provide direction and
momentum.

In the period ahead, United States President
Obama will host the Israeli and Palestinian leaders and
key regional parties in Washington, DC. I expect the
Quartet to meet soon and to consult closely with
members of the League of Arab States. The challenge
is to begin implementing transformative changes on the
ground and to kick-start a renewed and irreversible
drive to achieve an Israeli-Palestinian agreement. The
ultimate objective remains the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State,
living side by side in peace and security with Israel,
and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region.

Resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is
fundamental to the well-being of both peoples, the
region and the world. This Council, the Quartet, States
in the region, the international community as a whole
09-33303
and I as Secretary-General must each play our full role.
Security Council resolutions, previous agreements and
obligations, and the Arab Peace Initiative give us the
framework we need. We should be as determined as we
are patient, as insistent as we are supportive, and as
principled as we are empathetic to the very real
concerns of both parties. The parties need confidence
that the process will address their vital interests. For
that, they need confidence that commitments made will
be commitments monitored and commitments kept.

In this regard, I believe that there is a deep crisis
of confidence among ordinary people on the ground,
and for good reason. Palestinians continue to see
unacceptable unilateral actions in East Jerusalem and
the remainder of the West Bank - house demolitions,
intensified settlement activity, settler violence and
oppressive movement restrictions due to permits,
checkpoints and the barrier, which are intimately
connected to settlements. The time has come for Israel
to fundamentally change its policies in this regard, as it
has repeatedly promised to do but has not yet done.
Action on the ground, together with a genuine
readiness to negotiate on all core issues, including
Jerusalem, borders and refugees, based on Israel's
existing commitments, will be the true tests of Israel's
commitment to the two-State solution.

Ordinary Israelis continue to seek reassurance
that a future Palestinian State will guarantee their right
to live in peace and security. In this respect,
indiscriminate rocket attacks that have caused loss of
life, civilian suffering and damage to property in Israel
are not only deeply unacceptable, but also totally
counterproductive, and must cease. The Palestinian
Authority must continue its efforts to consolidate
progress in developing and deploying an effective
security structure and the functioning institutions of a
future State - work that Israel must facilitate. For its
part, Israel should refrain from using excessive force
that kills and injures civilians, as it did during the
recent conflict in Gaza with such devastating
consequences. Firm and full respect for international
humanitarian law by all parties is indispensable.

The beginning of Palestinian self-empowerment
has been a key achievement of this past year's efforts
and must not be imperilled by the financial crisis
facing the Palestinian Authority. I appeal to donors,
including in the region, to urgently meet unfulfilled
commitments, including for budget support and Gaza's
reconstruction.
3

I remain extremely worried about the situation in
and around Gaza, with internal Palestinian divisions
and Israeli-Hamas tensions trapping the civilian
population in a vortex of hopelessness. The United
Nations continues to fully support Egypt's efforts to
achieve reconciliation among Palestinian groups and is
ready to engage with a Government that unites Gaza
and the West Bank within the framework of the
legitimate Palestinian Authority. As an interim
measure, we would also welcome the establishment of
practical mechanisms that could help Palestinians in
Gaza focus on reconstruction, security issues and
preparations for elections.

I am convinced that the policy of continued
closure of the Gaza Strip does not weaken Israel's
adversaries in Gaza, but does untold damage to the
fabric of civilian life. Nearly four months after the
conflict, in which 3,800 houses and two health-care
centres were destroyed, and 34,000 homes, 15 hospitals,
41 health-care centres and 282 schools sustained
varying degrees of damage, we cannot get anything
beyond food and medicine into Gaza to assist a
population that had been in the midst of a war zone.
This is completely unacceptable.

I call on Israel to respond positively to repeated
calls to allow glass, cement and building materials into
Gaza. In the aftermath of the war and given the level of
human suffering now evident on the ground, I seek the
support of all members of this Council and the Quartet
for the United Nations efforts in Gaza. We are ready to
work with local businessmen to help start action to
repair and rebuild houses, schools and clinics. I can
assure all Council members that we will continue to
ensure the full integrity of programmes and projects.

Indeed, the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009) - a durable and fully respected
ceasefire, prevention of the illicit supply of weapons to
Gaza, the reopening of the crossings in accordance
with the Agreement on Movement and Access, and
progress on Palestinian reconciliation under the
legitimate Palestinian Authority - must be fulfilled.
Efforts on these elements, as well as a prisoner
exchange, remain the only way of meaningfully
altering the dynamics on the ground for the better.

Finally, let me emphasize the important regional
context. Arab countries have reaffirmed their
commitment to the Arab Peace Initiative, which offers
Israel the opportunity for acceptance and security
within the region on the basis of land for peace. This
remains a key framework around which a
comprehensive approach to peace can and must be
built. I continue to believe strongly in the potential for
activating the regional tracks of the peace process,
alongside a rejuvenated Palestinian track, including
between Israel and Syria, on the basis of land for
peace. I support the convening of an international
conference in Moscow. I also look to Arab and regional
countries to play a positive role regarding the internal
Palestinian situation by urging all parties to turn away
from Violence and weapons acquisition and towards
reunification under one Palestinian Authority
committed to the principles of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and, indeed, to the Arab Peace Initiative
itself.

Like a bicycle that falls over when left at a
standstill, the situation on the ground could easily
deteriorate unless proper direction is given and real
momentum is quickly generated. Violence and terror
will not bring the Palestinians statehood and dignity,
and settlement expansion and closure will not bring
Israel security or peace. And no two-State solution can
be reached if the situation between Gaza and southern
Israel continues on its present destructive course or if
Palestinians remain permanently divided.

I call on the parties to honour all existing
agreements and previous commitments and to pursue
an irreversible effort towards the two-State solution,
including by fully implementing commitments on the
ground. I also believe that the international
community's credibility is at stake. We are a long way
from where we hoped to be when we embarked on a
fresh push for peace less than two years ago. However,
I take heart that there is a deep consensus about the
scale of the challenge and the importance of meeting it.
Let us move forward with confidence and resolve,
knowing that, if we rise to our responsibilities, we will
help the parties rise to theirs, too.

