The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Vice-Chancellor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany.

Allow me to express my sincere condolences on
the tragic loss of life in the accident of the Columbia
space shuttle to the families and to the Governments
and peoples of the United States and Israel.

I would like to thank Secretary of State Colin
Powell for the information he has just given us. The
place and timing of this detailed account underline
once more that the Security Council is and remains the
centre of decision-making on the Iraq crisis. Germany
supports this approach. Given the implications they
could have for future decisions, the findings have to be
examined carefully. We can already see that they
coincide in part with information that we also have.
They are based on a close exchange of information.

It is now decisive that the United Nations
inspectors also be provided with this extensive
material, insofar as that has not yet happened. They
have to work with this information to be able to clarify
the unresolved questions quickly and fully. And Iraq
has to answer the elements which were provided today
by our colleague Colin Powell to the Security Council.
The more expert information the inspection teams have
at their disposal, the more targeted their work can be.
Thus, from the outset, Germany, too, has passed on the
information to Hans Blix, Mohamed ElBaradei and
their teams.

The Security Council has been dealing with Iraq
for 12 years. As a matter of principle, the unity of the
Council is of central importance in this context.
Baghdad has time and again violated the obligations
laid down in the relevant Council resolutions. Nor do
we hold any illusions on the inhumane and brutal
nature of Saddam Hussain's dictatorship. Under his
rule, Iraq has attacked its neighbours Kuwait and Iran,
fired missiles at Israel and deployed poison gas against
Iran and its own Kurdish population. The regime is
terrible for the Iraqi people. That is why a policy of
containment, sanctions and effective military control of
the no-fly zones has been implemented since the Gulf
War. Iraq must comply with all relevant Security
Council resolutions in their entirety and completely
disarm its weapons of mass destruction potential.

The presence of the inspectors in Iraq has already
effectively reduced the danger of that potential.
Nevertheless, the aim of resolution 1441 (2002) is the
full and lasting disarmament of Iraq. In his latest
report, Hans Blix listed many open questions. The
regime in Baghdad must give clear answers to all these
concrete questions without delay.

Despite all the difficulties, United Nations efforts
to disarm Iraq in the past were not without success. In
the 19905, the inspectors were able to destroy more
weapons of mass destruction capacities than did the
Gulf War. The threat potential of Iraq to the region was
thus clearly reduced. The current basis for the
inspections is laid down in resolutions 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002). The weapons inspectors from the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) have powers that reach
further than ever before. They have to be given a real
chance and the time they need to fully exhaust the
possibilities.

Chief Inspector Blix and IAEA head ElBaradei
will travel to Iraq again next weekend and thereafter
update us. The success of that trip will be of paramount
importance. It will depend crucially on the full
cooperation of Baghdad. Quite a few States suspect
that Saddam Hussain's regime is withholding relevant
information and concealing military capabilities. This
strong suspicion has to be dispelled beyond any doubt.
That is exactly why resolution 1441 (2002) provides
for the instrument of inspections in Iraq by UNMOVIC
and the IAEA.

The dangers of a military action and its
consequences are plain to see. Precisely because of the
effectiveness of the work of the inspectors, we must
continue to seek a peaceful solution to the crisis.

In the world of the twenty-first century, the
United Nations is key to conflict prevention, crisis
management and peace building. On the basis of
resolution 1441 (2002) and in the light of practical
experience, we need to enhance the instruments of
inspection and control. We need a tough regime of
intensive inspections that can guarantee the full and
lasting disarmament of Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction. By tightening inspections, we are creating
an opportunity for a peaceful solution. Such a tough
system of inspections could also be effectively applied
by the Security Council in other cases. Our French
colleague made some very interesting proposals on this
matter which deserve our further consideration.

Moreover, we ought to support all endeavours of
States in the region that are currently engaging in
considerable diplomatic efforts to bring the Iraqi
Government to fully implement the resolutions. Iraq
has to disarm openly, peacefully and in cooperation
with the inspectors without any delay.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of Iraq.
