Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, I
would like to welcome His Excellency Mr. Didier
Burkhalter, President of the Swiss Confederation and
Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), and thank him
for his comprehensive briefing. I also congratulate his
country on its assumption of the chairmanship of the
OSCE for 2014.

Almost 40 years since its establishment, the role
of the OSCE, through its early-warning, conflict
prevention, crisis management and post-conflict
rehabilitation systems, has proved that the organization
is one of the important partners of the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We also believe that such kinds of interactions with
regional and subregional organizations are a good
opportunity to strengthen the implementation of the
mandates of those organizations.

We note the official launch of the "Helsinki-MO"
project by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly in
January. We look forward to the completion of the
OSCE strategic document in 2015, and we hope that the
conclusion of that exercise will help the organization
to contribute to the maintenance of international peace
and security in a more efficient manner.

In the meantime, I would also like to encourage
the OSCE to extend its cooperation to other regional
organizations, mainly in the area of experience-sharing,
most especially with the African Union, an organization
that is evolving into a viable and irreplaceable partner
for the maintenance of peace and security on the
African continent.

Allow me also to express our appreciation for
the important role that the OSCE is currently playing
in facilitating various processes aimed at settling
the crises and conflicts in its region, especially the
continued efforts of the co-Chairs of the OSCE
Minsk Group to mediate on the Nagorno Karabakh
conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Rwanda
supports the position contained in the joint statement
of the Presidents of the OSCE Minsk Group co-Chair
countries, issued on 18 June 2013, which reiterates that
only a negotiated settlement can lead to peace, stability
and reconciliation, opening opportunities for regional
development and cooperation.

Another important contribution of the OSCE that
we value is its assistance in the destruction of surplus
weapons left by the Cold War, especially in Ukraine
and Georgia, as well as its support for arms control
through its Forum for Security Cooperation. It is also
very encouraging that the modernization of the Vienna
Document and exchange of ideas on conventional
arms control are among the priorities of the Swiss
chairmanship.

In the Balkans, we commend the active contribution
ofthe OSCE in the recent municipal elections in Kosovo,
its contribution to promoting the rule of law and its
continued support of the Roma and Sinti minorities.

With respect to the OSCE's efforts in combating
transnational threats, I welcome the OSCE's intention
to organize a conference in April on foreign fighters in
other countries. I look forward to the positive outcome
of the conference.

On Ukraine, we are very alarmed by the ongoing
situation in that OSCE member State. The situation
has proved that it has the potential to take a dangerous
twist, unfortunately leading to dozens of deaths and
injuries and the destruction of property. We welcome
the efforts of the OSCE Chairperson-in-Office to find
a peaceful solution to the crisis, including by proposing
the establishment of an international contact group on
Ukraine and the appointment of a special envoy to that
country.

We also commend Poland, Germany and France
for brokering, on 21 February, the agreement on
the settlement of the crisis in Ukraine between the
Government and the opposition. We took note of the
turn of events that followed the signing of that deal,
namely, the moves by the Supreme Rada to release
former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko from a prison
hospital and to divest President Viktor Yanukovych.
Nonetheless, we hope that all parties will implement
the agreement in good faith, particularly by refraining
from all kinds of violence and by putting in place a
Government of national unity that will carry out the
necessary constitutional and legal reforms, leading to
presidential elections scheduled before the end of this
year. We call on all international actors to respect the
sovereignty of Ukraine and ensure that the process is
Ukrainian-led and Ukrainian-owned.

Finally, I would like to express my country's
support for the vision and priorities of the Swiss
Chairperson of the OSCE's work this year. We look
forward to continued good cooperation between the
OSCE and the United Nations in maintaining peace and
security in accordance with Chapter VIII ofthe Charter
of the United Nations.

