Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate and for
the concept paper circulated by your
delegation(S/20ll/408, annex). I also thank the
Secretary-General and Mr. Achim Steiner for their
perceptive and inspiring statements. This debate is
timely in that it affords us the opportunity to evaluate
progress in implementing the internationally agreed
development goals, conventions and protocols that
frame our response to climate change. Through this
discussion, we can also contribute effectively to
preparations for the 2012 United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development.

The challenges posed by climate change are
immense and the consequences for peace and security
wide-ranging. Every aspect of our lives, from food
security to resource management, is threatened by this
phenomenon. As we have witnessed in the current food
crisis in the Horn of Africa, threats to water
management, animal health and crop production are
magnified by political instability and insecurity.
Scarcity breeds fear, which in turn fuels conflict. This
chain reaction demands vigilance on the part of the
Security Council. Unless we take concerted action to
mitigate and adapt, the risks will only increase. For
example, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change has estimated that a l-metre sea-level rise
could flood 18,000 square kilometres of Nigeria's
coastal land, damage assets valued at $89 billion, and
force the relocation of up to 5 million Nigerians. The
cost of protecting Nigeria from such a rise in sea levels
is estimated at $3 billion.

On the basis of those facts, we are gravely
concerned about the potential impact of changing
climate conditions. Nigeria is working with bilateral
and multilateral partners at the regional and
international levels to identify solutions to these
challenges. My Government has also sought to
mainstream its mitigation and adaptation strategies
with development policies aimed at significantly
reducing carbon emissions and sustaining its campaign
against desertification.

Nigeria remains committed to the Millennium
Development Goals and the Green Wall Sahara
(Nigeria) Programme, which seeks to ensure
sustainable consumption and production. We have
initiated mechanisms to address the issue of gas
flaring, firmly determined to progressively transform it
into liquefied gas processing. We are engaging in
research on methods of carbon-dioxide reduction in
petroleum products.

While we recognize that not every nation is
equipped to implement root-and-branch policy change,
it is important that every nation, no matter how small,
play a small part. My delegation is concerned about the
slow rate of progress in achieving agreement on
implementing international climate change mitigation
agreements. Nations have too often failed to honour
their commitments to such frameworks, and such
failures have reverberations everywhere. In many
cases, the efforts of developing countries and small
island developing States to adapt to the negative
impacts of climate change are undermined by natural
disasters and often by conflict. Our struggle to protect
our climate should therefore reflect the additional
challenges faced by such nations, and should feature in
our wider peacebuilding frameworks.

I firmly believe that if we can support political
stability, we can create the space for long-term
capacity-building and the embedding of best practices
and national policies for climate change. The United
Nations system is uniquely placed to guide the
implementation of the existing commitments in the
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change and its Kyoto Protocol, the Johannesburg Plan
of Implementation and the Mauritius Declaration.

Seated around this table are those who could
encourage developed countries to implement their
commitments to reducing emissions and supporting
developing countries with the requisite technological
and financial assistance to address climate change
effectively. Nigeria therefore calls for enhanced efforts
for the equitable distribution of adaptation funds and
capacity-building programming, as well as promotion
of the Global Environment Facility programme steered
by the United Nations Development Programme.

Our response to climate change must be rooted in
political and technological innovation. Our response to
climate change should not be any less strong in the
field of sustainable development. The General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the
Commission on Sustainable Development and the
United Nations Environment Programme are credible
and concrete platforms for effectively discussing and
adopting appropriate measures for dealing with climate
change. I want to reiterate my Government's
commitment to relentlessly supporting, promoting and
fulfilling all regional and international obligations for
mitigating climate change in a collective effort that
seeks to ensure the well-being of present and future
generations. We will be steadfast in the collective
effort that seeks to ensure that peace and stability are
maintained in the world.

