Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
thank the Secretary-General for joining us today.

I thank you, Mr. President of the General
Assembly, for descending from the high podium to join
us to represent your own country. It is an honour to
have two Presidents in the room today, you and
Ambassador Levitte. I take your presence here as being
of enormous significance to all of us.

I would like to express to you, Ambassador
Levitte - the President of the Security Council - our
country's very great appreciation for the leadership that
you and France have taken on behalf of peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
I want to thank all of our friends and colleagues
from the Lusaka process, who hosted us with such
graciousness and generosity in Lusaka on 6 and 7 May,
for again making the long journey to New York. Their
presence here represents their commitment to finding a
solution to the problems of the Congo. I hope that the
world, which is focused on those problems,
understands that everyone is here voluntarily to help
solve them.

I am particularly honoured in that regard to speak
after my friend, Minister Amama Mbabazi of Uganda,
one of the most distinguished statesmen of Africa,
whom I have now had the pleasure to work with
increasingly in recent months and whose speech
deserves careful perusal by all of us.

And, of course, I am delighted at the presence of
the other representatives in the Chamber, and of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ambassador Morjane, who is doing an extremely good
job under extraordinarily difficult circumstances.

This is an important day for all of us, as we
proceed with this long odyssey. Although Minister
Mbabazi was gracious in referring to the American
month, in January, discussions really began earlier than
that. I want to pay tribute to the presidency of the
British in the month of December, and to Sir Jeremy
Greenstock and Ambassador Eldon, for starting the
process. This process has now gone on for many
months. Let the world see that the United Nations is
not turning away from Africa, and let the world see
that there is no double standard. Africa is at the centre
of our attention. This is doubly true, as today as we are
dealing simultaneously with two other major African
issues: Sierra Leone and the Ethiopia/Eritrea problem.
There will be separate meetings going on concurrently
on the latter issue, in conjunction with the Organization
of African Unity (OAU).

But the problems remain, and they have become
more serious in recent days in at least two areas, as
Minister Mbabazi's comments made clear. The people
of the Congo are looking to us to help find a way out of
the hell in which they have been living for so long.
They look to us to help them build lives not defined by
conflict. There have been a lot of statements in recent
months about how the people of the Congo need peace,
but these statements - many of them made here
around this historic horseshoe in this historic
Chamber - have not yet been acted on.

Thirty-six days ago, Mr. President, you and I
were in the region with out colleagues from Great
Britain, the Netherlands, Mali, Tunisia and Namibia on
behalf of the entire Security Council. We were greatly
honoured to represent all of you, and I think we did a
fairly good job in carrying the weight of the United
Nations into the Great Lakes. However, I am not sure
where we are today. Nonetheless, I do note that the
delegation - comprised of three African nations, three
European nations and one country from neither Europe
nor Africa, the United States - symbolized our
common commitment. I would stress again that the
reason that the Latin American and Asian
representatives were not with us was that they had gone
to Kosovo on a parallel mission.

When you decided last month to convene today's
meeting, Mr. President, we had anticipated that we
could build momentum. But the events of the last two
weeks have changed the nature of this meeting.

Let me start, as you did, Sir, with Kisangani, and
let me be honest with my friends from both Rwanda
and Uganda. There is no excuse for what happened in
Kisangani. There was no excuse when the fighting
began around 3 or 4 May. The immediate cessation of
that fighting, after the 8 May ceasefire negotiated by
the Security Council, was promising, but in the last few
weeks the fighting resumed with an extraordinarily
high level of intensity, leaving hundreds of people
killed and thousands wounded and causing enormous
damage to the infrastructure of Kisangani- damage
that the international community will have to pay to
clean up, otherwise it will not be done, thereby
diverting resources from long-term reconstruction and
essential health and education needs. That resumption
is one of the most troubling things I have ever seen in
my career in diplomacy. I am talking now not about the
initial fighting, but about the resumption of fighting a
few weeks ago.

I agree With Minister Mbabazi that there is now a
ceasefire in place and that we have to lock it in. But it
is a fragile ceasefire, and as the Secretary-General has
so correctly warned us in meeting after meeting, we are
facing a gap between the ceaesfire, which took effect a
few days ago, and the arrival of any peacekeeping
forces. We must be honest with ourselves: it is more
difficult now to get peacekeeping forces than it was a
few weeks ago precisely because of the events in
Kisangani. It is more dangerous. It is more
problematical. Governments and their populations have
more reservations. And it will be harder to fund those
efforts because of what happened in Kisangani. So let
us be honest about that in this Chamber.

I personally am not interested in a court of
inquiry into who started Kisangani. The leaders of both
sides have been very clear with all of us that it was the
other side that started it. Based on similar experiences
that I have been involved with in places like Bosnia,
Kosovo and Cambodia, I am certain that we will never
get to the bottom of who started it. The issue is to stop
it permanently and never to let it happen again. That
can be done only with the highest level of political
leadership.

I salute you, Mr. Secretary-General, for your
around-the-clock and tireless efforts with the leaders in
the region to stop that fighting. Without your personal
involvement, I think the chances are very high that the
fighting would still be going on.

As for the fighting in Equateur Province between
the armed forces of the Congo and the Movement for
the Liberation of the Congo (MLC), that too is a
serious problem. It is threatening to bring the war
closer to the major population centres. I say it quite
frankly today, in the presence of the signatories to the
Lusaka Agreement - and, in this case in particular, in
the presence of the Foreign Minister of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the representative of the
MLC - that we need to see a willingness on your part
to halt the fighting.

Let me turn now to the national dialogue. Again,
I speak with great respect for the sovereign
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
But I must say, in all candor, what my Government has
already said publicly. I am obligated and obliged to
repeat here in public that we do not believe that the
renunciation of the facilitator appointed by the OAU
and attacks on the national dialogue can be regarded as
anything other than an attack on the Lusaka peace
process. If there are differences between any parties in
this Chamber and the facilitator, let those be ironed
out. But let us not attack the process itself unless we
are ready to confront the extraordinary implications of
that. I have heard the problems that the Government in
Kinshasa has with the national dialogue. May be some
of them are justified. But an attack on the process itself
can only be regarded as an attack on Lusaka.

The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement is one of the
few things standing between order in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its degeneration into
warlord-dominated, resource-driven satrapies. Last
January, when we in this Chamber sat with the seven
Presidents of the region, a commitment was made to
redouble our efforts for peace. I hope that that will be
the result of this very important meeting that you are
chairing today, Mr. President, only one level below the
chief-of-State level.

In order to bolster the peace process, the
Secretary-General has recommended the reordering of
some of the Lusaka tasks, particularly the sequencing
of foreign troop withdrawals. He suggests that priority
be given to the withdrawal of Rwandan and Ugandan
forces from the Kisangani area. I think that this
recommendation is extremely appropriate, given recent
events. That is one of the major things we will be
discussing. But, as I support the Secretary-General's
position, I would like to underscore a few critical
points.

First of all, in no way does prioritizing the
withdrawal of the forces that fought each other in
Kisangani diminish the long-standing call of the
Security Council, which is on the record in resolutions,
for the withdrawal of all - I repeat, all - foreign
forces. We are not in any way, shape or form
abandoning Lusaka by accepting, as I hope and believe
we should, the prioritization recommended to us by the
Secretary-General.

Secondly, there is an urgent need for all parties to
abandon all support to non-signatory armed groups,
particularly the ex-Forces Armees Rwandaises (FAR)
and Interahamwe. The fact that these groups are still
allowed to stay in business is truly unacceptable. They
are among the most odious groups in Africa, if not in
the world, and they must be dealt with through
concerted regional action.

Thirdly, a discussion of withdrawing Rwandan
and Ugandan forces should not in any way detract from
the obligations of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to participate in the national
dialogue, to allow other Congolese parties the same
right, and to abide by the results of the process.

And fourthly, in regard to this point, let us not let
this discussion detract from the legitimate need to take
into account the security concerns of Rwanda and of
Uganda. Those are legitimate - although the
explosion of fighting in Kisangani, which has nothing
to do with those needs, was extraordinarily lamentable.
We cannot allow a situation occur where the ex-FAR
and Interahamwe resume their 1995-1996 campaign of
terror inside Rwanda.
All of this should be done to strengthen Lusaka.
Let us recall again that this is not an outside-imposed
agreement, but an African initiative: as Mr. Salim
Ahmed Salim put it, an African solution to an African
problem.

There are some who say that Congo's struggle
and the slow progress of Lusaka somehow prove that in
some places failure is certain - that people are simply
predisposed to killing each other. I heard this in
Bosnia; I heard it in Kosovo; I heard it in Viet Nam;
and in an earlier era we heard it in regard to the great
European Powers, which have finally, after a century of
brutality, put their internal differences behind them so
that, today, wars in the central part of Europe, once so
common, are no longer possible. I hope that we will
see, in our lifetimes and in our professional careers, the
leaders of Africa reach the same level of achievement.
If they do so, they will have done it much faster than
the Europeans did, but I hope they can - as
Ambassador Levitte so eloquently, but I regret to say
unsuccessfully, put it to Prime Minister Meles Zenawi
when we were in Addis Ababa four or five days before
that war broke out - learn from Europe's mistakes.

I categorically reject the notion that Africa is not
ready for democracy, or that it needs "strong men" or
dictators to ensure stability, or that among certain
peoples or tribes conflict is inevitable. Such opinions,
which we all heard in regard to Bosnia as well, are
uninformed and, in subliminal form at a minimum,
carry a racist connotation. They were wrong in Bosnia;
they were wrong in Kosovo; they are wrong in Africa.

Let us also stand together to reject the notion that
has gained some prominence among commentators that
some States have become "failed States". States do not
fail; leaders do. Much is made of the artificial nature of
African borders, and many claim that this makes
conflicts inevitable. I share the concern about those
borders and about the way they were drawn in the late
nineteenth century. But those were the borders that the
countries of Africa chose to maintain when they
became independent. And once having made that
decision, the leaders must figure out a way to live
within those boundaries. Or, if they wish to change
them, they may change them voluntarily, as happened
in the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and elsewhere,
but not through wars.

All of this means that we cannot give up hope.
Leadership can make a difference; it must make a
difference. Last January, when we embarked on the
"month of Africa", we said that 2000 would be the
"year of Africa", and you, Mr. President, have set a
very high standard by maintaining the attention of the
Security Council with respect to these issues. At that
time the Permanent Representative of Zimbabwe
reminded us that our commitment to peace efforts -
from the many efforts of the United Nations around the
world to our own commitment in the United States, for
instance, to the Middle East peace process - must be
strong enough to survive numerous setbacks, some of
them catastrophic and seemingly fatal. The
representative of Zimbabwe warned us that in Africa,
like everywhere else, we must be prepared to accept
setbacks and not let them deter us from moving ahead.
I believe that one should accept good advice, especially
when it comes from such an esteemed colleague.
Setbacks are, unfortunately, part of any peace process,
but they should not diminish our resolve; they should
increase it.

In conclusion, let me remind us all that we have
come here today to bolster a peace process that, while
imperilled, is one to which we are all committed. We
have not come here out of a sense of charity, or simply
to right past wrongs - although that must be done -
but because we all recognize that peace in the Congo
and peace and democracy throughout Africa are in the
national interests of us all: Europeans, Asians,
Americans, others in the Western hemisphere, friends
and neighbours alike.

As we proceed with our discussions today and
tomorrow, and as we move forward in the coming
weeks, I hope we will all draw inspiration from what
Ambassador Greenstock, Ambassador van Walsum and
Ambassador Andjaba saw when they made their trip to
Kananga a month ago: thousands of ordinary
Congolese people lining the streets of that city, deep,
deep in the heart of a beleaguered and isolated area,
thousands of ordinary Congolese shouting, "Peace,
peace, peace". Let us help those people fulfil their
hopes and dreams. This, members of the Council and
my friends from the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Agreement, is the best possible reason for us to
continue working for implementation of the Lusaka
Agreement and for peace in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

