Mr. Cengizer (Turkey): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on Guinea's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council at such a crucial juncture and to
wish you every success in this important duty. Our
appreciation goes to your predecessor, the German
presidency, for bringing its task to completion with
care and diligence throughout, at an equally critical
period.

Turkey is happy to align itself with the statement
of the European Union. On the other hand, Turkey, for
a number of reasons, be it our principled approach to
the ongoing crisis as a neighbour of Iraq or be it the
vote cast by the Turkish Parliament, has been at the
forefront of the news during the three weeks since we
last gathered in this Chamber. Hence, the reason for us
to avail ourselves of this opportunity to reiterate the
basic considerations that are still behind our considered
action in this instance and to clarify at the same time
what has been the subject of some speculation lately.

Before I do so, let me first say that Turkey
understands the many difficulties Mr. Blix and Mr.
ElBaradei have encountered, along with the actual
intricacies they have to address while fulfilling their
mandate. It is a fact that considerable progress has been
registered in the inspection process since 18 February,
when we last spoke before this Council. Yet we note
with dismay and foreboding that Iraq, even at this hour,
has yet to show full, immediate, active and
unconditional cooperation with the United Nations
weapons inspectors. Regrettably, the course of action
Iraq has chosen to follow - disgruntled rather than
cooperative - lies at the centre of the present
difficulties this Council is faced with, threatening its
vital unity at this crucial time.

However entrenched the differences that bar the
Council from reaching a united stand may seemingly
be, we call upon the members once again to recognize
that cohesion in this Council will not only serve the
legitimacy of any action that may ensue upon these
deliberations, but will reinforce the credibility of the
United Nations. The Council's cohesion will ensure
that the decisions reached by this body are heard loud
and clear in every part of the globe. Diplomacy must
offer its best at this very critical moment.

Turkey has been earnestly seeking a peaceful
solution to the present crisis, which has been caused by
the non-compliance of Iraq with the many relevant
decisions taken by this Council over the course of no
less than 12 years. As a matter of fact, Turkey has done
everything in its power to let wisdom and foresight
reign. Indeed, we have every reason to seek a peaceful
outcome as a neighbouring country which has felt the
vicious impact of the instability in our region,
especially after the Gulf War.

Yet, for exactly the same reasons - that is,
because of the very fact that we are a neighbouring
country to Iraq, destined to seek friendship and
cooperation with its people - we have been taking
precautionary measures that are geared to lessen and
mitigate the many adverse affects of a looming armed
conflict. Understandably, we have many preoccupations
that continue to occupy the forefront of our minds.
These are manifold in nature and stem from a number
of geostrategic, political, military and economic
considerations, all based on lived-through, real-time
experience. These we should not be expected to let
fester and assume that they will somehow take care of
themselves. These are issues that do not lend
themselves to be treated, at least by us, merely as
different outcomes of different scenarios. We are not
only very near to the area of conflict - we are side-by-
side with it. Hence, we cannot readily contemplate just
any outcome.

Likewise, presenting these manifold
considerations out of their true context, and depicting
Turkey as haggling over a price tag as if this has been a
pecuniary affair, has been a gross disservice to a
country and its people that have been a bastion of
stability in that region. Those scribblers around the
world who have done so have in fact diminished
themselves and their arguments, but Turkey has arisen
once again to the fore in its true colours.

It is in the context that I have tried to describe
that Turkey has been unequivocal in pronouncing the
principles that guide us vis-a-vis Iraq during these
difficult times. We have been following a transparent
and open policy and we have repeatedly made clear the
basic tenets of our policy, which we will continue to
safeguard. Let me reiterate these once more to this
body.

First, the territorial integrity, national sovereignty
and political unity of Iraq should be kept intact.
Secondly, the future of Iraq should be decided by the
Iraqi people in their entirety, not by some of them.
Thirdly, the natural riches of Iraq belong to Iraq and
the Iraqi people as a whole - again, not to some of
them. It is these basic principles that we will continue
to safeguard.

It is because of our open adherence to these
principles that I say this here today: There is no
concealed agenda on our part. I can also say this: As
we have nothing to hide, we do not wish others to hide
anything from us. It is because of our adherence to
these principles that we are set against any attempts at
faits accomplis and other actions that may hinder or
run counter to the emergence of the required
democratic process in Iraq. No one should try to
prejudge the democratic process that these principles
guard and embody at one and at the same time. It is
because of these, yet again, that I can say that any
decision reached by the Iraqi people is acceptable to
Turkey as long as it is reached democratically and
through the participation of all.

I should make it especially clear that Turkey does
not intend to shut out the Kurds living in northern Iraq.
With them, we enjoy a multitude of human bonds,
including kinship and history. We have wrought a
shared wisdom and moral and cultural values. We have
been living together for 1,000 years. Shame on those
soothsayers that pray for enmity in the belief that such
outright conflict would serve their parochial designs!
Let me say just this: Even when terror was rampant in
Turkey, the Turks and Kurds showed that their time-
honoured ties are strong enough to resist any
provocation whatsoever.

We look forward to the day when this crisis ends
and when we can reach lasting and viable grounds on
which the peoples of the region and Iraq - including
Arabs, Kurds and Turkmen - can start to benefit from
the fruits of stability. We wish to see Iraq start forging
a future in which it will become a respected member of
the international community whose human, cultural
and natural riches benefit its people and the region.

