The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Bangladesh.

I shall raise six points for Mr. Annabi. The first
relates to the deployment of the civilian police. We are
very happy that the deployment has picked up; we now
have 933 civilian police deployed there. That is an
improvement, and we welcome the faster deployment. But
we believe that we should also try to look into the
deployment process and see how best we can effect a
speedier deployment of the civilian police. I say this also
in a general context, because we face the same situation
in Kosovo.

The second point relates to the violence led by
militias. As many members of the Council have
mentioned, we are seriously concerned about that, and we
believe in this regard that proactive efforts should be
made to stop such militia activities. I think that the
closing down of camps in those areas is a good way to
start.

The third point relates to the development scenario.
This is an area of close interest to Bangladesh. We
believe that some positive measures are being taken in
this regard. We were very happy to hear about the
community empowerment projects of the World Bank,
about which Mr. Annabi reported to us. We believe that
we will have an opportunity to assess their impact on the
local population. The Quick Impact Projects, which have
been funded by the United Nations Children's Fund and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, bear promise, and we believe that they need to
be encouraged by our side. We also believe that the
revenue situation is likely to improve with the setting up
of the customs and taxation system. Perhaps on a future
occasion the Council will have a report on this aspect
from the Secretariat.

Another matter related to the development projects
is, as many have mentioned, the slow disbursement of
funds. As we mentioned last time, we believe that given
the size of the commitment that has been made to
development in Timor, it would be a pity to see the effort
there faltering because of the slow disbursement of funds.

The fourth point relates to the health and education
situation in Timor. We believe that these two areas need
special attention. With regard to education, on an earlier
occasion we mentioned the need for focusing on the
education of girls in the programmes in Timor. We
believe this is an important area. We had also
recommended that to make the development sustainable
in Timor we should focus on the grassroots level through

 
poverty-eradication programmes such as microcredit
programmes.

The fifth issue that I would like to raise is the question
of national unity and reconciliation. We believe that these
are also priority areas in East Timor in the context of the
paradigm of nation-building. The recent visit by President
Wahid and the militia leaders to East Timor augurs well for
the achievement of these objectives. Gradual improvement
in the economic and political situation should help in the
process.

Finally, with regard to the future political process, we
agree that, rather than setting up a time-frame without
specific achievements on the ground, it would be better to
identify the specific benchmarks to chart the path to
independence and then set a time-frame on that basis.

I will stop here and resume my functions as President
of the Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Annabi to respond to the
comments and to the questions that have been raised.

