Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Iwould
like to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing. We
also thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, for his efforts, which
we support.

The Secretary-General summarized the past decade
for us, during which unfortunately little has improved
in the Middle East. It is with sadness and pain that we
received today's assessment of the situation, which
hardly appears encouragingThe Middle East region
is suffering from a number of civil wars and sectarian
wars: together with the presence of various terrorist
and extremist groups the area has been transformed
into a permanent battlefield and is causing enormous
suffering to the civilian population, particularly in
Syria, Iraq and Yemen.
In the light of what we have heard, we cannot
ignore the fact that some members of the Organization,
including Security Council members, have had and
continue to have significant shared responsibility in
those conflicts. As for their place in history, only time
will tell.

With regard to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian
question, this is a topic that must continue to be high
on the agendas of the Organization and the Security
Council and we should not give up in spite of the
current impasse. Ever since the partition of Palestine
in 1948, Uruguay has been in favour of the creation of
two States, one Jewish and one Arab. We have always
followed the situation in the region very attentively and
we are extremely concerned about the lack of progress
between Palestine and Israel given the humanitarian,
political and security consequences it holds for both
countries, as well as the impact it has on the entire
Middle East region.

Uruguay would once again like to reiterate its
support for the right of both Israel and Palestine to
live in peace within safe, secure and internationally
recognized borders in a environment of renewed
cooperation free of any threats or actions that could
threaten peace. We once again endorse the two-
State solution for two independent States and we are
convinced that this is the only way that will make it
possible to ensure the peaceful co-existence of Israel
and Palestine. Today it is more essential than ever that
the international community reinforce its efforts to
support this process and encourage the parties to return
to the negotiating table.

Uruguay is also worried about the expansion of
settlements in occupied Palestinian territory and the
West Bank. As we have mentioned, these settlements are
illegal under international law and are in contravention
of the recommendations of the Quartet. Uruguay
reiterates its call to the parties to refrain from taking
any unilateral actions could undermine dialogue and to
abide fully by their obligations under international law.
We urge Israel to halt its settlement practices.

Futhermore, Uruguay emphatically condemns
terrorist acts and the glorification ofviolence occurring
on Palestinian territory. It is therefore extremely
important to give political signals to find a way out
of the current vicious cycle of withdrawal and violent
confrontation. It is important for the parties to refrain
from taking unilateral measures that undermine
dialogue and instead comply with all obligations under
international law and Council resolutions in good faith.
We reiterate our willingness to continue working
together in order to reactivate the peace process through
all existing initiatives in order to overcome the current
status quo, including some within the framework of the
Council. None of these initiatives can or should replace
the best way to achieve peace, that is, direct, bilateral
negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians that
will make it possible to find a satisfactory solution to
this process.

In this Chamber in the past I quoted the American
poet Bob Dylan, specifically the old song The Times
They Are A-Changin'. I fear that, without decisive
and concrete action by the Security Council, we will
have to utter a different phrase as times will have
indeed changed.

