We would like to thank Mr. Zahir Tanin, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his briefing. We would also like to thank Mr. Ivica Daeie¢, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Glauk Konjufca, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, for their statements. Estonia commends Mr. Tanin in particular for the latest report of the Secretary- General the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) (S/2020/255) and for leading the work of UNMIK, which has helped advance the democratization of Kosovo and promoted human rights. We also appreciate UNMIK's support for women's participation in decision-making processes and for initiatives targeting youth and the fight against gender-based violence. During the critical time of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, we commend the positive actions taken by UNMIK, including the donation of medical equipment to the country's Ministry of Health. We would like stress that the parliamentary no-confidence vote has further complicated the political situation in Kosovo during the global COVID-19 pandemic. Political stability should be restored as soon as possible, and all political actors must work together to ensure that citizens receive the medical assistance and economic support they need. We therefore call on political and institutional leaders in Kosovo to unite their efforts to mitigate the social and economic impact of COVID-19. We hereby highlight the contribution made by the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) to help Kosovo, especially during these difficult times. Recently, for example, EULEX helped to build the capacity of security bodies within the institutions of the Kosovo Correctional Service by donating information technology equipment to assist its staff in holding virtual meetings. The normalization of relations between Serbia and Kosovo is the key to regional stability, and the dialogue between them should resume after the pandemic is over. We welcome the appointment of Mr. Miroslav Lajeak as European Union Special Representative for the Belgrade-Pristina Dialogue and other Western Balkan regional issues at the beginning of this month and wish him much success in his endeavours. We commend the decision taken by the Kosovo Government to lift the customs tariffs on imports from Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. This is an important first step towards the resumption of the dialogue. We are also glad that the President of Serbia, Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, has affirmed his readiness to fully cooperate with the Pristina authorities in responding to the outbreak and helping the people of Kosovo. As time passes and as both countries continue to demonstrate actions of good faith, the challenges faced by Kosovo and Serbia will hopefully be increasingly addressed in the context of the dialogue facilitated by the European Union (EU), which remains an essential requirement in order for each to advance on its respective European paths. With regard to Kosovo's EU integration path, we look forward to Kosovo's continued implementation of the Stabilization and Association Agreement, which is also important to the completion of further reforms in support of socioeconomic development, the rule of law, and the fight against corruption and organized crime. Accordingly, as strong cooperation with EULEX becomes increasingly prevalent in due course, we would welcome the strategic review of UNMIK. Finally, we wish to express the hope that the plan proposed by President Macron and Chancellor Merkel to host a summit meeting between Serbia and Kosovo in Paris, with the participation of both parties' leaders and EU High Representative Borrell, will come to fruition. As we face the global health crisis presented by COVID-19, let us stand together in solidarity, unity and compassion, in line with the Secretary-General's appeal.
