Mr. Al-Allaf (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first of all like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing this morning.

Jordan associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt earlier today
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

During its ministerial meeting held on 11 May
(see S/PV.6123), the Security Council sent a clear
message to all parties concerned about peace in the
Middle East. The Council reiterated the urgent need to
restore peace to the region in accordance with the two-
State solution and previous agreements and
obligations. We are meeting today not just to reiterate
the importance of that message, but also to emphasize
that, given developments in the region in recent
months, now is the appropriate time to achieve tangible
and genuine progress in the Arab-Israeli conflict, so as
to produce concrete results on the ground. If we let this
opportunity pass us by, there will be catastrophic
consequences for the region and its peoples, the peace
and security of Israelis and Palestinians and
international peace and security as a whole.

Finding a just and lasting solution to the
Palestinian problem, which is at the heart of the
conflict in the Middle East, is the key to the overall
solution of other problems in the region. Any solution
must be based on Security Council resolutions and the
terms of reference adopted at international conferences
with regard to the Palestinian problem. In particular, it
must be based on resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860
(2009), which reiterated that an end to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict could only be based on the two-
State solution. We must therefore intensify efforts and
embark upon serious Palestinian-Israeli negotiations.
Those negotiations must take place according to a
properly defined timetable and be based on a clear and
acceptable plan to achieve a peaceful resolution and
ensure security for Israel.

Under the guidance of His Majesty King
Abdullah II, Jordan is certainly prepared to make every
effort to support that undertaking, so as to launch
negotiations to establish a contiguous, viable and
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital, in line with agreed international terms of
reference and the Arab Peace Initiative, which is the
main starting point to deal with the Arab-Israeli
dispute.

Now is a good opportunity to do that, given
regional and international efforts to find a solution to
the conflict in the region. However, Israel is continuing
its unilateral policy in an effort to impose a fait
accompli on the occupied territories. Israeli plans to
establish new settlements, in particular in East
Jerusalem, and its expansion of existing settlements,
are totally unacceptable. Attempts to create a new
situation on the ground clearly violate both
international humanitarian law and the commitments
that Israel entered into under the Road Map. They also
increase tensions in the region and jeopardize the
chances of finding a just and lasting solution and for
establishing a viable Palestinian State.

If Israel truly wants to demonstrate its sincerity
about moving towards peace, it must immediately halt
all settlement activity and dismantle all illegal
settlement outposts. Israel must not alter East
Jerusalem, and must end its policy of Judaizing
Al-Quds and changing its historic Islamic character. It
must stop its excavations near Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
must cease destroying houses and erecting barriers. It
must end its confiscation of land and all other acts that
could have a negative impact on a peaceful settlement.
Such acts also run counter to international law, in
particular the Fourth Geneva Convention.

As a country of the region, we have taken note of
the positive impact of President Obama's message
delivered in Cairo, in particular as regards the
commitment of the United States to a two-State
solution, to find comprehensive peace in the Middle
East and to improve relations with the Arab and
Muslim world. In that regard, Special Envoy George
Mitchell is making an effort in the region. It is
extremely important to support and build on all such
efforts, as well as to give them every chance of
success.

In line with its responsibilities under international
humanitarian law, the international community must
act immediately to halt the ongoing humanitarian
suffering of the Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip.
That includes lifting the blockade stifling the
Palestinian people, who should also be provided with
the necessary assistance to address their difficult
circumstances, imposed by the occupation. The
deteriorating humanitarian situation of Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip is also resulting in increased despair and
frustration, both in the region and in the Arab and
Muslim world. That will have an impact on security,
stability and peace efforts throughout the region.

Under the guidance of King Abdullah II, Jordan
will continue to make every possible effort to
encourage international stakeholders to end the
suffering of the Palestinian people in Gaza. Voluntary
Jordanian organizations will also continue to deliver
the necessary aid to our brothers in the Palestinian
territories.

Achieving peace in the Middle East is not just a
cherished goal of the countries concerned. That goal
has now taken on an international dimension as well,
given its impact on international peace and security.
Resolving the conflict will be to the benefit of all
parties, and of the entire international community. We
must seize this historic opportunity to achieve peace in
the region, for the region must have peace.

