The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

Ijoin earlier speakers in thanking Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for his briefing.
It has become all too familiar for us to hear the
desperate plea of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs calling for us to respond to the
critical humanitarian needs of civilians in the besieged
and hard-to-reach areas in Syria, particularly the dire
situation in Aleppo. On Friday, we commemorated
World Humanitarian Day, a day designated to serve
as an annual reminder for us to work to alleviate
the suffering of innocents. It is a day that should
strengthen our resolve, a day to honour the bravery of
humanitarian actors delivering such needed assistance.
It was indeed horrifying that what preceded that day
was a stark reminder of how the world had slid into
further disarray. The footage depicting young Omran
Daqneesh, a 5-year-old Syrian boy, sitting impassively,
despite his bloody face, has become a symbol of the
struggling and the tragic consequences that the conflict
has had for civilians, particularly children. It was a
shocking and numbing experience. The significance of
World Humanitarian Day came ironically with an ugly
twist and a powerful reminder that more needs to be
done in the Syrian context.

The Council has yet to pronounce itself on a
weekly, 48-hour humanitarian pause in Aleppo,
almost two months since it was first requested by
the United Nations. The continuing silence from the
Council runs contrary to its demand for a political
solution as violence continues to escalate in Aleppo
and beyond. An immediate response in support of a
weekly humanitarian pause and a full endorsement
for its implementation would have been ideal. Seven
weeks on, the Russian Federation has expressed
support for a humanitarian pause. We must urgently
seize the opportunity to set our differences aside and
pronounce an undivided validation or endorsement of
the humanitarian pause to begin this week.

The agreement, however, is just the first step, as
we continue to hope for the warring parties to respect
and implement a two-day truce. It is also important to
stress that the humanitarian pause must not be a one-off
event, it has to be sustained in the long run.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity to
remind the parties to the cessation of hostilities of their
responsibilities in connection with the terms signed in
February. We hope that eventually talks will prevail
and the bloodshed in Aleppo and other cities in Syria
will end. While the insurgent fighting in Aleppo has
shifted our focus from other cities in Syria, I would be
remiss not to echo the sentiment expressed by Under-
Secretary-General O'Brien about the challenges for
the delivery of assistance to other besieged and hard-
to-reach areas. We urge all the parties to ensure that
humanitarian access be provided to those towns. As
often seen in recent weeks, such access should not be
deliberately impeded.

This week is a crucial week for Syria. In addition
to the all-important humanitarian pause in Aleppo,
which hopefully will pave the way for an increase in the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to civilians, Mr. De
Mistura is also scheduled to resume the intra-Syrian
peace talks in Geneva. We have repeatedly underscored
that a political solution is the only way forward, and we
reaffirm our support for the United Nations-facilitated
talks towards a political solution to the Syrian
conflict. We are hopeful that a greater push could be
made for the resumption of political dialogue without
preconditions. We hope that a more sustained truce
or cessation of hostilities among the various parties,
particularly between the Government and opposition
forces, could be worked out urgently. As articulated by
many stakeholders, a reduction in violence essentially
would alleviate the dire humanitarian crisis faced by
ordinary Syrians - a goal that to date, unfortunately,
has eluded us, and the consequences of which led to
untold human sufferings. We must put an end to this.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

