Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by expressing my thanks to Ambassador Liu
Jieyi and his team for a very successful presidency last
month, and to welcome Ambassador Nebenzia, our new
Russian colleague, to the Security Council.

I should like to wish you, Sir, all the very best for
the month ahead as President of the Security Council.
You have got us off to a flying start with the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2370 (2017) today, which the
United Kingdom is very pleased to support. I hope
that you have started the month as you mean to go on,
because there is a lot to do together and we need to
maintain the unity and activism of this morning as we
grapple wth the challenges of the month ahead. There
is no greater challenge than the unrelenting scourge of
terrorism. It is a threat that we all face and that we must
all unite to defeat.

Through the resolution adopted today, we have
committed to taking practical steps to do just that,
first, by stopping terrorists' deadly use of explosive
devices, and secondly by stopping their illegal supply
of small arms and light weapons. We need only look to
Mosul - to its ruined buildings and ruined lives 4 to see
that these weapons and explosives are crucial enablers
of the brutality of groups like Da'esh. Over three
years, Da'esh used small arms and light weapons and
explosive devices to impose its sick ideology on the
people of Mosul, systematically persecuting anyone
who dared to stand in its way. Three years on, thanks to
the bravery of the Iraqi security forces, Da'esh has now
been defeated in Mosul. But not content with years of
brutality, Da'esh has left behind a bitter, bloody legacy
for those returning home - a city littered with booby
traps and other improvised explosive devices (IEDs).

We must make no mistake - the indiscriminate
use of these devices goes against the basic tenets of
international humanitarian law and the basic tenets
of human decency. That is why the United Kingdom
is committed to developing practical approaches that
reduce the use and availability of improvised explosive
devices. It is why we have committed to spending
$129 million over the next three years to tackle the
problem of IEDs, explosive remnants of war and land
mines. And it is why we are committed to developing an
effective and informed network across the international
community that will help track key components and
prevent the manufacturer of these devices. In parallel,
we need to do more to combat the illicit trafficking
and, crucially, the diversion of small arms and light
weapons. It is not enoughjust to investigate and dispose
of illicit weapons; we must prevent the moment when a
legal weapon becomes diverted to illegal use.

The Arms Trade Treaty remains the most important
instrument at our disposal to do that. It is a robust,
effective, legally binding treaty, and one that took years
to agree. We must use it to its fullest extent, drawing
on its transparent and consistent standards to regulate
the global arms trade. I therefore strongly urge all
States to join the Arms Trade Treaty. The Council has
already made a call on the international community to
consider signing and ratifying that vital instrument,
captured in the most comprehensive resolution adopted
on small arms and light weapons - resolution 2220
(2015). I deeply regret that we were unable today to
repeat that call unanimously, but we may rest assured
that the Arms Trade Treaty will remain central to the
United Kingdom's approach to preventing irresponsible
trafficking in arms.

Before I cede the floor, I think it is important to
recognize that the words in resolution 2370 (2017)
are only as good as their implementation outside the
Chamber. As an example, it is simply not good enough
to express our support for arms embargoes mandated
by the Security Council in the resolution if we are
unwilling to make them a reality in areas of genuine
need around the world. If we look at South Sudan,
last year the Council had a real chance to take steps
to lessen the carnage caused by the uncontrolled flow
of weapons there, and yet when we voted to impose an
arms embargo we failed.

The United Kingdom maintains that it is long
past time for us to return to that issue, and when we
do I hope that we will channel some of the fervour
for arms embargoes that we found in the resolution
adopted today.

