The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset
of the meeting, I should like to acknowledge and
welcome the presence in the Council Chamber of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Public Service of
the Bahamas, The Honourable Mr. Frederick A.
Mitchell; the Under-Secretary General for Political
Affairs of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Brazil,
His Excellency Mr. Antonio Patriota; the Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Chile, His Excellency
Mr. Alberto Van Klaveren; the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Dominican Republic, His Excellency
Mr. Carlos Morales Troncoso; the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Guatemala, His Excellency Mr. Jorge Briz
Abularach; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Guyana,
His Excellency Mr. SK Insanally; the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Greece, Her Excellency Ms. Dora
Bakoyannis; and the Deputy Foreign Minister of Peru,
His Excellency Mr. Harold Forsyth.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Austria, the Bahamas, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Mexico, South
Africa, Spain and Venezuela in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I invite His Excellency Mr. Rene Preval,
President-elect of Haiti, under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure, to take a seat at the Council table.

The Security Council has agreed to invite the
following participants who are seated at the table in
accordance with rule 39 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure: Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti;
Mr. Ali Hachani, President of the Economic and Social
Council; Mr. Albert Ramdin, Deputy Secretary-General
of the Organization of American States; and
Ms. Rebeca Grynspan, Assistant Administrator and
Director of the Regional Bureau for Latin America and
the Caribbean, United Nations Development
Programme.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting, and I invite him to
take the floor.


