Ms. Wronecka (Poland): For the past two years I
have had the honour to chair the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1518 (2003), concerning Iraq,
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005) concerning the Sudan, and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan. I would like to thank the
Council for the opportunity to reflect both on my role
since 2018 as Chair of these Committees and on the
work accomplished during that time. I would like to
begin with a few words about our leadership ofthe 1518
Committee on Iraq.

During my term as Chair of that Committee, I
have been committed to exploring creative ways to
support Iraq in its efforts to recover its assets and
achieve progress with regard to the delisting of entities
and individuals. I conducted consultations with the
relevant members of the Council on new initiatives
aimed at increasing the prospects for asset recovery and
enabling the 1518 sanctions regime to be wound down
in the foreseeable future. In early 2019 I convened two
informal meetings ofthe Committee, the first time such
meetings had been held since December 2005. During
the first meeting, on 9 January, a delegation of the
Government of Iraq Visiting from Baghdad discussed
several issues with the Committee, specifically the
recovery of Iraqi financial assets abroad, the task of
dealing with delisting requests and the delisting of
Iraqi entities from the 1518 sanctions list. The Iraqi
delegation circulated a paper during the meeting on
action mechanisms for recovering assets, subsequently
transmitted as a document of the Committee. At the
second meeting of the Committee, on 12 February,
INTERPOL's Special Representative to the United
Nations briefed the Committee on apossible cooperation
agreement with INTERPOL along the lines of similar
accords with other Sanctions Committees.

This creative approach contributed to
reinvigorating and advancing the Committee's work.
In the course of the past two years we have witnessed
incremental progress in the delisting of the entities on
the Committee's sanctions list. As noted in this year's
annual report, as ofDecember 2019 there are 76 entities
on the sanctions list, compared to 169 in the report for
2017 (S/2017/1078). That reduction of the number of
entities by more than half in two years was due to the
efforts of the Committee and the Permanent Mission of
Iraq, which submitted a number of delisting requests,
all of which the Committee members were agreed on.
I encourage Iraq to continue to submit requests so
that the remaining 76 entities can be delisted as soon
as possible. Besides this, the momentum generated by
the Committee's meetings contributed to furthering
the Government of Iraq's informal engagement with
Committee members. The Iraqi delegation visited
New York for the second time in June this year and
participated in its turn in a series of meetings with the
members of the 1518 Sanctions Committee. It is my
firm hope that the 1518 Committee will remain active
in 2020 under the able stewardship of the Permanent
Representative of Estonia.

I will now turn to the 1591 and 2206 Sanctions
Committees, on Sudan and South Sudan, respectively,
without going into too much detail. As Chair, I made
every effort to keep the Committees' work transparent
for the entire United Nations membership and provided
regular open briefings on their work in this Chamber,
held every 90 days for the Sudan and at least once a
year for the South Sudan sanctions. I will now focus
on the implementation of the sanctions regimes, their
effectiveness and my thoughts on their possible future.

Sanctions should not be an end in and of themselves.
They are a tool that should serve a specific purpose set
by the international community. Sanctions can neither
exist nor be successful in isolation. For regimes to be
truly effective, they should be subject to the Council's
regular reflection and revision. They must be part of
a broader Security Council strategy and be embedded
in a broader political context. The same applies to the
activities of sanctions committees. It is my firm belief
that if the work of committees are to be effective,
transparency and outreach are of crucial importance.

In that context, I consider it one of the Chair's main
tasks to deepen the dialogue between the committee
and the Government of the country under the
sanctions regime and to enhance contacts with relevant
neighbouring States. With that aim in mind, I undertook
visits to the Sudan, South Sudan and other countries
of the region in both 2018 and 2019. To strengthen the
engagement of the Committees with the Sudan, South
Sudan and their neighbouring States and to allow for
their interaction with the respective Panels of Experts,
each year I organize Committee meetings open to
the participation of representatives of the countries
under the sanctions regimes and their neighbours. I
also work to enhance the Committees' contacts with
other Security Council subsidiary bodies, in particular
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya, as well as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict.

I am convinced that the full implementation of the
sanctions regime established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015) can serve to protect the peace process
in South Sudan and target potential spoilers who are
threatening the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and the formation of the
transitional Government. I truly believe that the arms
embargo introduced by the Security Council in 2018 has
played an important role in reducing the suffering of
the civilian population in South Sudan. In that context,
I would like to remind all Member States, particularly
those neighbouring South Sudan, of their obligations
to observe the implementation of sanctions measures. I
would also like to stress that one option for complying
with and implementing the sanctions regimes is to ask
the Committee for the necessary exemptions to the
asset freeze, the travel ban and the arms embargo.

When it comes to the sanctions regime concerning
the Sudan, I would like to emphasize what I have stated
on numerous occasions in this Chamber, which is that
the situation in Darfur has greatly improved since the
imposition of that regime. There can also be no doubt
that the situation in Darfur today is closely linked to the
political process currently under way in the country.
I am truly convinced that the political changes in the
Sudan present a real opportunity for a comprehensive
and inclusive peace agreement in Darfur. I therefore
encourage the Council to explore the different options
for supporting and acknowledging the achievements
made so far by the Sudanese authorities and people. In
that context, I hope that the Security Council will follow
through on its intention, as expressed in resolution
2455 (2019), to establish clear, well-identified and
measurable key benchmarks that could serve to guide
the Council in reviewing the measures imposed on the
Government of the Sudan.

Regardless of the future of the sanctions regime,
I call on the international community not to lose
sight of the situation of the civilian population of
Darfur. Sanctions, particularly arms embargoes, are
supposed to ensure the security of civilians, but they
cannot replace sustainable development and genuine
political participation. The sources of instability in
Darfur are complex and reflections on the international
community's future approach should first and foremost
address the question of tackling the root causes of the
conflict in Darfur.

Allow me now to turn briefly to my observations
from chairing the 1518, 1591 and 2206 Committees
and general remarks on the functioning of subsidiary
organs and the role of the Chairs.

Over the past two years, I have fulfilled my
mandate from the Security Council with a sense of
great responsibility. These two years have made me
realize that, despite his or her expertise, enthusiasm,
commitment and dedication, the Chair has limited
autonomy and freedom of action. It is no secret that
certain members of the Council openly reject the tool
of sanctions. Given that the Committees reach all their
decisions by consensus, in many instances political
divisions inside the Security Council have made it
difficult to agree on even quite minor actions. It has not
been exceptional for me to find the consensus rule being
abused. At times it has also been my impression that,
despite the adoption of Security Council resolutions
calling for the full implementation of the sanctions
measures, some delegations were not reinforcing those
messages in the respective Committee and were not
fully supportive of the work of the Panel ofExperts. Let
me also point out that the lack of a clearly established
practice for co-penholdership of the Security Council's
resolutions on sanctions regimes curtails the Chair's
capacity to have a creative impact on the sanctions
regime even further.

However, all in all, my experience serving as
Chair of three sanctions Committees has been a unique
and rich opportunity and a very important part of my
work as head of the Polish delegation to the Security
Council. I wish the best of luck to my successors - the
Permanent Representative of Estonia, who will take
over as Chair of the Iraq and Sudan Committees, and
the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, who will
chair the South Sudan Sanctions Committee.

Allow me to conclude by thanking the Security
Council Subsidiary Organs Branch and the Secretariat
for their invaluable assistance with the everyday
work of the Chair. I appreciate the professionalism
of the interpreters and the technical assistance
provided by the Secretariat. My special words of
appreciation also go to the Panels of Experts on the
Sudan and South Sudan. One cannot overestimate
the value of the information that they provide to the
Committees - information that is very often obtained
under the most challenging circumstances.

I would also like to thank my fellow members of
the Security Council - in particular the penholders,
the United States and the United Kingdom - as well as
the Permanent Representatives of Iraq, the Sudan and
South Sudan to the United Nations and their respective
Governments for their fruitful cooperation. Last but
not least, I would like to thank my own team, which
has worked incredibly hard over the past two years and
whose professionalism and dedication have allowed me
to advance the work of the sanctions committees.

