Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Today,
the Security Council agreed to specific travel restrictions
on those categories of Iraqi officials responsible for
obstructing the work of the United Nations Special
Commission (UNSCOM). The Council declared its
intention to impose such sanctions the next time Iraq
violates the terms of Security Council resolution 1115
(1997), and the Council will begin from today the process
of drawing up a list of those officials whose travel is to
be prevented in such an eventuality.

It is amazing to me that, after six and a half years,
this body still must consider new approaches to convince
Iraq to comply with its international obligations. Only one
party is responsible for this very sad state of affairs: the
Baghdad regime.

Six and a half years after the liberation of Kuwait,
Iraq still refuses to meet its most basic obligations, such
as allowing UNSCOM. inspectors to carry out their
Security Council mandate without obstruction or
harassment. Resolution 1115 (1997) reminded
Baghdad - yet again - of its clear obligations in this
area, and put it on notice that the Security Council would
not tolerate continued Iraqi refusal to give UNSCOM. the
access necessary to ensure that Iraqi weapons of mass
destruction no longer menace the region.

Apparently, this strong warning was not enough.
UNSCOM. Executive Chairman Richard Butler's report to
the Security Council records a litany of Iraqi harassment,
obfuscation, obstruction and deception - all taking place
after resolution 1115 (1997) was adopted. For example,
Iraqi officials destroyed documents in front of UNSCOM
inspectors; Iraqi officials blocked access to sites,
documents, and individuals; Iraqi officials - at the
highest levels - lied and concealed information about
key programmes, even when confronted with known facts
by UNSCOM; Iraqi officials physically detained an
UNSCOM. chief aerial inspector and photographer; and
Iraqi officials interfered with UNSCOM. helicopter
operations, endangering pilots and passengers.

In addition, the Deputy Prime Minister, in front of
the Executive Chairman himself, told Iraqi officials under
his authority not to answer questions posed by UNSCOM.
And, perhaps most disturbing, the Iraqi Permanent
Representative to New York privately and publicly
threatened that Iraq will cease cooperation with
UNSCOM. and the Security Council if the Council
imposes new sanctions on Iraq. If carried out, this threat

 

would represent a material breach of Iraq's obligations and
demand a strong response.

How did Iraq explain these egregious acts? Iraq first
attacked the credibility of the Special Commission and
questioned its judgement. When this did not work, Iraq
resorted to the time-honoured tactics of bullying, burning
and blackmailing.

UNSCOM. operates as an arm of the Security Council
and gets its mandate solely from Security Council
resolutions. When Baghdad challenges UNSCOM, it
challenges the Council, and the Council has again made
clear that it will brook no such challenges. If, after six and
a half years, Iraq still does not understand this basic fact,
then we must once again consider new mechanisms to
make it understand.

Some here have suggested that the Security Council
ought to reward Iraq because it is, in their view,
cooperating with UNSCOM. to a greater degree now than it
has in the past. They point out that since there were "only"
six blockages out of 670 inspections, Iraq is substantially
complying with resolution 1115 (1997).

Using that logic, if I walked into a bank 670 times and
robbed it only six times, I would therefore be a
"substantially law-abiding" citizen. Compliance with
international obligations is not a voluntary act. Cooperation
is not a matter of degree. Either Iraq is in compliance with
its obligations or it is in breach of those obligations.

The Security Council has not asked UNSCOM. to
determine how many or what kind of programmes of
weapons of mass destruction it is acceptable for Iraq to
maintain, but rather to verify that all of Iraq's programmes
of weapons of mass destruction have been destroyed.
UNSCOM. cannot complete this task, frankly, because Iraq
will not cooperate.

Let us take a look at Iraq's so-called cooperation over
the past six months. Iraq is claiming that its "cooperation"
allowed UNSCOM. to account for most of the Scud missile
engines imported into Iraq. But in fact, Iraq refused to let
UNSCOM. remove those engines from Iraq for analysis for
four months last year. And Iraq still has not explained why
many of those engines were apparently stripped of key
components before they were destroyed: the same parts
critical to the development of an indigenous missile
production programme.

UNSCOM. is right to insist that Iraq account for
these and other components and clarify the status of
Iraq's indigenous Scud manufacturing capability. Until
Iraq provides this information, there is no way to
determine with any degree of confidence whether Iraq
still has the capacity to construct and deploy prohibited
missiles.

Iraq also wants the Council to believe that it has
cooperated with UN SCOM. with regard to chemical
weapons. However, as late as September, Iraq was still
lying directly to UNSCOM. about its production of VX.
Only when presented with absolutely incontrovertible
evidence did Iraq "cooperate" by admitting that it had lied
in the past. Again, this is too little, too late.

As to biological weapons, the words of the report of
the Secretary-General speak for themselves:

"This is an area that is unredeemed by progress
or any approximation of the known facts of Iraq's
programme". [S/1997/774, para. 125]

Some of my colleagues have tried to draw attention
to the report of the Director-General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Hans Blix, on Iraq's
nuclear programme as an example of Iraqi cooperation.
However, even in this area it is clear that Iraq has not
answered all the relevant questions necessary to have a
full accounting of its programmes. The books cannot be
closed. Furthermore, we now know, thanks to the efforts
of Mr. Blix and his staff, that Iraq lied and concealed an
active weaponization programme for years in direct
defiance of its commitments under the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and its
commitments to the IAEA. Iraq has lied about its
programmes for too long and too recently for us to settle
for anything less than absolute certainty that Iraq's
nuclear ambitions have been completely neutralized.

When accounting for nuclear weapons, close is not
good enough. If you fail to account for just one nuclear
device, that could mean the destruction of an entire city.

Baghdad has a clear and simple choice. It can
comply with its obligations, thus opening the way to
lifting sanctions, or it can continue along the path of non-
compliance. It cannot do both.

At this point, I would like to commend the
Executive Chairman of UNSCOM, Mr. Butler, for the
fine work he and his staff have done in the short time he

 

has been in his position. Clearly, Mr. Butler has the
courage, stamina and dedication necessary to perform his
extremely difficult job. The international community owes
Mr. Butler and his staff their gratitude.

UNSCOM. and the Council have the right and the
obligation to hold Iraq strictly accountable for every aspect
of all its programmes of weapons of mass destruction. Iraq
cannot pick and choose which questions it wishes to
answer.

We on the Council must do everything we can to give
Ambassador Butler the tools and the support he needs to do
his job as efficiently and as thoroughly as possible. This
resolution, we believe, helps to accomplish that objective.
This resolution represents a strong but measured response
of the Security Council to the continued failure of the Iraqi
Government to cooperate with the Special Commission.

Since nothing in Iraqi behaviour merits the lifting of
the suspension of the sanctions review, this resolution
extends the suspension. No one even suggests that after six
and a half years Iraqi performance comes close to
compliance. Our resolution does not impose sanctions now,
but it does start the process by beginning the compilation
of names, so if sanctions are imposed there will be no
administrative delay. It makes very clear to the Iraqi
authorities that the next time they try to block UN SCOM's
work the Council will impose sanctions against those
individuals responsible for Iraqi failure to cooperate with
UNSCOM.

We are not proposing broad-based sanctions that may
cause hardship for the Iraqi people. Our goal remains to
help the people of Iraq. But our goal must also always be
to help protect all the peoples of the region, and
especially the people of Kuwait, who have suffered the
most from Iraqi aggression, whose properties and archives
were stolen during the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, and
whose families still suffer the daily anguish of not
knowing what has become of their loved ones still
missing in action or taken prisoner of war. We must not,
and will not, forget them, and we call upon Iraq to
comply with the Council resolutions which deal with
these issues.

This resolution addresses the specific issues of Iraqi
non-cooperation with UNSCOM. and Iraqi obstruction of
UNSCOM's work. But for Iraq to rejoin the international
family of respectable nations, it must begin by
demonstrating its peaceful intentions and by fully
complying with all relevant resolutions of the Council.

It was our hope that all members of the Council
would have supported this resolution. The sponsors made
tremendous efforts to obtain the support of all Council
members. Some members have chosen not to support this
resolution. We regret their decision. But there have been
other resolutions on Iraq that were not unanimous. Those
resolutions all carry the full weight of international law,
and so will this one.

