The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Belarus, Cambodia, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt,
Finland, Germany, Indonesia, Ireland, the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mozambique, New Zealand, Norway, the Philippines,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea, South Africa and the
Sudan, in which they request to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Wibisono
(Indonesia) and Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) took seats at
the Council table; Ms. Wensley (Australia),
Mr. Sychov (Belarus), Mr. Ouch (Cambodia),
Mr. Larrain (Chile), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla (Cuba),
Mr. Alema'n (Ecuador), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt),
Ms. Rasi (Finland), Mr. Kastrup (Germany), Mr. Ryan
(Ireland), Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic), Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Powles (New Zealand),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines),
Mr. Lee See-young (Republic of Korea), Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa) and Mr. Erwa (Sudan) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in response to the requests contained in a letter
dated 8 September 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Portugal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council and a
letter dated 9 September 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Brazil to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council, documents
S/l999/955 and S/ 1999/961, respectively.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following documents: S/ 1999/950,
letter dated 7 September 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of Ireland to the United Nations addressed
to the Secretary-General; S/ 1999/956, letter dated 8
September 1999 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of
the Permanent Mission of Angola to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the declaration on the situation in East Timor
made by the member States of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries (CPLP) in Lisbon on 6
September 1999; and S/ 1999/963, letter dated 10
September 1999 from the Permanent Representative of
Portugal to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General.


