Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We appreciate the convening of this meeting and
the important briefings given by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and Ambassador Joao Pedro
Vale de Almeida. We also thank Ambassador Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve for his valuable briefing as
well as for his work as Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).

Peru attaches high priority to compliance with and
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), by which
the Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear programme.
We are of the view that the Plan, and the subsequent
verification and monitoring regime, reveals the value of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
international disputes and in maintaining international
peace and security, and in that regard must be preserved.
We are paying close attention to the implementation of
the Plan, both within the scope of the Security Council
and that of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors. In that respect, we take
note ofthe Secretary-General's report (S/2019/492), and
we wish to emphasize that, as verified by the IAEA, the

Islamic Republic of Iran has been complying with all
the provisions of the Plan.

However, like the Secretary-General, we regret
the withdrawal of the United States from the Plan
and the taking of other actions that may impede the
ability of the parties to implement certain provisions
of the JCPOA and of resolution 2231 (2015). In the
face of the decision of other parties to the JCPOA
to maintain their commitment to the Plan and their
support for the verification work of the IAEA, we
regret the announcement made on 8 May by Iran that it
would not commit to respecting the limits on enriched
uranium and heavy water reserves at the current stage
if the other parties to the agreement failed to meet its
demands within 60 days.

On the other hand, we stress the need for strict
compliance with all the restrictive measures set out
in annex B to the resolution, which include transfers
related to nuclear energy, ballistic missiles and
weapons to or from Iran, as well as provisions on the
freezing of assets and travel bans. Specifically, and
in line with annex B, paragraph 3, to resolution 2231
(2015), we urge the Iranian authorities not to undertake
any activity related to ballistic missiles designed to
launch nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic missile technology. We consider it of the
utmost importance that the Iranian authorities conduct
themselves with prudence and moderation, bearing in
mind that the development of their ballistic missile
programme may be perceived as a provocation and/
or an arms race, capable of increasing tensions in a
particularly unstable region. We support the work that
the procurement channel has been developing as a vital
transparency and confidence-building mechanism that
ensures that transfers are consistent with the provisions
and objectives of the Plan and resolution 2231 (2015).

We underscore how important it is that the Council
remain united in its duty to guarantee full respect for
the JCPOA and the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), with a view to guaranteeing the validity of the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security.

Finally, given the delicate situation that has arisen
in the Persian Gulf, we join others in calling all parties
to exercise caution, de-escalate tensions and resolve
differences through dialogue.

