Mrs. Taj (United Republic of Tanzania):
Mr. President, I wish to thank you for having organized
this meeting. We join others in thanking Ms. Angela
Kane for her briefing, and we thank the Palestinian
observer and the Israeli representative for their
statements.

Tanzania has been following with deep concern
the disastrous course of events between Israel and its
neighbours, and in particular the grave situation in
northern Gaza caused by the recent major Israeli
military operation. We condemn the encirclement of
the town of Beit Hanoun, which resulted in many
civilian casualties, including innocent women and
children, which constitutes a grave violation of
international humanitarian law.

The killing yesterday morning of 19 civilians in
Gaza is profoundly shocking. We offer our condolences
to the families of the victims. Israel should not use the
pretext of self-defence in targeting innocent civilians.
The killing of civilians, including children and women,
is unjustifiable and intolerable. It is evident that Israeli
military policies in the Palestinian territories have gone
too far and must not be allowed to continue. The
international community and the Security Council must
respond.

Once again, we urge Israel to cease its aggression
against the Palestinians, withdraw its forces from Gaza
and exercise utmost restraint, including taking every
step possible to protect civilians. We have noted the
Israeli Government's regret and its decision to conduct
an investigation, and we look forward to its early
conclusion and to appropriate action. We also support
the call for an independent investigation.

Tanzania again calls on the Palestinian militants
to cease firing rockets against Israeli civilian targets.

The current spate of violence comes at a time
when there were hopes that an agreement would be
reached on the formation of a Palestinian Government
that could end the current stalemate and build a climate
of trust in which the political process could be
rekindled. The people of Gaza have not enjoyed peace
in a long time, but their situation has worsened
following the Israeli military assaults and the current
economic paralysis.

We reiterate our call for concerted and deliberate
efforts to ensure that there is no further destruction of
Palestinian infrastructure and property and that
emergency humanitarian assistance is provided as a
matter of urgency.

Both Israel and Palestine must realize that the
endless violence is complicating the quest for a lasting
peace in the area. They should give dialogue a chance.
We also urge President Abbas and the Hamas
leadership to resume their talks on the formation of a
Government of national unity.

We call on the international community, including
the Quartet, to continue to assist the parties to return to
a negotiated two-State solution, on the basis of land for
peace, to end the conflict, as provided for in numerous
United Nations resolutions and in the road map.

In conclusion, we thank the delegation of Qatar
for the draft resolution it has circulated, which we are
ready to discuss with a view to its early adoption.

