The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of Slovakia.

The importance of security sector reform as an
essential element of any stabilization process has been
increasingly acknowledged by the international
community in general, and by the Security Council and
the whole United Nations system in particular. Yet, a
common understanding of the concept of security
sector reform is far from having been established.
There is also a lot to be done in order to overcome the
fragmented character of current efforts in the field of
security sector reform so that we can fully benefit from
orchestrated actions taken jointly by the international
community.

Slovakia does not have a recipe for the solution
to those problems, but we believe that our efforts and
our debate today can serve several purposes.

First, they can highlight the central importance of
security sector reform for peace and stability. There are
numerous examples in which the lack of reform in the
security sector and a lack of good governance, justice
and democratic accountability represent the root causes
of conflict. The need for security sector reform is often
a precondition of stable and sustainable post-conflict
development. It is therefore crucial to understand that
it is a long-term - indeed, a never-ending - effort.

Secondly, they can underline the central role of
national and local ownership. If a security sector
reform programme is to be successful and sustainable,
it must be country-specific and driven by local actors.
One can hardly expect security sector reform to be
implemented without a clear understanding on the part
of recipient countries that security sector reform is
beneficial for their development, stability, security and
prosperity, and that resolute action and sustained effort
are therefore needed on their side.

Thirdly, our efforts and this debate stress the
ultimate objective of security sector reform, which
should not be mere institution- and capacity-building.
It should be improvement of people's lives through that

public service. Security sector reform should therefore
be accompanied by the implementation of the
principles of good governance, transitional justice,
democratic accountability and respect for human
rights.

Fourthly, they can accent the interlinkages
between security, development and human rights. The
primary tasks of security sector reform are related to
peace, security and stability. However, if implemented
correctly, security sector reform will sooner or later
yield fruit in the form of improved living standards.

There are several ways to improve the
performance of the international community in order to
achieve the aforementioned goals. The following
should receive particular attention.

First, donor efforts should be better coordinated
not only among the donors, but notably with the
recipient country. Besides the quantity of donor
support, there is also the question of its quality and
focus on the core areas that determine the success of
the effort. International actors should better coordinate
their support for States concerned in order to cover all
key areas and to achieve cumulative effects.

Secondly, the role of regional and other
international organizations should be further promoted.
They often play a central role in developing and
implementing security sector reform programmes and
in awareness-raising. In particular, their added value is
in their ability to embed national security sector reform
processes in a regional context.

Thirdly, we are strongly convinced that the
United Nations can do much more. Improvement of the
United Nations performance does not necessarily have
to lead to new institutionalization or increased resource
needs in the United Nations. We believe that a lot can
be achieved through more coherent and coordinated
approaches.

We pin our hopes on a comprehensive report of
the Secretary-General that could outline the basic
strategy of the United Nations in the field of security
sector reform. Such a report should define shared
principles, objectives and guidelines for the
development and implementation of United Nations
support for security sector reform. It should summarize
the lessons learned so far by different United Nations
system entities and make clear the roles and
responsibilities of individual players within the United
Nations system. Ultimately, the report could serve as a
basic orientation and planning tool for various United
Nations entities working on security sector reform and
in related areas.

However, it is not just the Secretary-General's
responsibility. The Security Council has its own and
unique responsibility for international peace and
security. The Council therefore could and should make
a difference through a better reflection of security
sector reform priorities in the mandates of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and integrated
political offices.

In conclusion, let me stress that today's debate in
the Security Council is not the end of our efforts
related to security sector reform. We will continue
promoting security sector reform priorities in the
Council, other United Nations bodies and other
relevant international forums. As I have mentioned, we
hope to see the report of the Secretary-General on
United Nations approaches in the foreseeable future so
that we can build on his recommendations in our future
activities, the first of which is a workshop we are
planning to organize in cooperation with South Africa
later this year. Through that initiative, we aspire to
bring the issue of security sector reform where it is
most urgently needed - to the continent that has
suffered so much due to the lack of functioning
security sectors.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Germany.

