The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Colombia to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the two co-leads of the Security Council
mission to Colombia, which took place from 3 to 5 May,
namely, the United Kingdom and Uruguay.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of Uruguay.

The Security Council mission to Colombia, which
Uruguay had the honour of co-leading with the United
Kingdom, took place from 3 to 5 May. The purpose
of the visit was to express the support of the Council
for the implementation of the Final Peace Agreement,
as referred to in the terms of reference of the Security
Council mission, as well as to hear from all stakeholder:
the Government, the people of Colombia, the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito
Popular (FARC-EP), the United Nations Mission in
Colombia and the country team, and to ascertain the
progress made in and the difficulties of the process.

The visit took place over two days. I shall report on
the activities conducted on 4 May before handing over
to my colleague, Ambassador Matthew Rycroft, who
will describe the activities of the second day.

On 4 May, we held institutional meetings in the
city of Bogota. Those took place in three key instances.
The first was a meeting of the Council members with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Colombia and Head of the United Nations Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Jean Arnault, who stressed the timeliness
of the visit, given that the parties were working to
complete the process of laying down of arms within the
ISO-day term set out in the agreement. Other aspects of

the process and the Council's potential contributions to
it were also discussed there.

Council members also met with the Resident
Coordinator and all the bodies, funds and programmes
of the United Nations country team. During the visit,
we were able to appreciate the excellent work of
Special Representative Jean Arnault and the United
Nations Mission in Colombia, and we thank them for
all of the support that they provided to the Security
Council mission.

Also of great importance were the meetings with
Government authorities.

The President of the Republic, Juan Manuel
Santos, received us as members of the Security Council
and then held an extended meeting with the highest
authorities, including, besides the President himself,
the Vice-President, the Minister for Foreign Affairs,
the High Commissioner for Peace and several other
senior officials of the Government of Colombia.

In addition to thanking us for the visit, the President
also expressed gratitude for the support that the Council
is extending to the peace process in Colombia. We also
heard from the Congressional Peace Commission,
which brings together the entire Colombian political
spectrum. Its representatives stressed the importance
of safeguarding the achievements made as part of the
peace process.

Another key moment was an exchange with the
National Commission for Follow-up, Impulse and
Verification of the Implementation of Peace Agreement,
in which Mr. Sergio Jaramillo Caro, High Commissioner
for Peace, and Mr. Ivan Marquez, Commander of
the FARC-EP, also participated. At that meeting,
Mr. Jaramillo referred to the progress on the issues that
are being worked on as peace is implemented, such as,
inter alia, the gender perspective, indigenous peoples
and comprehensive economic recovery strategies. The
FARC-EP referred to the importance of reconciliation, to
the system of truth, justice, reparations, non-repetition,
and guarantees, especially in the areas of security and
legal and political matters.

We also held a meeting with members of civil
society. Several organizations expressed their concern
about insecurity and killings in local communities.
The Council also heard the same concern from the
Government and the FARC. We share that concern
and call for institutional protection measures to be
implemented to respond to the threat of armed groups.
Women's organizations pointed out the disproportionate
harm suffered by women in conflict and post-conflict
environments. We acknowledged the fundamental
importance ofthe gender perspective in peace processes.
Members of civil society suggested the establishment
of a successor United Nations mission that should be
deployed throughout the territory of Colombia. During
the visit, we witnessed the commitment of the parties,
the goodwill and the hope that Colombians have for the
results of this peace process.

As a general assessment of those meetings, I would
like to highlight the commitment of all participants in
the peace process to continuing their best efforts to
move the process forward, with the awareness of the
difficulties that were raised and knowing that further
difficulties will arise in future, as is normal for such
processes. Several of these difficulties derive from the
difficult conditions in relation to building the federal
zones, which are in very rural and distant areas, where
highways and all the other infrastructure that is needed
for their installation still need to be built. Another
factor that has had a negative impact is the climate,
with heavy rains making tasks extremely difficult.
Another difficulty relates the pace of the adoption of
legal and administrative measures for the purpose of
reintegrating former combatants in civilian life. In all
cases, these points were brought up not as complaints
but to indicate the difficulties for which efforts must be
made if they are to be resolved.

I now give the floor to my colleague Ambassador
Matthew Rycroft.

