Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): We have once again assembled
today in the Security Council to consider the extremely
grave situation in Lebanon. Pakistan strongly deplores and
condemns the tragic incident of this morning, which has
resulted in the deaths of innocent civilians and Fijian peace-
keepers.

On 15 April, we expressed our deep concern over the
escalation of hostilities along the Israel-Lebanon border, as
well as inside Lebanon. We find the continuation of this
conflict reprehensible and deplorable and call for the
immediate cessation of hostilities by the Israeli forces.

This escalation of hostilities is neither justifiable nor
in keeping with the objective of obtaining a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
The continuation of these aggressive actions by Israel is
further increasing tensions in the region. These
premeditated and carefully planned aggressive actions
have resulted in civilian casualties, the displacement of
thousands of civilians and massive destruction of
Lebanon's infrastructure.

Pakistan deplores and condemns the targeting and
killing of the civilian population. Pakistan has consistently
stressed that Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973) and 425 (1978) continue to provide a viable and
just framework for the achievement of a durable and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We also firmly
believe that, during the transitional period, Israel, as the
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949, remains obliged fully to respect and implement the
provisions of the Convention and relevant Security
Council resolutions in the occupied Arab territories.
Resolution 425 (1978) in particular calls for strict respect
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon within its internationally
recognized boundaries. This resolution also calls upon
Israel immediately to cease its military action against
Lebanon and withdraw forthwith its forces from the
territory of Lebanon. Regrettably, this resolution remains
not only unimplemented but continues to be flagrantly
violated by the Israeli authorities.

The Government and the people of Pakistan are
extremely disturbed by these developments in Lebanon
and call upon the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility to put an immediate end to these aggressive
actions by the Israeli forces. Israel must immediately
cease its military actions against Lebanon and withdraw
its forces from Lebanese territory. Pakistan also fully
supports the point of view that Lebanon is entitled to be
appropriately compensated for the destruction it has
suffered at the hands of the Israeli forces.

