Ms. Blum (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation welcomes the convening of this debate on a
matter of special importance to our Organization, in
particular in the context of the ongoing process of
Security Council reform. The note by the President of
the Security Council contained in document
S/2006/507 contains guidelines that deserve careful
consideration with a view to enhancing the Council's
transparency and effectiveness. Colombia welcomes
the efforts made by the members of this organ to
implement the practices outlined in that document.

We highlight the interaction by countries holding
the Council presidency with Member States and the
briefings given at the beginning of each month.
Equally useful are the exchanges held by the
Permanent Representative of the country in the
presidency with media representatives and the
webcasts of those exchanges.

Nevertheless, these practices must continue to be
expanded in order further improve transparency and
the participation of the membership in the Council's
activities and decision-making. Efforts should be made
to reduce the number of closed meetings that limit
access by Member States and to guarantee the
participation of States non-members of the Council in
the discussion of matters that affect them directly.
Moreover, it would be important to create greater
opportunities for consultation with regional groups and
organizations as well as with other actors, as necessary,
to gain a greater understanding of the specific
characteristics of each situation.

Advance circulation of or access to draft
resolutions would be another step towards greater
transparency in the work and decision-making of the
Council. Member States should be fully informed
about decisions the Council intends to make before
they are finalized. A predictable and transparent
decision-making process is necessary to strengthen the
legitimacy of the Council's actions. To that end, efforts
must be made to establish formal rules of procedure.

We recognize the efforts of the permanent
members to limit the use of the veto, but we consider
that regulating its use under clear parameters would be

an important step towards greater transparency in the
work of this organ. One could seek to limit the use of
the veto to situations under Chapter VII of the Charter
and only in situations calling for the use of force or the
imposition of sanctions. That would be in accordance
with the Council's mandate to guarantee the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In a similar vein, the use of the veto could be
limited to substantive, not procedural, matters, and
consideration could be given to increasing the number
of negative votes required by permanent Council
members. For example, the veto might come into play
only with the negative votes of at least two of those
members.

In a broader sense, the relationship between the
Security Council and the General Assembly is another
element of particular relevance to this debate. There is
a significant imbalance in that relationship. This is
explained to a great extent by the Council's
appropriation of General Assembly matters. According
to the United Nations Charter, the General Assembly is
the principal deliberative, policymaking and
participatory body. Its mandate is comprehensive and
includes matters related to disarmament and the
maintenance of peace and security, as well the
consideration of matters related to human rights and
humanitarian law.

While the Council's working methods and its
relations with the General Assembly have improved,
there is still room for improvement, including periodic
meetings among the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council and the submission of regular
analytical reports by the Council to the Assembly.

To conclude, allow me to emphasize that for my
delegation modifying the working methods of the
Security Council is an important part of the
comprehensive Security Council reform process. We
will therefore support all efforts and initiatives aimed
at making the Council an organ that is more democratic
and representative and more transparent and effective.

