Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I must begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for your excellent
work in presiding over the Security Council as well as
that of your entire team. We are grateful, Sir, for the
way in which you led the Council this month, which
began so explosively and has been so full of major
issues that will continue to be priorities for us in the
month of February. It is also a great pleasure to receive
the presidency from a Latin American brother after 25
years of absence from the Security Council. Further,
in the spirit of the statements of the representatives of
Japan, New Zealand, Malaysia and Spain, who took
advantage of the opportunity today to reflect on issues
that we think are of vital importance in the Council,
going beyond the narrower viewpoints of our national
positions, we would like to add the following.

First of all, we support the holding of these wrap-
up sessions because we think that, above all, we
as non-permanent members need to be transparent
and accountable for what we do and say here in the
Council, since we are here because we were elected
by the General Assembly. We therefore support the
accountability initiative as an activity that we will
engage in this afternoon with other members of the
Assembly.

I cannot help mentioning resolution 2261 (2016)
on Colombia as an extraordinary success during your
presidency, Mr. President. It is probably only we Latin
Americans who can truly appreciate the significance of
this step. For over 50 years, Colombia was plunged in
a bloody war whose various origins were very closely
linked to the social and political situation of all Latin
American countries, in particular a violent period of
years of political unrest following the assassination of
the leader Jorge Elie'cer Gaitan Ayala. The fact that both
the Government of Colombia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo
have asked for Security Council support to monitor and
verify the implementation of new peace agreements is
not just a recognition of the work of the United Nations.
Indeed, through that action, the Security Council is
taking on great responsibility to ensure that this culture
of violence ceases, that weapons should be laid down
and that other mechanisms ofwar that exist in Colombia
should be dismantled, such as paramilitarism, the Plan
Colombia and other phenomena that are closely linked
to the conflict in that sister nation.

For us, Venezuela, as everyone knows, our liberator,
Simon Bolivar, was also Colombia's liberator, as he was
the liberator of five other Latin American nations. For
us, our army crossed borders only to liberate our Latin
American brothers - never to attack any country. As
the late President Chavez Frias once said, one of our
strongest desires is to see peace - peace and social
justice - for our Colombian brothers. We think that
the adoption of this resolution was one of the most
important achievements in January. We wish to reiterate
our thanks to the United Kingdom, which, in a very
short amount of time, was able to facilitate a resolution
that is to a great extent in line with the agreements that
the parties reached during their last meeting in Havana.

Unfortunately, while we have this encouraging
news from Colombia, I must confess that we are not
comfortable with the way the Security Council is
addressing some issues and not others. The Security
Council has a very clear mandate pursuant to the
Charter of the United Nations. However, there are
certain problems that, due to national interests,
particularly those of the Council's permanent members,
become priorities to such an extent that a single topic is
tackled four or five times in a month, when the reality
is that there is a conflict throughout entire regions such
as the Middle East that requires a shared, joint vision
to resolve it.

In this regard, I would highlight the question of
Palestine. The issue of Palestine is very frustrating
for us and a sign of the failure of the Security Council
thus far to work in a coordinated manner. There is no
consensus on the subject, and we have been unable to
adopt a single resolution in the last seven years. New
Zealand proposed a draft resolution. France is trying,
and we are expecting a draft resolution. I think the
Security Council should truly make it a goal this year to
propose a solution for the Palestinian people, because
what is happening in Palestine is utterly in violation of
international law.

This has nothing to do with Israel, nor it is against
the Israelis; we deeply regret the civilian deaths on both
sides. This is more a question of international law and
the need for the settlement activities in Palestine to end.
There is a need for Security Council resolutions to be
properly implemented. A response needs to be given
to the legitimate concerns of the Palestinian people,
with a solution based on the existence of two States.
Nor have we been able to promote Palestine becoming
accepted as a full-fledged State Member of the United
Nations, which is a prerogative of the Security Council
and is one of the prerequisites for moving forward in
negotiations, in the sense that it should be a given that
two States exist. Otherwise, Palestine will continue
to be subjected to disproportionate military action by
Israel and to an unending settlement process.

While we are gathered here, I would also mention
the Palestinian youth and the Palestinian people
who are being blockaded in Gaza. These people had
expectations and trust in the international community
that we have unfortunately failed to live up to.

Also with regard to the Middle East, we need to
recognize the situations in Iraq, in Syria and in Libya,
which are all linked. They have the same origin, and
at some point we need to carry out an assessment of
the Security Council interventions in those conflicts
and what the results have been. Today, there are vast
territories where State institutions do not exist, where
there is no official institution of any kind nor any social
fabric that could provide a response for these peoples in
the face of the trauma of conflict. In Iraq, in Libya and
in Syria, most of the State institutions have collapsed,
and in the ensuing vacuum a new phenomenon has
arisen - new in terms of its size.

Terrorism is not a new phenomenon. Many
countries around this table have suffered from
terrorist acts. We have always condemned terrorism
on principle, but the terrorism we are seeing today is
highly funded with great military might. It is almost an
army, and it represents the development of a new kind
of war - one that uses social networks and appears
capable of countering all coalitions formed to fight it.
We believe that the Security Council needs to rethink
its action in the face of this new phenomenon in the
Middle East and make it a priority so as to address
these issues one by one, without leaving any one out.

We have discussed the issue of Syria. What has
happened in Syria is a tragedy. We reject the use of
starvation and siege against the population itself
as a weapon of war. We repudiate the attacks on
humanitarian agencies and on civilians. We condemn
what happened in Madaya.

But also we raise our voice in outcry against what is
happening in Yemen. As I said, there are issues that are
just not discussed. The situation in Yemen also needs
to be tackled because the same factors underpinning
the Syrian crisis are at play in the conflict in Yemen as
well. Clearly there needs to be a regional vision for the
solution to these conflicts.

With regard to Syria, the enormous effort
undertaken by the International Syria Support Group to
promote the negotiations in Geneva is an extraordinary
opportunity that I hope the Council will not squander.
I think Mr. De Mistura deserves the full support of the
Security Council. We are troubled that, at this stage,
parts of the opposition still have not agreed on who will
represent them and have put preconditions on initiating
the dialogue. We call on Council members that may
have influence on those parties to uphold the agreement
and remind them that it was agreed that they were going
to begin discussions without preconditions. We have
said that humanitarian issues would be prioritized once
the peace talks began.
Finally, I must mention the situation in Burundi.
We have said on many occasions that we are particularly
troubled that 60 or 70 per cent of the conflicts on the
agenda ofthe sanctions committees take place in Africa.
That indicates that our brotherly African continent
continues to suffer the legacy of its colonialist past and
all the divisions within its countries. It is in constant
conflict. We appreciate the visit that the Council
conducted to Burundi and affirm that any action taken
by the Security Council, not withstanding its differences
with the authorities of the country concerned, must
must be in line with Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations and the principles of respect for national
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

I also thank the countries that have indicated their
active support for us as we assume the next presidency.
We hope that we will live up to the example of our
Latin American predecessor and hope to contribute to
international peace and security from that position on
the Security Council.

