Mr. Annabi: As it is rather late, I will try to be brief.

I will of course be happy to convey to the Special
Representative the expressions of appreciation for his work
that have echoed around the table, as well as the concerns
mentioned by some members of the Council regarding the
continuing activities of the militias and the situation in the
refugee camps in West Timor.

On the issue of disbursements, which has been
mentioned by some members of the Council, we share the
concerns expressed about the pace of the disbursements and
the bureaucratic hurdles that have to be overcome in the
process. Those expressions of concern are actually helpful
to those of us who are trying to get around some of these
problems and to resolve them as expeditiously as our
rules and regulations will allow.

At this time, the United Nations trust fund has
received some $24 million, of which $14 million has now
been allotted and approved for expenditure. We will
continue to work actively with the mission on the ground
and with the World Bank to accelerate the pace of
disbursements on the ground. I understand that
requisitions for expenditures against the trust fund for
large capital-expenditure projects are now out for bidding,
and that some $4 million will be spent over the next three
weeks; and that bids for another $7 or $8 million, for
rehabilitation, will be allocated to 21 buildings of the East
Timorese police and administration that need to be
refurbished. Of course, the salaries of civil servants -
the number of which is growing - will continue to be
paid.

I also want to mention in this regard that the
Controller has authorized loans from the trust fund for the
implementation of World Bank projects, pending the
completion by the World Bank of its own procedures
regarding the disbursement of funds in its own trust fund.
These efforts will continue, and we will keep the Council
informed.

With regard to pensions, this is an issue that is being
discussed on a continuing basis with the Government of
Indonesia, which has so far agreed to pay pensions to
former civil servants until independence. What we would
like to obtain, of course, is an agreement to pay pensions
beyond independence and an agreement to pay pensions
on a pro rata basis for former civil servants who worked
in the previous administration in East Timor, as that
would of course encourage them to go back. Some of
those former civil servants could be of great help. Those
discussions will continue and, again, we will keep the
Council informed in this regard.

Concerning the issue of the Timor Gap, members of
the Council may recall that last February UNTAET and
Australia concluded a memorandum of understanding that
extended the terms of the Australia/Indonesia Timor Gap
Treaty for the duration of the transitional period. The
National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT) has
indicated that it cannot continue under the terms of the
old Timor Gap Treaty after independence. In close
cooperation with the CNRT and the National Consultative

 

Council, UNTAET is conducting negotiations with
Australia on a regime that would govern the Timor Sea oil
and gas reserves after independence. The first round of
these discussions was held in March, last month, and we
anticipate that a second round of discussions will take place
in May or June. These negotiations have proceeded so far
in a constructive manner, and we hope that they will lead
to an agreement that will be consistent with current
international law on the settlement of maritime boundary
issues.
I think, Mr. President, that I will stop here. That

covers most of the questions.

