Mr. Miranda (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text furnished by the delegation): At a time when my
country is going through a difficult period, I am pleased
once again to address the members of the Council. I should
like to begin by congratulating the President this month,
Ambassador Robert Fowler, for the wise and able manner
in which he is conducting the proceedings of the Council.
My special greetings are also extended to the Foreign
Minister of Canada, Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, who is presiding
over today's meeting on Angola. This fact is an indication
of the commitment and solidarity of the Government of
Canada with the Government of Angola in its efforts to
restore peace.

Seven years ago, when the Council for the first time
imposed sanctions against UNITA rebels in resolution 864
(1993) and in other subsequent resolutions - adopted,
respectively, in 1997 and 1998 - we believed that the
political authority and the means at the disposal of the
Security Council would ensure strict compliance with these
measures by all States.

However, this did not happen. The Security Council
and the United Nations in general were unable to stop the
serious and systematic violation of the sanctions. While it
would be fair to attribute this fact largely to the lack of an
effective mechanism to monitor the sanctions, nevertheless
it was also due to the bad faith of the one person who is
mainly responsible for terrorism in Angola, Mr. Savimbi;
some members of the international community; and
transnational organized crime linked to trafficking in
diamonds and weapons, which finds Angola's ongoing
crisis to be fertile ground for increasing its profits.

It is no secret to anyone that despite Security Council
resolutions, certain States and individuals continue to
provide all kinds of support to Mr. Savimbi, thus
challenging the authority of the Council. We do not believe
that anything can justify the support provided to a man who
has turned against the Angolan constitutional order, as is
the case of Mr. Jonas Savimbi. In 1992 he rejected with
violence the electoral results, and he is still attempting
obstinately to oust by force a democratically elected
regime. As a result, the Angolan people are being plunged
into misery and deprivation.

We find it difficult to understand the reason why,
despite hard evidence that the sanctions were being
violated, the United Nations has only very recently
decided to investigate the extent of these violations and
the identity of the main perpetrators.

Although the investigation came rather late, it goes
without saying that it does set a precedent in United
Nations history. Its findings and recommendations have
received overwhelming support from the international
community, thus dispelling any doubts as to the
objectivity and transparency of the report presented to the
Council. The fact that the draft resolution contains more
than 80 per cent of the recommendations in the report is
indeed noteworthy.

It is now incumbent upon the Security Council to
assume its responsibilities, to make use of its authority
and to justify the faith placed in it by the States Members
of the United Nations. My Government considers it
imperative that the Council demonstrate a sense of
realism and justice by activating, whenever necessary, the
appropriate mechanisms provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations to ensure that all States unconditionally
abide by its resolutions, particularly resolutions 864
(1993), 1127 (1997) and 1173 (1998).

The draft resolution we will be adopting today
provides a basis for all States to demonstrate their
adherence to the sanctions regime against UNITA. We
want to believe that good sense will prevail and that all
Governments will cooperate with the sanctions Committee
and the United Nations in general, with a view to
preventing Savimbi and his group from obtaining access
to any external support, whether it be political,
diplomatic, military, material or financial.

This action must include prohibition of the use of
the territory of any State to carry out political activities or
propaganda campaigns and the bringing to justice of all
individuals or companies whose practices are in conflict
with Security Council resolutions on Angola.

In this context, we would like here and now to
appeal to regional organizations such as the Organization
of African Unity (OAU), of which my country is a
member, to use their good sense and lend unequivocal
support, as the Southern African Development

 

Community did through its foreign ministers, to the report
which has been submitted by the sanctions Committee on
Angola, including its recommendations. We would also like
to call on the OAU to make the report a reference
document for all approaches to the prevention, management
and resolution of conflicts.

At its last summit, in Algiers, the OAU declared the
year 2000 to be the year in which all conflict in Africa
should end. To that end, the organization is cooperating
with the mechanisms created by the United Nations to
counter all acts that threaten international security by
politically isolating all those who directly or indirectly
encourage and support subversive wars in our continent.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government's full
support for and recognition of Ambassador Robert Fowler
as Chairman of the sanctions Committee, and I would like
to appeal to members of the Council, to the Secretariat of
the United nations and to the entire international community
to continue to provide all necessary collaboration for the
successful completion of its tasks.
