Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Mr. President, I
commend you on your leadership in convening this
open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I also appreciate the efforts that have been
made by the Secretariat in this area, including the ten-
point platform it announced and the round-table
discussions it has held.

As the concrete examples in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2004/431) make clear, the causes,
the parties and the forms of armed conflict that threaten
the safety of civilians vary widely. Today we are
witnessing an increasing number of internal conflicts
caused by a variety of factors, rather than traditional
warfare between States. The activities of international
criminal organizations and terrorists also threaten the
lives of civilians. But whether they too should be
considered to be armed conflict is a subject of
controversy. Armed conflicts - or more neutrally,
situations that pose threats to civilians - are thus very
divergent. When we are to engage in negotiations for
humanitarian purposes with a party that threatens the
safety of civilians, elements that we have to take into
consideration are totally different in a case where the
party concerned is an anti-government organization
with substantial control over a certain portion of the
territory and in a case involving what we refer to as a
terrorist organization. I therefore believe that, rather
than wasting too much time trying to establish general,
abstract rules applicable to the protection of civilians in
all types of armed conflict, it would probably be more
practical and appropriate to identify and collect the
practices that have proved to be most effective in
protecting civilians in specific armed conflicts.

I hope that the Security Council will give due
consideration to such an approach and discuss this
issue in terms of the role the Council is supposed to
play and its capacity to do so. The Security Council is
the organ with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security.
However, we have to admit frankly that it cannot cope
with all the situations in which the lives and the safety
of civilians are threatened. Effective protection of
civilians in armed conflict requires collaboration
between the Council and other organs such as the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. It is also important for the Council to
collaborate with all relevant international organizations
active in the field. In his report, the Secretary-General
repeatedly affirms the necessity of the regional
approach and the importance of the role regional
organizations can play in the protection of civilians.
My country shares his View.

I would now like to comment on the ten-point
platform in Secretary-General's report. Due to time
constraints, however, I shall limit my comments to four
specific points of particular interest to Japan.

First, it is quite obvious that the security of
humanitarian personnel is essential for the smooth
implementation of humanitarian assistance activities.
In principle, their neutral posture should ensure their
security. Recently, however, there have been deliberate
attacks on humanitarian personnel, and we are deeply
concerned. We support the inclusion of the protection
of humanitarian personnel in the mandates of
peacekeeping operations so that the objectives of
humanitarian assistance activities can be achieved. It is
not clear, though, who bears the responsibility for the
security of humanitarian personnel in areas where
peacekeeping troops are deployed. Is it the Office of
the United Nations Security Coordinator or the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations? Japan
expects that a comprehensive solution will be presented
in the Secretary-General's report on the security of
United Nations personnel to be submitted to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session.

I do not have a wonder drug to ensure the security
of humanitarian personnel. However, at the least, it is
necessary for the international community to reaffirm
its united support for humanitarian assistance activities
and strongly condemn any attack that threatens the
security of humanitarian personnel. We should also
reaffirm such basic principles as impartiality and
independence, which humanitarian personnel must
observe so that they will not be regarded as agents of
certain members of the international community. As far
as legal measures are concerned, Japan supports the
idea of expanding the scope of the Convention on the
Safety of United Nations and Associated Personnel.

Secondly, due to the uncontrolled circulation of
small arms and light weapons, the harm that is being
done to civilians in armed conflict has become
markedly more severe. Stricter controls are very much
needed. In 2001, the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects was adopted. We
believe that it is necessary not only to raise awareness
of small-arms issues in the international community but
also to take real action in the affected areas. It is
therefore crucial for the international community to
strive towards the steady implementation of the
Programme of Action.

Japan also considers it necessary to strengthen the
Security Council's monitoring of breaches of arms
embargoes. We therefore welcome the fact that a group
charged with monitoring the arms embargo on Somalia
was established in January of this year. We hope that
the Security Council will consider establishing new
groups of a similar nature as necessary, as well as
strengthening the work of those already in operation.

Japan also supports the strengthened efforts being
made by the Department for Disarmament Affairs,
including the Coordinating Action on Small Arms. The
Security Council should also engage in an exchange of
views with the Department for Disarmament Affairs
and make full use of its expertise. For its part, Japan,
with a view to consolidating peace, is implementing
projects which link the collection of small arms and
light weapons with development in Cambodia and in
other countries. We believe that they are effective in
removing the incentive to possess such weapons.

Thirdly, the reintegration of refugees and of
internally displaced persons is an important element in
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. For them,
safe return is only the first step towards reintegration.
In order to avert a situation in which such persons are
obliged to become refugees and internally displaced
persons once again, and in order to achieve a durable
solution, efforts must be made to ensure that they are
accepted as integral members of a local community and
that they play a role in its reconstruction. Thus, a
seamless transition from humanitarian assistance to
reconstruction is extremely important. Japan
accordingly welcomes the holding of an Economic and
Social Council event on transition.

Fourthly, Japan attaches great importance to
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
rehabilitation from the standpoint of the consolidation of
peace, and it understands the important linkage between
such peace-building activities and peacekeeping
operations. However, peacekeeping activities should
not be expanded without limitation in the name of
peace-building. Peace-building should lead to
reconstruction and development. It requires expertise
which is different from that required for peacekeeping.
It is desirable that the authority of a Special
Representative of the Secretary-General should be of a
coordinating nature.

In its final section, the Secretary-General's report
touches on the relationship between the protection of
civilians and peace processes. It is also very important
to work to prevent the outbreak or recurrence of armed
conflict in order to ensure the effective protection of
civilians. In that connection, Japan would stress the
importance of human security, which promotes the
protection and empowerment of individuals through
assistance such as the Trust Fund for Human Security.

A ceasefire agreement is but a first step towards a
lasting peace. A society impoverished by armed
conflict remains in a precarious state. It stands at the
crossroads between peace and national rebirth on the
one hand, and a return to armed conflict on the other.
Under such circumstances, promoting human security
can enable such a society to move forward on the road
towards peace and robust national reconstruction.
Japan therefore hopes that the concept of human
security will be further mainstreamed in the United
Nations system.

