Mr. Ward (Jamaica): My delegation joins in
thanking Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
detailed briefing on the situation in Kosovo. It is
important that the Security Council be kept fully
informed of the problems and the actions taken to
alleviate them.

Many of the concerns that were expressed by my
delegation at the meeting on 18 January still remain of
particular concern, especially the situations in the
Presevo Valley and, more recently, in Mitrovica. We
urge the parties involved to bring an end to this cycle
of violence. Without the resolution of these problems,
the hope for peace and reconciliation in Kosovo will be
elusive.

We are also concerned about the potential for the
destabilization of the whole region. The information
provided by Mr. Guehenno on the actions being taken
by the Kosovo Force (KFOR) is welcome, and these
actions have our full support. We are also pleased to
hear of the confidence-building measures being
employed by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and
my delegation offers its full support for these
measures.

The recent spate of violence in Mitrovica is
extremely worrying to my delegation, and the attacks
against United Nations peacekeepers is an alarming
development. We are concerned that the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) was forced to pull its staff out of southern
Mitrovica. My delegation attaches great importance to
the role of UNHCR, and all parties are responsible for
ensuring that its work is facilitated and unhindered. We
welcome the declaration signed by the Kosovo
Albanian leaders aimed at restoring calm in the area.
Their role is of extremely great importance to the
process of peace and reconciliation.

My delegation has in the past addressed the
situation of trafficking in persons. We were pleased to
learn of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) regulation making
trafficking in persons a crime punishable by
imprisonment. We note that recently the first guilty
verdict for trafficking in women has been issued in
Kosovo. We agree that the verdict sends to those who
would buy and sell human beings for profit a strong
message that the courts will support the police with
strong sanctions.

We are also concerned about the reports of
growing drug use in Kosovo, and we note the efforts of
UNMIK and the Kosovo police in dealing with the
situation.

My delegation continues to stress that until the
issue of detained and missing persons is addressed,
peace and reconciliation in Kosovo will be elusive. We
hope that advances will be made in this area in the near
future. We note that the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General has said that this is high on his
priority list. We hope that the cooperation between
Belgrade and UNMIK will lead to a solution to the
problem. We urge UNMIK to continue addressing this
situation. Enhanced communication with the authorities
in Belgrade should help to resolve this problem, and
my delegation urges enjoining the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to include these detainees in the amnesty
law or effect their releases through presidential decree.
My delegation wishes to reiterate that the provisions of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) must serve as
the basis for the work of UNMIK and that this
resolution must be fully implemented.

We continue our support for the work of UNMIK
as it works in collaboration with the people of Kosovo
to prepare the province for substantial autonomy. We
believe that the process of defining autonomy and of
developing institutions of self-government, with the
people of Kosovo sharing more and more responsibility
in the administration of the province, must be actively
pursued. As UNMIK develops the legal framework for
Kosovo, we urge that in this context the concept of
substantial autonomy be clearly defined before the
province-wide elections, thereby removing the issue as
a focus of the election campaign and removing any
confusion as to its meaning in the post-election period.

We support the building of effective law
enforcement and an effective judiciary as one of the
four priorities for UNMIK. As we have said in the past,
peace and reconciliation are not possible without a
judiciary that dispenses justice without fear or favour.

