Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): On behalf of the
members of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I
am pleased to present the report of the Commission on
its sixth session as contained in document (8/2013/63).

We recall that it was you, Mr. President, in your
previous capacity as Chairperson of the Peacebuilding
Commission IN 2011, who presented the report of
the PBC on its fifth session (see S/PV.6805). We are
grateful for having this year's briefing, Sir, under your
country's presidency of the Council.

This year's report ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
is organized around the main functions and work of
the Commission, placing particular emphasis on the
results achieved and the challenges and opportunities
relating to the impact of the Commission in the field
and its relations with United Nations Headquarters.
It mainstreams the implementation of relevant
recommendations from the 2010 review of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture (S/2010/393, annex)
and has incorporated a forward agenda for 2013 as an
implementation framework for those recommendations.

Allow me to highlight a number of issues of
particular importance from the report. First, the
reporting period saw particular attention focused on
institutional consolidation, which is crucial for the
Commission's future role and impact. The Commission
launched an ambitious exercise to improve and clarify
its working methods, especially as they relate to its
linkage and collaboration with the work of key actors
in the field.

Secondly, during the reporting period, the
Commission continued its focus on facilitating the
work of country configurations in order to achieve
the Commission's goals on the ground. To that end,
the Commission had embarked on a work programme
designed to support the Commission's engagement
with the six countries on the agenda, namely, Burundi,
the Central African Republic, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Liberia and Sierra Leone. The peacebuilding process
in each of those six countries is at a different stage,
presenting different opportunities and posing different
types of challenges.

Some highlights of the Commission's country-
specific engagement during the reporting period
included, first, support for the launching of a national
reconciliation strategy and for the first regional hub for
security and justice in Liberia; secondly, support for the
successful holding of elections in Sierra Leone; thirdly,
resource mobilization for the peacebuilding pillar of a
new poverty reduction strategy in Burundi, including
through support for the successful organization of the
Conference of Burundi's Development Partners held in
Geneva in October 2012; and fourthly, the initiation of
a resource-mapping exercise in Guinea with a view to
supportingthe developmentofanational aidmanagement
and coordination system. I thank the leadership of the
respective countries for their commitment and support,
without which the Commission would have not been
able to achieve its goals.

Conversely, the disruption of the presidential
electoral process through an unconstitutional change
of Government in Guinea-Bissau on 12 April 2012
undermined the progress in peacebuilding that had
begun to take place in that country. That and the violence
witnessed in the Central African Republic towards the
end of 2012, which has led to the challenging security,
humanitarian and political situation of today, underlined
that the role of the Commission's engagement needed to
be more comprehensive, targeted and well coordinated.
In addition, and in the absence of a broader, more
vigorous and continuing national commitment, and in
the absence of coordinated efforts to address the root
causes of instability, the role of the Commission in
certain situations remains seriously challenged.

Thirdly, in parallel to the Commission's focus on
country-specific engagement, the work undertaken
by the Commission on policy development in 2012
has given priority to partnerships as an area which
gives substance and value to the Commission's main
functions in sustaining attention, forging coherence
and mobilizing resource for the six countries on its
agenda.

The work of the Commission has therefore focused
on strengthening the partnership with the World Bank
and the African Development Bank. The Commission
has taken important steps towards the promotion of the
better alignment of national peacebuilding priorities
in the countries on the agenda with the engagement of
both banks in those countries, thus ensuring a greater
degree of coherence of efforts, as well as sufficient
focus on peacebuilding objectives in those countries.
Given the nexus between peace and development, the
Commission is also pursuing a thematic focus on job
creation and rule-of-law assistance in partnership with
banks and other stakeholders. The Commission sees an
important linkage between those efforts to strengthen
partnerships with key financial institutions and the
work undertaken by the Peacebuilding Fund in support
of peacebuilding priorities in the countries on the
agenda.

In that regard, the Commission has continued its
regular dialogue with the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF)
Advisory Group and the Peacebuilding Support Office,
with a view to further strengthening synergy and
harmonization.

Fourthly, the Commission sought to deepen its
working relationship with key actors in the field,
especially with senior United Nations leadership. An
informal dialogue with the Executive and Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General in agenda
countries was launched in April 2012. The dialogue
represented an important step in clarifying areas
of mutual complementarity. That is certainly a
crucial partnership requiring deeper and continuing
commitment and support from the Commission's
membership and the United Nations top management.
In addition, dialogue with regional organizations,
including the African Union Peace and Security
Council, continued during the reporting period,
underscoring the recognition of the African Union's
central role in support of peacebuilding efforts on the
continent.

Fifthly, partnership with United Nations principal
organs is of no less significance. The report stipulates
that members elected from each of the three principal
organs need to lead the efforts to deepen and substantiate
the relations with the Peacebuilding Commission. That
is an area in which we expect to see further advances
in 2013. In 2012, however, in view of the need to
strengthen the links with United Nations field missions
and enhance the impact in the field, the Commission
placed particular emphasis on the relationship with the
Security Council and had a very meaningful interactive
dialogue with the members of the Council in July 2012.
The consideration of the Commission's report on its
fifth session last July in the Security Council offered
an opportunity to revive the discussion on what the
2010 review described as the potential to create a new
dynamic between a more forthcoming Security Council
and a better-performing PBC.

Suggestions aimed at energizing the relations
between the two bodies have been followed up,
including through the Commission's Working Group
on Lessons Learned, which explored in November
2012 the scope of the Commission's advisory role to
the Council on transitions of United Nations missions
in countries on the agenda. The Commission could
potentially demonstrate value added by supporting a
process of drawdown and withdrawal of United Nations
missions that is not only grounded in sound analysis
and in country-specific realities and national needs,
but also ensures that the international community
remains committed to, and cognizant of, the essential
links between peace and socioeconomic development
beyond the lifetime of United Nations peacekeeping
and political missions.

Much discussion has taken place around the
extent to which the Commission is delivering on the
high expectations that accompanied its creation in
2005. Therefore, 2012 was a year when the question
of the collective responsibility and commitment of the
membership took centre stage in the Commission's
deliberations. I must say that while we collectively
managed to instil some sense ofurgency with respect to
this topic, the task of translating such commitment into
concrete actions and contributions remains unfulfilled.
To that end, the High-level Event on "Peacebuilding:
The way towards sustainable peace and security",
which was presided over by the Prime Minister of
Bangladesh in September 2012, brought together,
for the first time, a number of Heads of State and
Government, Ministers and senior officials from among
the Commission's broader membership. The consensus
political declaration that emanated from that event
reaffirmed and reinvigorated the political commitment
to the key principles, objectives and priorities that the
Commission has consistently promoted, at both the
policy and the country-specific levels.

Finally, I cannot emphasize enough the need to
envisage a new paradigm for South-South and triangular
cooperation which could reinforce national ownership
in peacebuilding through focused support on national
capacity development and institution-building in
critical peacebuilding priorities. That is an area which
requires further commitment from Member States and
the United Nations system at large. The Peacebuilding
Commission is uniquely positioned to become a
platform for the development of this new paradigm
by piloting concrete projects of cooperation in the
countries on its agenda. The Peacebuilding Commission
can certainly facilitate the matching ofneeds identified
by those countries with the most relevant experience
and expertise, especially from the global South.

In closing, I must underscore that the Commission
continues to receive direct and substantive support from
the Peacebuilding Support Office. As the Commission
further seeks to strengthen linkages and ensure deeper
collaboration and synergy with the PBF and other
stakeholders, including philanthropic actors, civil
society and the private and business sectors, the role of
and the support received from the Office will become
even more crucial.

The pace at which the United Nations and the
global peacebuilding agenda are evolving testifies to
the urgency of the need to address sources ofprotracted
instability and the drivers of relapse into conflict. To that
end, we can no longer afford to remain in the custody
of a traditional and business-as-usual approach to the
link between security and socioeconomic development.
We shall continue to face systemic challenges, but we
must commit to facing them with the requisite resolve
and determination. We have to take bolder and more
courageous steps in support of sustainable peace and
security.

