Mr. Navarrete (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Madam President, my delegation would like to thank
you for having convened this public debate on the
situation in Afghanistan. It demonstrates the excellent
way in which Jamaica is serving as President of the
Security Council for this month.

The situation in Afghanistan is an issue that has
held the attention of the Organization, not only in the
Council but also in many of its other bodies, over the
course of many years. Various factors, such as
occupation and foreign interference, drug trafficking,
human rights violations and internal conflict have all
brought war, instability and a deterioration in living
standards to a people that, unfortunately, for more than
two decades has known no peace.

With the military action that in recent weeks has
been undertaken as a proper response to the
abominable events of 11 September, it is time for the
United Nations to shoulder more fully its responsibility
with respect to rebuilding the country. We agree with
the Secretary-General - whom we thank for his
introductory statement today - that we must focus our
efforts and define international action to promote a
climate of stability and comprehensive and lasting
peace in Afghanistan.

Tracing the political course that Afghanistan
should take is the prerogative of the Afghan people. No
entity and no person should try to accommodate their
own interests in the process leading to the
establishment of the new, inclusive and broad-based
Government that will be assembled in the near future.
The sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Afghan
people must be unequivocally respected. As
Ambassador Brahimi has said, Afghanistan needs help,
not interference, from the members of the international
community.

The Government of Mexico is convinced that the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative, by
using their political and moral authority, can take on
the mandate to work with all parties in Afghanistan and
in the Afghan diaspora to promote, through dialogue
and negotiation, understandings and commitments that
will lead to the establishment of a representative
Government reflecting the interests of all ethnic groups
and committed to working for the entire Afghan
people.

To my delegation, the road map sketched this
morning by the Special Representative in his
exceptionally informative briefing seems correct. It is
indispensable that, first and foremost, the parties meet
to begin a constructive dialogue that will enable them
to reconcile their interests and, then, to take concrete
action to establish Afghanistan's own political
structures that can provide stability for the country.

Rebuilding Afghanistan may be the greatest
challenge now before the United Nations. It requires
the deployment of all the Organization's political and
negotiating capabilities. At the same time, Afghan
representatives must begin work on the various
elements that go into governance.

All the questions related to the future of
Afghanistan are important, as they are part and parcel
of the same issue. Yet the Government of Mexico
considers that the highest priority must consistently be
given to providing for the well-being of the men and
women of Afghanistan, who have lived in deplorable
conditions and who lack the basic means of
subsistence. The Afghan people suffer from poverty,
illiteracy, lack of equal opportunity because of gender
and the lack of basic services, and all of those
problems must be addressed and overcome through a
response to the humanitarian crisis. If any of those
negative elements persist, it will have a negative
impact on the process of rebuilding the country.

The presence of United Nations humanitarian
personnel will help ease the suffering of the Afghan
population and will prevent even greater misfortune,
especially during the transition period. It is also
necessary to address the question of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and to work hard to put in
place conditions of safety and security that will
encourage those groups to return to their places of
origin, free from fear and in safe and secure conditions.

