Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Pascoe, the Palestinian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Malki, and the Permanent
Representative of Israel, Ms. Shalev, for their
statements. France aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the Permanent Representative of Sweden on
behalf of the European Union.

To begin, I should like briefly to address the
matter of Lebanon, which is also on the Council's
agenda. We support the Prime Minister-designate,
Mr. Saad Hariri, and we hope that a Government will
be formed quickly. The spirit of dialogue must
continue to prevail among Lebanese parties. The
countries of the region should, for their parts, also join
forces to foment a climate conducive to the formation
of that Government.

Moreover, it is essential that all parties respect
resolution 1701 (2006). We will closely follow the
review of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) that the Secretariat will conduct over the
coming months in accordance with resolution 1884
(2009). We express our concern about the recent spate
of incidents, which are simply violations of resolution
1701 (2006). On the subject of Monday's explosion in
southern Lebanon, we await the results of the joint
fact-finding mission of the Armed Forces of Lebanon
and UNIFIL, which should help to clarify the
circumstances of the incident. In any case, we
underline our support for the complete implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006), which calls on the Lebanese
State to exercise its sovereignty over the entire
Lebanese territory, so that no weapons can be situated
in the country without its consent.

I turn now to the Israeli-Palestinian matter. I am
not the first in the Council to say that rarely - in all
likelihood never - has there been such an
international consensus about the conditions for peace:
the creation of a viable, independent and democratic
Palestinian State, living peaceably side by side with
Israel within secure and recognized borders, as set out
in this Council's resolution 1515 (2003). Nevertheless,
we still have to determine the way to take the steps
leading to that goal and to do so fast. I will suggest
three important steps.

First, progress on the ground is necessary to
prevent people from losing all hope. In that regard
Israel should stop settlement activities in the West
Bank and also in East Jerusalem. They are illegal and a
major obstacle to peace. As our President Sarkozy has
said, the settlements obstruct the prospects for a
Palestinian State, they do not contribute to security for
Israel but rather increase its vulnerability.

A second important consideration is Jerusalem.
After the clashes in recent days in the Holy City, we
call upon the parties to show restraint, so as to avoid
the immediate risk of an escalation, whose
consequences cannot be predicted. We call upon the
Israeli authorities to cease the demolition of houses and
other expulsions in East Jerusalem. It is a fact that
settlement in that city has taken on a particularly
provocative aspect. There can be no peace without
Jerusalem, which will be, as President Sarkozy said in
his address to the Knesset on 23 June 2008, the capital
of both States.

Complementary progress must also be made in
the realm of movement and access. This is the case for,
Gaza - and I will come back to this - but it is also
the case for the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The
lifting by the occupying authorities of obstacles to
movement around a number of large Palestinian cities
constitutes a positive development that should be
pursued.

All measures that allow for movement towards a
normal life for the Palestinian population should be
encouraged. Beyond their consequences in
humanitarian matters these measures would also allow
the Palestinians to face their responsibilities to build
the institutions of their future State. Along these lines
the Palestinian Authority should continue its efforts to
strengthen its security sector and also to institute the
rule of law. The continued fight, without quarter,
against terrorism should remain a priority.

As regards the situation in Gaza - and this is my
second point - the consolidation of the ceasefire that
hinges on a full implementation of resolution 1860
(2009) remains a priority. This resolution has set the
parameters for a lasting ceasefire, including the
reopening of crossings and the implementation of
mechanisms that will make it possible to put an end to
weapons trafficking. These two conditions have not
been met.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza is concerning.
We call for an immediate opening of the crossings,
especially to allow for access by civilians to
humanitarian assistance and also for a resumption of
economic activity. Beyond the humanitarian concerns
the current closing of these crossings leads to the
continuation of the status quo of the political situation
in Gaza. Parallel to these efforts, we continue to call
for immediate and unconditional release of Gilad
Shalit. I should like to thank the delegations that
mentioned the case of this prisoner.

As regards the Goldstone Report, its allegations
are grave. Throughout the Gaza conflict brought on by
the firing by Hamas on Israel, France has reiterated its
unswerving position: international humanitarian law
should be respected in all places, under all
circumstances and by all parties to a conflict,
particularly in Gaza and in southern Israel. We believe
the parties should engage in a process of independent
inquiry, in conformity with international standards, into
allegations of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights during the Gaza crisis.

My third and last point has to do with inter-
Palestinian reconciliation and the role of the neighbour
States. Palestinians should speak with a single voice in
order to put the peace process back on track. There
cannot indeed be a peace accord with just one part of
the Palestinian people, nor would there be a viable
Palestinian State without Gaza. There cannot be peace
without recognition of Israel's right to exist, without a
renunciation of violence and without respect for signed
peace accords. While negotiations towards inter-
Palestinian reconciliation face many challenges, we
continue to support the Egyptian mediation efforts, and
we should also like to pay particular homage to those
efforts.

The countries of the region, of course, have an
important role to play. We will continue to provide all
of our support to the Arab Peace Initiative. This should
be an essential foundation of a global and lasting
solution to the situation in the Middle East.

All measures and gestures by States of the region
to demonstrate their commitment to a lasting peace -
including, in particular, good-neighbourly relations
with Israel - are to be encouraged. In the context of
that regional approach, we also believe that the time
has come to make progress on the Syrian and Lebanese
tracks of the peace process. Such developments will
amount to nothing, however, if the two parties do not
resume their negotiations with a view to reaching a
definitive peace settlement whose broad outlines are
already known to us.

This is a matter of urgency, as President Sarkozy
has recalled by stressing the urgency of settling a
conflict that is not only regional, but also concerns the
entire world. Tensions have increased in recent days in
the Middle East, and we all feel that a spark could
ignite a fire at any moment.

This is a matter of urgency, and the international
community and the Council also have a major role to
play, because the situation in the Middle East is
pressing and concerns us all. We therefore support the
efforts of the United States Administration. For their
part, France and the European Union have expressed
their willingness to support and facilitate the
negotiations as much as necessary and to consider the
guarantees required in a possible agreement.

It is now time to make concrete progress on the
path of a just and comprehensive peace that is based on
the Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid principles and the
Road Map and is in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. France is prepared to
play its full role in such an effort.

To that end, President Sarkozy and President
Mubarak have proposed the idea of a peace summit in
the framework of the Union for the Mediterranean,
which would accompany a resumption of peace
negotiations between the two parties and would, of
course, be organized in consultation with all parties
involved.

