Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): As we all know, just
over a year ago the international community was full of
optimism regarding the progress towards peace in the
Security Council 374m- meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

Middle East, inspired by the success of the peaceful and
democratic elections in Palestine held on 20 January 1996.
Although Israeli-Palestinian relations went more or less
downhill for the rest of 1996, 1997 began on a positive
note with the momentous agreement to redeploy Israeli
forces from Hebron. My delegation believes that this
agreement holds particular significance, for it demonstrates
once again that, even if differences at first appear
insurmountable, those man-made differences can be
overcome through dialogue between the parties directly
concerned. .

Now, however, a new man-made difficulty has arisen
in East Jerusalem which, if not handled with adequate
caution and prudence, could pose serious problems for the
entire peace process. My delegation considers the recent
Israeli decision to construct housing units in the southern
part of East Jerusalem as a step which runs contrary not
only to the relevant international conventions and Council
resolutions, but also to the acceleration of the peace
process, especially in light of the well-known political
sensitivities associated with the city.

At this juncture, we believe that it is crucially
important to prevent any weakening of the bonds of trust
and cooperation that have been built between the Israelis
and the Palestinians, especially following the Hebron
agreement, lest the fraying of those ties jeopardize the
entire peace process. This is all the more important as the
final-status negotiations -- one of the most critical and
complex stages of the peace process - are scheduled to
start soon. Clearly, neither the Israelis nor the Palestinians
would benefit were the implementation of Israel's
construction plans to derail the entire peace process, as
already clearly evidenced through the events of last
September in Jerusalem.

Furthermore, we wish to emphasize the importance of
both sides' adopting a prudent and level-headed approach
in the current circumstances. What has happened thus far is
indeed cause for serious concern, but in no way justifies a
violent response, which would only encourage extremism
on both sides. In this connection, a photograph in last
Friday's New York Times, which showed a Palestinian
demonstrator holding an olive branch at the East Jerusalem
housing site, conveys an important symbolic message that
violence should not be a tool for solving problems.

Fully recognizing the far-reaching implications that the

Middle East carries for world peace andflprosperity, the

Republic of Korea has consistently supported the peace

process in the region and closely followed its
implementation. Along with other members of the
international community, we too believe that the Israelis
and the Palestinians alike have a vital stake not only in
continuing but in accelerating the peace process. It is
therefore our sincere hope that a more fully fledged spirit
of compromise and- cooperation will prevail in their
relations. As my delegation emphasized before the
General Assembly during its debate on the situation in the
Middle East last fall, we believe that difficulties in the
Israeli-Palestinian relationship have often been caused by
the impact of domestic politics at the international level.
Solutions to these problems, therefore, can also be found
domestically.

By the same token, we firmly believe that, despite
setbacks, the truly impressive progress made in the peace
process so far proves that Israelis and Palestinians are
capable of mustering the courage, wisdom, and patience
they need to overcome the current difficulties.

In conclusion, I wish to reiterate the hope of my
delegation that the present tensions in East Jerusalem can
be promptly defused through open-ended dialogue
between the tWo sides, so that the Middle East peace
process can once again move forward on the course laid
out by the agreements freely entered into on the basis of
Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

