Mr. Prosor (Israel): Allow me to take this
opportunity to congratulate Lithuania on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.

Jewish tradition places great importance on
upholding the sanctity of life. The Talmud famously
teaches that "Whoever saves a life, it is considered as
if he saved an entire world." The Talmud also goes on
to teach that "Whoever destroys a soul, it is considered
as if he destroyed an entire world." In Syria, almost
130,000 worlds have been destroyed.

We will soon mark the third anniversary of
the Syrian conflict, and there is no end in sight. We
cannot sit comfortably in this Chamber discussing the
protection of civilians in armed conflict when, before
our eyes, the crisis in Syria has reached catastrophic
proportions. We have all been criticized for not doing
anything substantial to help the people of Syria. The
endless meetings, discussions and good intentions are
not good enough. All of that is doing nothing to change
the situation on the ground. Each of us represents a
nation, but we also represent the aspirations of millions
of people throughout the world. The Security Council
has often been divided on the issue of Syria, but time
is running out. The Syrian people cannot wait as the
wheels of diplomacy spin in the mud of debates and
dialogues.

How many nations can say that they truly help
protect civilians? Looking back on 2013, it is clear that
very few had the courage to act on their ideals. When
hostilities erupted in the Central African Republic,
the African Union acted swiftly to avert a potential
genocide. And when violent extremists began a swift
campaign of terror in northern Mali, France took
the lead with decisive action that saved the lives of
countless civilians.

Each and every country must do its part. Horrified
by the savagery and violence that has ravaged Syria,
Israel has refused to be indifferent to the suffering. We
have treated hundreds of Syrians in desperate need of
medical care.

When Governments are unable or unwilling to
protect their civilians, the United Nations is often the
last line of defence. Peacekeepers have saved tens of
thousands of lives, but the reality is that millions of
civilians are still in need of protection. Those innocent
men and women turn to the United Nations for help, but
find themselves standing alone.

I want to thank the Permanent Representative
of India, who spoke just now, for raising important
questions that need to be addressed by the Council
honestly and openly. In this age of modern warfare,
it is difficult to distinguish between combatants and
bystanders. Petty politics have drained the efforts and
attention of the Security Council. Instead of opening
the channels of humanitarian aid, little more than a
trickle of assistance is reaching those who need it the
most.

If we are really honest with ourselves, then we will
admit that we have not done enough. Somewhere in the
world there is a mother shielding her children as rockets

and mortars explode all around. Somewhere in the world
there is a father crawling through rubble searching
for scraps of food to feed his hungry children. And
somewhere in the world there are children labouring
day and night to help ease the burden on their families.

Ronald Reagan said, "Let us be sure that those who
come after will say that in our time we did everything
that could be done."

Those men, women and children should not stand
alone. We should be standing at their side, easing their
burden and ensuring a safer and more secure future
for them. We share the fundamental responsibility to
protect civilians from the three "Ts" - terror, torment
and tyranny. We must set aside our differences and
make a lasting change for generations to come.

The clock is ticking, and time is running out. It is
time to stop talking and take decisive action. Every life
we save is a world unto itself. No nation is free from
responsibility. I call on each and every one of us today
to act now.

