Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Much has been said today
about the critical juncture the Sudan finds itself at and
the challenges that remain. We welcome this
constructive discussion.

Over the past five years the parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) have worked
together peacefully to address their issues and take that
historic agreement forward. There have been successes
and failures, but through the ups and the downs the
parties have stayed the course and stability has
prevailed. We commend them for their commitment to
peace and the courage they have shown under difficult
circumstances.

We have come to the final phase of CPA
implementation. At this point, all efforts must focus on
ensuring that the referendums in Southern Sudan and
Abyei are free, fair, transparent and credible, held on
time and in a peaceful manner. All parties concerned
should respect the outcome of the referendums. These
points are all crucial, since a result that can be
legitimately contested will be controversial, not just in
the Sudan but in the eyes of international public
opinion. In that context the commencement of the voter
registration process and the large turnout for it is a
noteworthy first step.

Let me underscore here that Turkey has, as a
matter of principle, always attached importance to the
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Sudan since its independence in 1956. We also
fully support the CPA, which has brought peace to the
Sudan after decades of internal strife. Those two
positions are not incompatible. Indeed, the CPA itself
reflects the same delicate political balance.

On the other hand, we do have concerns that
while separation is a legitimate choice, it is a difficult
one. However, in the end, that is a matter for the
Sudanese people to decide. In line with the main tenets
of the CPA, the future of the Sudan is very much in the
hands of the Sudanese. They are faced with a simple,
binary choice: either unity or separation. Their will is
the way forward, and their right to self-determination,
as manifested in free, fair and credible referendums,
will have to be respected.

Whatever the outcome of the referendums, all
Sudanese people, regardless of race or religion, and
whether in the North or the South, will continue to be
interdependent. In that regard, the future is not as
simple or binary. The need to find solutions that ensure
peaceful coexistence among diverse communities will
not change after January. Indeed, it will most likely
become more pronounced.

That is why comprehensively addressing all post-
referendum arrangements is crucial, and we welcome
the progress made recently in that regard. The fact is
that while one is not a precondition for the other, there
is a mutually reinforcing link between the finalization
of post-referendum arrangements and the successful
holding of the referendums. Meaningful progress in
post-referendum arrangements can be translated into a
more positive working climate in the preparations for
and run-up to the referendums, as well as in their
aftermath. That is why more concrete progress is
needed, including with regard to Abyei.

The international community and the United
Nations stand ready to support all those efforts, but
peace must come from within. No amount of outside
support can replace or substitute for the political will
of the Sudanese stakeholders themselves to pave the
way to a future devoid of conflict. Ultimately, it is
those parties represented here today that had the
courage, foresight and wisdom to sign on to the CPA
five years ago. It is those parties that will make sure it
is implemented in full, and it is those parties that have
it within their grasp to together establish a peace
beyond the scope of the CPA.

Turkey is concerned about the recent military
clashes in Darfur and the overall deterioration in
security. We condemn all attacks on civilians,
humanitarian workers and the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and call for the
perpetrators to be brought to justice. We urge all rebel
movements in Darfur to join the peace process in Doha
without further delay and without preconditions.

The humanitarian situation cannot be addressed
properly until a steady state of security is attained.
That is impossible as long as the rebel groups continue
to fight, rather than enter into political dialogue. There
have to be real consequences for rebel groups that
propagate conflict. Intransigence cannot be rewarded.

We must not lose focus in Darfur because of the
CPA or other considerations. A comprehensive and just
political settlement in Darfur is the only viable way
forward. Turkey fully supports the joint mediation
effort of the African Union (AU) and the United
Nations, hosted by Qatar. We welcome the strategy for
Darfur announced by the Government of the Sudan. We
also welcome the continuing rapprochement between
the Governments of the Sudan and Chad.

It is not only the Sudan that is rapidly
approaching a critical juncture. The resolve of the
international community to maintain peace and security
is also at stake. We have a multitude of mechanisms,
processes and structures in place, as well as high-level
engagement, but translating that high-level effort into
success is the challenge before us. The CPA is not just
a series of timelines that need to be met. It is a political
path, charted five years ago, that will most likely lead
to the break-up of a very large country and its peoples
into two.

That is potentially a traumatic experience, the
benefits of which may only become apparent in the
long term. If history is any guide, even in the best
circumstances and with the ongoing commitment of the
parties to work together, we must shortly brace
ourselves for the same major turbulence ahead. As
such, insisting on strict adherence to the letter and the
spirit of the CPA will continue to be crucial. This
historic Agreement must be fully implemented and
brought to its culmination.

On the other hand, the Council and the
international community must also be prepared to
effectively manage the likely political, security and
humanitarian repercussions of CPA implementation,
especially in the aftermath of the referendums. That
will require carefully scripted, sound messages, as well
as putting in place the right tools, which include
genuine incentives.

As we move forward, in the light of the complex
and multifaceted national and regional dynamics, it is
clear that a detailed strategy is necessary to manage the
post-CPA period. In the final analysis, the Security
Council's main responsibility is the maintenance of
international peace and security. We hope that its
continued political involvement in the process, and this
meeting today, will ultimately be helpful in advancing
that essential important goal.

In closing, let me express Turkey's ongoing
commitment to peace and stability in the Sudan and the
region and our full support for the invaluable efforts of
the United Nations and the AU.
34
