The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the United States.

I, too, want to thank Lord Ashdown and Judge
Meron for joining us today and for their dedication and
commitment to peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
capture and prosecution of persons indicted for war
crimes has long been a priority for the United States
and the Security Council. The emergence of a stable
and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be
possible until indicted war criminals are brought to
justice, especially Radovan Karadzic' and Ratko
Mladie. These and other indicted war criminals should
know that they cannot wait out the international
community.

It should be no mystery to the people of
Republika Srpska that more than half of them live at or
below the poverty line. It is because investors will not
do business where the law is not upheld and because
Karadzie's vast criminal support network continues to
steal resources that local Governments need to pay for
pensions, health care and education.

The parties made a solemn commitment at
Dayton eight years ago to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and turn over indictees. The
international community has kept its Dayton
commitments, including the creation of the Republica
Srpska. The time has come for the Republica Srpska to
do its part and comply with all the requirements of
Dayton and its greater obligation as part of the Euro-
Atlantic community.

While it is the ICTY that will try Karadzic,
Mladie and other senior officials most responsible for
crimes within the ICTY's jurisdiction, it is important
that justice for other cases be transferred to a
competent national jurisdiction in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We commend the efforts of the Office of
the High Representative, the international community
and the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
create domestic capacity by establishing a War Crimes
Chamber within the State Court of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The project, part of a regional effort, is
essential to the strengthening of the rule of law and
will also support the ICTY's completion strategy. We
strongly urge the Office of the High Representative, the
ICTY and the local authorities to refine and finalize the
plan for - and begin operation of - a War Crimes
Chamber without delay. Resolution 1503 (2003)
encourages Member States to support the establishment
of this War Crimes Chamber.

For its part, the United States is prepared to lend
its support by providing expert assistance and up to
one-third of the cost. We encourage other donors and
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to also help
shoulder the financial and technical burdens.

We applaud High Representative Ashdown's
efforts to target those who provide financial and
logistical support to persons indicted for war crimes.
The United States has instituted its own mechanism to
ban the travel, freeze the assets and prohibit the
financial activities of those who help persons indicted
for war crimes to evade justice. Steps such as the
European Union travel ban are also effective at putting
pressure on these individuals, and the United States
enthusiastically welcomes them. In keeping with the
recently passed resolution 1503 (2003), we strongly
urge all States to impose similar measures to freeze the
assets and restrict the travel of fugitive indictees, as
well as of those individuals or groups that help them
evade justice.

Lord Ashdown also mentioned the tremendous
progress made by the Defence Reform Commission,
the Indirect Tax Policy Commission and the
Intelligence Commission. The United States strongly
supports the work of all three commissions and we call
on the relevant institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina
to approve and implement the draft legislation these
commissions have proposed without delay.

We also urge the relevant authorities in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to continue and accelerate economic
reforms, particularly in privatization, the restructuring
of domestic debt and the reduction of the burden of the
Government on the economy. The United States stands
ready to provide technical and financial assistance to
help Bosnia and Herzegovina implement these reforms,
and we urge other Member States to consider how they,
too, can contribute, and to do so.

I now resume my function as President.

I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

