Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): Let me also thank
Sir John Holmes for his very comprehensive briefing. I
must confess, though, that it was rather depressing to
listen and to hear about the continued suffering of the
people in Chad, the Central African Republic and the
Sudan. But one of the bright spots of his briefing came
at the end, when Sir John began to share some of his
thoughts regarding his visit to the region. I am
particularly pleased that among the impressions that he
had is that of the regional nature of the situation. My
delegation has always argued that, until the
international community resolves the situation in
Darfur, people will always suffer in the camps in Chad,
the Central African Republic and elsewhere. Darfur is
the key; until the situation is unlocked, the suffering
will continue. Unfortunately, no amount of help or aid
given will be enough as long as the political situation
in Darfur is not resolved.

We also share the view of Mr. Holmes that the
situation in Darfur is also threatening to affect the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the North
and the South of the Sudan. If that goes, then the
situation will be really even more tragic than it is.
What the situation in Darfur needs is a very intense
political effort to try and bring about a solution that
can embrace the rebel forces, the Government of the
Sudan and all the other actors in the area so as to
establish peace there.

The terrifying thought is that the only thing that
seems to ameliorate the situation in Darfur is, of
course, the presence of the African Union Mission in

Sudan (AMIS). AMIS, however, is not going to be
there forever; in fact, AMIS is threatening to leave by
June or July this year. Then the people of Darfur will
really be left to the mercy of the Janjaweed, the bandits
and all those other characters that Mr. Holmes
described so well in his testimony.

I therefore think that we, too, wish to join the call
to the international community to redouble our efforts
in trying to resolve the situation in Darfur. Until we are
successful there, there will always be people who will
flee for their lives into Chad and the Central African
Republic, where they face even more challenges.

I am very pleased that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is shining a
spotlight on the conditions of the people there. We
have been waiting for this report to come out and
remind us that it is really about the people who are
suffering in that part of the world. Sometimes, here, we
get involved in all the difficult issues of political
complications that can overshadow the fact that it is
the people who are suffering. I am glad that the United
Nations is finally doing what it does best, which is to
remind the international community that, while we
argue about hybrids, letters, memos and all the rest, the
people on the ground continue to suffer; the people on
the ground remain at the mercy of the Janjaweed and
all the other characters there; and the people on the
ground are the ones who we have to remember,
because it is about them in the end.

So I say this to thank Mr. Holmes for the report.
It is a very difficult report to hear. He said that he
hoped that he would not have to give it again; we, too,
would hope that we will hear a different report next
time, but at the pace at which we are going it is
doubtful that we will be that successful. Let us hope we
are.

