Mr. Chikoti (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I am
addressing the Council on behalf of the States members
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP): Brazil, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,
Mozambique, Portugal, Sao Tome and Principe, Timor-
Leste and my own country, Angola, which is currently
president of the Community.

In response to the coup d'etat in Guinea-Bissau,
the international community has in recent weeks
proposed initiatives seeking a solution that will
safeguard the dignity of the Guinean people and restore
their legitimate right to a normal life and to peace,
justice, freedom and development. In that regard, two
weeks ago I had the honour to take part in a meeting of
the Security Council (S/PV.6755) convened by the
President for that month, the United States of America,
in which we had the opportunity to discuss Guinea-
Bissau. Today, we are again taking measures to find an
acceptable solution that satisfies the international
community.

The CPLP and its member States remain deeply
concerned over developments in the country. We have
adopted two resolutions on Guinea-Bissau, most
recently on 5 May, reaffirming that the only authorities
in Guinea-Bissau recognized by the CPLP are those
that derive their authority from constitutional and
democratic legitimacy, and giving full support to the
View expressed by the legitimate Government of
Guinea-Bissau following the conference of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), held in Dakar on
3 May.

Despite the international community's firm
condemnation of the coup d'etat and its demands for
the restoration of the rule of law in Guinea-Bissau,
there have been no results so far that can ensure the
restoration of constitutional normality. We welcome the
release of the Government officials jailed after the
military coup, including Interim President Raimundo
Pereira and Prime Minister Carlos Gomes Junior, and
we call for the release of the remaining detainees
following the coup. We believe that the Guinean people
cannot consider themselves free so long as they do not
enjoy all their political and civilian rights, both within
and outside Guinea-Bissau.

The CPLP welcomes the position taken by the
United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the
European Union and the International Organization of
la Francophonie, which strongly condemns the coup
d'etat, and calls on the Security Council to make every
effort to immediately restore the constitutional order,
to reinstate the legitimate Government of Guinea-
Bissau and to conclude the electoral process. The
7

CPLP also appeals to the Security Council to impose
targeted sanctions on the military personnel and
civilians involved in the coup d'etat, and expresses its
support for the sanctions recently adopted by the
European Union and those also planned by ECOWAS.

At this time, the most important task of the
international community, under the leadership of the
Security Council, is to implement appropriate
mechanisms for the restoration of constitutional order
in Guinea-Bissau. In that regard, we reiterate our
support for the request of the legitimate Government of
Guinea-Bissau for the establishment and deployment of
a comprehensive stabilization force, comprising staff
of member countries of ECOWAS, the CPLP and the
African Union, under a Security Council mandate.

The Council should therefore urgently deliberate
such a proposal, under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, and establish a mission mandate
that will safeguard the constitutional order, protect the
country's institutions, legal authorities and people,
ensure the completion of the electoral process and the
implementation of the defence and security sector
reform, and, last but not least, effectively combat drug
trafficking and its related impunity.

The CPLP and its member States are ready to
make a genuine contribution to that initiative, as it is
the best option among the ongoing efforts to resolve
the crisis and - as the most comprehensive and
multilateral solution to be received by the political and
social forces and people of Guinea-Bissau - offers the
best guarantee of success.

Following the establishment of the Angolan
technical and military assistance mission, which was
fully committed to achieving a bilateral solution to the
necessary defence and security sector reform, and after
it was deemed impossible to implement the tripartite
memorandum of understanding between the
Government of Guinea-Bissau, ECOWAS and the
CPLP, as provided for in the road map for reform, we
believe that it is time for a multilateral approach to
support the stabilization of Guinea-Bissau, under the
auspices of the Security Council. That seems to be the
way to help that country.

We propose the urgent establishment of a crisis
contact group for Guinea-Bissau, coordinated by the
United Nations, as mentioned in the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Guinea-Bissau
8
(S/2012/280), with the participation of representatives
of the African Union, ECOWAS and the CPLP.

In conclusion, allow me to draw the Council's
attention to the terrible scourge of illicit drugs and
arms trafficking in Guinea-Bissau, as well as other less
prevalent but equally serious trafficking. We believe
that the expressed intention of the country's legitimate
Government to combat drug trafficking was a key
reason for the coup d'etat. The international
community is therefore being challenged to mobilize in
that fight, which is of concern to everyone as it affects
us all, causing irreparable damage to and destroying
the country's political cohesion and social and moral
well-being, and making it important to strengthen
support for the ECOWAS plan to fight drug trafficking,
in particular in West Africa.

Finally, allow me to alert the Council and the
international community to the serious humanitarian
situation emerging in Guinea-Bissau, in particular
those of internally displaced persons and refugees and
the risk of an epidemic, which require a response and
appropriate action of the international community. We
cannot delay such a response to Guinea-Bissau's needs.

I am grateful for attention of the Council and the
invitation to the CPLP to address it.

