Mr. Casardi (Italy): I have the honour of speaking on
behalf of the European Union: Poland, the Czech Republic,
Hungary, Romania, Lithuania, Slovakia and Cyprus have
associated themselves with this statement.

Only five months ago, in August last year, the
Liberian factions reached an Agreement in Abuja to put an
end to the civil war that had ravaged their country for the
previous six years. The Agreement was a turning-point in
the efforts to start a process of national reconciliation after
a long war that had taken a huge toll on the country:
150,000 people had lost their lives in the endless cycle of
violence, and 800,000 people had been forced to leave
Liberia. The growing awareness that the six years of war
had been completely in vain, the weariness of the people
and the deadlock between the factions laid the groundwork
for an agreement.

We now have before us a very gloomy and disturbing
picture of the peace process as presented to us by the
Secretary-General in his latest report. Major violations of
the cease-fire have occurred, causing the tragic deaths of a
number of African soldiers in the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG). Allow
me to take this opportunity to express the sincere
condolences of the European Union to the families and
Governments of the soldiers that have lost their lives.

These are sad developments for a unique peace-
keeping operation that, for the first time, has been
implemented to a large extent through the participation of
the military contingents of an African subregional
organization deployed side by side with the United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL). This is
why its future success is bound to have wide-ranging
implications that will be felt beyond the region
immediately concerned.

Despite these tragic developments, and subsequent
delays in the implementation of the Abuja Agreement, we
share the opinion of the Secretary-General that the United
Nations and the international community must remain
committed to the Liberian peace process and that
UNOMIL will have a crucial role to play in that respect.
We should not let the entrenched interest of a few
individuals, or the passive adjustment of the combatants
to a never-ending state of war - they are often teenagers
who have known little else in their lives - prevail over
the desperate need for peace in this devastated country.

The international community must now urge the
Liberian factions to fulfil their obligations and enable the
start of an effective disengagement of forces and, in due
course, disarmament and demobilization of troops. It is
the hope of the European Union that conditions will be in
place to hold political elections in the country next
August, as scheduled in the Abuja Agreement.

The draft resolution, on which the Council is to take
action, clearly spells out that the international
community's continued support for the peace process,
including the participation of UNOMIL, is contingent
upon the commitment of the Liberian parties to resolve
their differences peacefully and to achieve national
reconciliation. Their behaviour will be carefully monitored
and the leaders will be held responsible for the deeds of
their men. The report that the Secretary-General is
requested to present by the end of March will provide an
opportunity for further scrutiny.

The draft resolution places squarely on the Liberian
factions the responsibility to respect the status and ensure
the safety of ECOMOG and UNOMIL personnel, as well
as of all those engaged in the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We also appreciate the reference to the
importance of respect for human rights and to the need to
rehabilitate the penitentiary system in the country.

It is our hope that the easing of tensions will allow
regular relief operations to take place throughout the

 

country. The economic recovery of Liberia should become
the first priority, in order to improve the living conditions
of its population and to create a climate of greater stability.
In this connection, let me recall that the European Union,
as a whole, is by far the largest donor of humanitarian,
food and rehabilitation assistance to Liberia since 1990.
These contributions will also help to rebuild the economic
infrastructure of the country, so that Liberia can once again
make full use of its natural resources for the benefit of its
people.

