Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): When I used the word "hypocrisy", I was
referring to a number of countries. They know who
they are, and they bear the main responsibility for the
humanitarian suffering in my country. The references
that you, Mr. President, made to practices such as
torture, the use of chemical weapons and so forth
demonstrate once again the deliberate politicization
of this issue and how some countries use the United
Nations to demonize and insult my Government. In
answer to the question posed by my British colleague,
today we will circulate two identical letters. I would
like to quote part of the text of the letters with regard to
the situation in Rukban and other camps.

"With respect to the situation in Rukban camp,
the Syrian Government affirms the information
already released in response to earlier reports and
wishes to stress that thanks to the approvals and
facilitation of the Syrian Government, the United
Nations and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent were
able to send two humanitarian convoys to Rukban
camp. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
is prepared to provide the necessary support to
send a third humanitarian convoy, as long as that
convoy does not fall into the hands of terrorists,
as has happened in the past. We are prepared to do
that on condition that the convoy does not fall into
the hands of terrorists."

The Syrian Government asserts that the only cause
of the deplorable conditions for civilians in the camp
is that the United States is occupying the land where
the Rukban camp is located. That country refuses to
dismantle the camp and is holding Syrian civilians in it
hostage. It is preventing them from returning home for
political reasons that are known to all. It is important
to bear in mind that the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic had an agreement with the United Nations
to end the suffering of the civilians in Rukban camp
and dismantle it so that they could return to the homes,
towns and villages from which they had been displaced
by terrorism. A number of meetings have been held to
discuss this issue, the most recent on 22 April.

With regard to Al-Hol camp, the Syrian Government,
in cooperation with United Nations, is preparing to send
a humanitarian convoy after the necessary approvals
have been obtained. Moreover, it has facilitated access
for the International Red Cross to bring aid to that camp
and neighbouring areas. With respect to the Al-Areesha
camp, which was flooded, the Syrian Government had
been asking for the displaced persons to be evacuated

to their villages and towns for a long time. The United
Nations did not respond to our request. If it had, that
humanitarian disaster could have been avoided.
Turning to Idlib, the civilians in towns and villages
around Idlib are suffering daily from bombings and
violations by the terrorist groups located there. Can the
Council guarantee that those terrorist groups will not
attack the civilians in the area around Idlib?

