Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I think we all knew
what the outcome of today's voting would be, and yet
it is profoundly disappointing and disturbing to see
a fourth veto on the situation in Syria, this time on
the referral of the Syrian conflict to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We thank France for creating
draft resolution S/2014/348, which was sponsored by
65 States, including my own.

With more than 160,000 lives lost, 2.7 million
refugees and close to 6.5 million displaced persons, this
veto is what it is - an endorsement of impunity. It is a
license for all perpetrators of human rights violations,
mass atrocities, crimes against humanity and war
crimes, in Syria and elsewhere, to continue those
grisly acts at will. Gross violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law continue
in Syria on a daily basis. Barbaric crimes are being
committed on a massive scale - crimes that should
have no place in the twenty-first century. Terrorism
is on the rise. Starvation is used as a weapon of war.
Humanitarian access is denied humanitarian aid
manipulated to force surrender. The level of physical
destruction and devastation is beyond description. A
generation of Syria's children - 5.7 million, according
to UNICEF - are growing up robbed of a childhood,
education, home and consequently of their future. They
represent a huge lost generation.

Last month, during an Arria Formula meeting,
many of us were shocked into silence by the images
contained in the Caesar report (S/2014/244, annex)
of thousands of emaciated bodies bearing multiple
signs of horrific torture. To us, shocking as they were,
these were just images. To countless victims in Syria,
they are the gruesome facts of their daily lives. More
recently, many of us witnessed another testimony to the
atrocities committed by the Syrian regime, resulting
from the indiscriminate use of barrel bombs - again,
images too shocking to bear, yet gruesome facts of
daily life for the people of Syria.

Yet none of that seems to have moved those who
once again chose to veto a Council resolution on Syria,
and who by doing so chose to protect the victimizers,
not the victims, and opened even wider the floodgates
of bloodshed and impunity. The Syrian regime had
ample opportunities to first prevent and then stop the
bloodshed. It never sought to do so. A referral to the
ICC would not and could not have impeded any process
towards peace and reconciliation, because no such
process was taking place. All sides think they can win
the battle by force, which means even more civilian
deaths and even more destruction. The long-suffering
people of Syria deserve better.

As a permanent international court with a mandate
to prosecute war crimes and crimes against humanity
when national authorities are unable or unwilling to
do so, the ICC was created to address exactly the type
of situation that exists in Syria today. Although the
Court's work can be only one piece of the larger justice
and accountability effort needed in that war-ravaged
country, Syria's referral could have been a crucial first
step in the right direction. By today's veto, that first
crucial step towards justice and accountability was
callously denied.

Today's veto is a stand on the wrong side ofjustice
and accountability - a stand on the wrong side of
humanity. And yet, I am encouraged to see that today,
so many more chose to stand on the right side of history.

