Mr. Menkerios: I would like to begin by
thanking the Council for this opportunity to report on
the situation in the Sudan, specifically on the
remaining phases in the implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA).

Let me state at the very outset that both
signatories to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement -
the National Congress Party (NCP) and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) - continue to
express commitment to the full implementation of the
CPA, including the timely conduct of the referendums
in Southern Sudan and Abyei, as well as the popular
consultations in the Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan
states. They also continue to reiterate their readiness to
respect the outcomes of these processes. So far, the
parties have maintained progress in CPA
implementation without major breakdowns emerging
from the recent elections with parallel victories. As
they approach the end of the implementation period,
the stakes are higher as they face the outcomes in the
referendums and the final phases of the 2005 peace
agreement.

The path ahead is certainly not without
challenges and could be divided into two broad phases.
First, the peaceful and credible conduct of the
referendums in Southern Sudan and Abyei, scheduled
for 9 January 2011, and popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The second,
perhaps more important challenge is the peaceful
implementation of the outcomes of these processes.

The immediate tasks that remain for the proper
and timely implementation of the CPA are the
formation of the Government of National Unity and the
Government of Southern Sudan; the formation and
launching of the referendums commissions for
Southern Sudan and Abyei; the demarcation of the
North-South border, as well as the Abyei border; the
commencement of the popular consultations in
Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile; and the initiation of
and progress on negotiations between the parties on
post-referendum arrangements. Both parties are
preoccupied with the formation of their respective
Governments - a task we expect to be announced
within this week or the next.

Widespread concerns exist about the tight time
frame for the preparation and conduct of the
referendums. The postponement of the national
elections from January 2009, as originally scheduled,
to April 2010 diminished the time available to prepare
for and conduct the referendums. Since the
announcement of the election results, the key priority
has been and continues to be the formation and
establishment of the referendum commissions for
Southern Sudan and Abyei. There is no more time to
lose.

On the referendum in Southern Sudan, I am glad
to inform the Council that the two sides have agreed on
the formation of the Southern Sudan Referendum
Commission and last week tabled their proposal to
Parliament for approval, which is expected in the next
few days. The United Nations awaits the formation of
the Commission to start working with it. The priority
for the Commission, once established, is to develop an
operational plan and a budget so that resource needs
can be identified and mobilized. In addition, the
Commission needs to set up offices at all
administrative levels, recruit and train staff, conduct
voter registration, oversee the conduct of the
referendum and announce its outcome. This is a tall
order. I believe that if the parties act and cooperate on
their commitments with the sense of urgency the
situation calls for, a timely conduct of the referendums
is possible, albeit challenging.

As requested by the Council, the United Nations
Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS) is finalizing its plans
and preparations to assist the parties with the conduct
of the referendums and the popular consultations on
time, consistent with the provisions of the CPA. The
parties need to be encouraged - indeed, urged - to
push on with the necessary preparations without further
delay.

On the referendum in Abyei, the parties have not
yet agreed on who is eligible to vote. This issue has
been referred to the Abyei referendum commission to
finalize. While the parties have nominated their
members to the Commission, differences persist on
who should chair it, as the chairperson would have the
deciding vote, including on eligibility. The resolution
of the eligibility issue and establishment of a
commission are top priorities for the Abyei referendum
process to commence. Moreover, demarcation of
Abyei's borders on the basis of the Permanent Court of
Arbitration decision continues to be stalled, for reasons
related to the lack of agreement on residency and
eligibility to vote in the referendum. My impression
from informal discussions with the parties, the NCP in
particular, is that the issues of residency and border
demarcation in Abyei are unlikely to be easily resolved
outside a broader post-referendum agreement on
grazing rights, resource sharing and citizenship, among
other issues.

The Ad Hoc Technical Border Committee has
presented its report to the parties, in which it describes
areas of agreement regarding the border and sections
where it was unable to agree. It is a welcome
development that the Committee has, with United
Nations technical and logistical support, started to
demarcate the sections of the border it has agreed
upon, with the exception of Abyei, citing security
threats. It is imperative, however, that the parties settle
the remaining contentious parts of the border and
demarcate them before the referendum is held.

The CPA gives the people of the Southern
Kordofan and Blue Nile states the right to decide on
their future governance through a process of popular
consultations. These are to be conducted by elected
state assemblies and should provide an opportunity for
a fresh approach to centre-periphery and minority
issues that, if properly implemented, could serve as a
model for the rest of the Sudan. However, a potential
continuation of the original North-South conflict is
also possible if the process is not handled with the
transparency and openness it demands. It is also of
concern that the timeline for the meaningful conduct of
these consultations remain tight, especially in Southern
Kordofan, due to the postponement of the census and
elections.

During my most recent briefing to the Council, I
emphasized that unity and secession do not need to be
a zero-sum game for the North and the South. It is thus
advisable for the two sides to continue to cooperate for
their mutual benefit, whether in unity or separation.

The goal of making unity attractive, therefore, should
be a long-term one, irrespective of the outcome. In
interactions with the leaders of the two parties, we
have advised that separation should not be considered a
divorce, and that in the case of a vote for separation,
maintaining close linkages between the South and the
North is in the interests of both.

In this regard, agreement on post-referendum
arrangements not only becomes crucial for long-term
peace and stability in the Sudan and the region, but
will also seriously affect the smooth implementation of
the CPA in the remaining phases of the interim period.
Accordingly, the parties have been engaged in
discussions and must be encouraged and supported in
reaching agreement on key issues of common concern.
Formal negotiations between the parties are scheduled
to start on 21 June with the assistance of the African
Union (AU) High-Level Implementation Panel, and we
will be fully supporting this effort.

The security situation around much of the border
and within Southern Sudan remains of great concern.
Sporadic clashes between the Misseriya and Rizeigat
armed militias and the SPLM. around the borders of
Abyei, Southern Kordofan and Western Bahr el-Ghazal
have continued. Within Southern Sudan, rebellious
armed elements in Unity and Jonglei states in
particular continue to cause security risks, as does the
Lord's Resistance Army in Western Equatoria. UNMIS
continues to work with the parties to help address these
security threats.

The overall situation in Southern Sudan requires
a concerted and comprehensive capacity-building
effort, irrespective of the outcome of the referendum.
This effort would, as an immediate priority, require a
coherent strategy on security sector reform and
institutional capacity-building. A development plan
that focuses on the provision of basic services in the
short term and sustained economic growth in the long
term is also a must. The Government of Southern
Sudan, with the assistance of the United Nations
country team and other partners, is in the process of
refining such a plan. It is only through such a
multifaceted approach that we can help ensure a
peaceful transition and effective protection of civilians
both in the short and long terms.

The United Nations has stood firm in its
commitment to assisting the parties in implementing
the CPA. UNMIS and the United Nations country team
stand ready to help them to conclude this peace process
in a way that contributes to continuing peace, stability
and progress. With regard to support for the
referendums, the United Nations is ready to extend
technical and logistical assistance to the two
commissions as soon as they become operational. We
have been providing and will continue to provide the
requisite assistance for the conduct of the popular
consultations. In order to support these processes, we
have planned and begun to redeploy resources and staff
to locations beyond those covered during the elections.

The UNMIS military contingent is in the process
of identifying possible hotspots and revising its
deployment accordingly. We will continue to train and
help develop the institutional capacity of the Southern
Sudan Police Service. As requested by the Council, we
have revised and are implementing a more effective
approach to the protection of civilians, which is no
longer a task entrusted to a particular unit but is an
integral component of all Mission operations. The
strategy being implemented entails reinforced presence
at the state level where a state coordinator manages and
directs the efforts of all Mission components to protect
civilians; a more flexible military deployment will
further enhance this effort.

In partnership with the AU High-Level
Implementation Panel, and in collaboration with other
key partners, we have been engaging the parties on all
processes that require further agreement and shall
continue to do so. In this regard, a consultative forum
involving key international stakeholders met in Addis
Ababa in May and agreed to support the partnership of
the AU and the United Nations in taking the lead on
facilitating progress and cooperation in the peaceful
implementation of the CPA and beyond.

International monitoring of the referendums is
another important issue. The political significance of
the referendums to the future of the people of the
Sudan, and indeed to the whole region, has led to calls
by the two parties that they be conducted in a
transparent and credible manner, and thus with much
closer scrutiny by the international community than the
elections received. In fact, the two parties have
separately informed UNMIS that they desire United
Nations engagement at a much greater level than
during the elections to help ensure that the referendums
are prepared and conducted without any interference
from one side or the other. This implies a wider scope
of engagement for UNMIS that exceeds its current

mandate. We have advised both parties that they should
jointly define this greater level of United Nations
engagement and present their request to the
Organization together. We await this joint request to
pass it on to the Secretary-General.

In all this, the international community must not
only encourage and urge the parties to stay the course
to ensure the timely conclusion of CPA implementation
and continued peace and mutual benefit, but also assist
them in this endeavour. This will require political and
material support both in the conduct of the remaining
processes and in ensuring a soft landing in the post-
referendum period.

There is much at stake for the future of the people
of the Sudan, the region and the African continent in
the outcome of the referendums and popular
consultations. The Sudan is a microcosm of Africa, and
its stability or instability will have far-reaching
implications. Alongside the exercise of self-
determination for the peoples of Southern Sudan and
Abyei, and popular consultations in the concerned
states, the Sudan needs to be encouraged and assisted
to expand the democratic space opened by the recent
elections and establish a broad-based system of
national governance that will lead to a more equitable
society and durable peace.

