Mr. Gayama (Congo) (spoke in French): My
delegation thanks Mr. Ian Martin for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/628); his
briefing was illuminating for Council members in the
context of this debate. We take this opportunity also to
welcome Mr. Jose Luis Guterres, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Timor-Leste, who is here representing his
Government. His presence attests to the strength of the
contacts between the United Nations and his country.

Despite all the caution engendered by the recent
sad experience in Timor-Leste, my delegation wishes
to note recent positive developments, seen in particular
in the gradual return to peace and the swearing in of
the new Government just a few days after the swearing
in of Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta as Prime Minister. These
positive developments are due to the sense of
responsibility demonstrated by the authorities and the
entire people of East Timor and to the work of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, the entire staff of the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL), United
Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations - without whom this progress would not
have been made.

We must also recall the decisive action by
international forces deployed at the request of the
Government of Timor-Leste and with the agreement of
the international community, in particular those
deployed by the Governments of Portugal, Australia,
New Zealand and Malaysia.

Thanks to the common effort of the international
community, Timor-Leste has been put back on track.
Today, the main challenge that the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste must face together is that of
consolidating what has been achieved, sending strong
signals in order to prevent a repetition of past errors.
My delegation supports the recommendation of the
Secretary-General to set up a new multidimensional,
integrated United Nations peacekeeping mission in
Timor-Leste. Indeed, the structure and mandate of the
mission as proposed by the Secretary-General are
consistent with the wishes of the expressed by the
Government in its recent correspondence with the

President of the Security Council. That is true also of
the objectives of most of the proposals contained in the
report of the Japanese Government mission, which was
recently introduced by the representative of Japan and
of which my delegation takes note.

My delegation also expresses its support for the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on justice and reconciliation in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/580) and for any other approach taken to
provide the new United Nations mission with the
resources it needs to accomplish its tasks in order to
ensure a swift and methodical transfer of full
responsibility for the conduct of national affairs to the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste.

It is clear that the success of the mission to be
established will depend not only on the resolve of the
people who will lead it, but also on an assessment of
past actions and the hoped-for results. In other words,
while it is understood that the United Nations must
help this new member of the international community
take its first steps, not direct it, the United Nations -
and thus the Security Council - still has the
responsibility to avoid any obstacles that could arise in
its path.

Therefore, with regard, for example, to the
judicial proceedings against the perpetrators of crimes
in Timor-Leste who are currently living in Indonesia,
we should have discussions with the country's
authorities to identify the best ways to combat
impunity while respecting both international norms in
that area and the sovereignty of every country.

As for the security problems in Timor-Leste,
which we know are a sensitive issue, my delegation
earnestly hopes that consideration will be given to the
proposal to gradually replace the international forces
now on the ground with a strong presence of United
Nations police supported by a military unit under
United Nations command - which in turn will be
replaced eventually by the Timorese national police
and army.

We must not only take account of the experience
acquired on the ground by the international forces, as
has been said, but also better meet the expectations
expressed by the Government of Timor-Leste by
seeking consensus on the best way to ensure security in
the run-up to the critical period of next year's
elections - a way that is in the interests of the

Timorese people and that is agreed by all the parties
concerned.

In conclusion, we believe it is important to stress
that, in the context of the new United Nations mission,
the importance of the security aspect should not
obscure the need to combat the deep-seated causes of
the crisis - particularly unemployment and poverty,
which affect a significant portion of the population,
especially young people and women. Timor-Leste also
needs schools and hospitals - in short, social
infrastructure. My delegation therefore supports any
proposal to establish an international assistance
programme, including through the initiative of a
"compact" for Timor-Leste.

