Let me sincerely thank Germany for taking the lead in bringing important climate change-related security issues onto the Security Council's agenda. We express our gratitude to the briefers for presenting their interesting perspectives. We strongly believe that addressing the implications of climate change is not only the responsibility of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council but also of the Security Council, as climate change poses risks to peace and security. Our responses should be comprehensive and more integrated. We must make every effort to achieve tangible progress on this issue. It is now our time to act to protect our planet and implement ambitious environmental policies to help us halt global warming and its consequences. We see around the world that degradation of the environment and climate change are negatively impacting people's lives. Cutting emissions in line with the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and the Katowice Rulebook is essential. We must also address the global challenges resulting from climate change, such as food and water scarcity, droughts, displacements, floods and competition over natural resources. We know that the consequences of climate change will be felt mostly in those countries and regions that struggle with poor governance and socioeconomic challenges. They will especially affect vulnerable populations in the Sahel, Africa, island States and Asia. That is why stabilization efforts and peacebuilding must be climate-sensitive. More emphasis must be put on a prevention agenda. In that context, let me underline the importance of anticipating risks by using new technologies and data. We commend the work of the United Nations Climate Security Mechanism. Risk assessment and management strategies, as well as sharing knowledge and experience and capacity-building in developing countries, will be crucial to building resilience. We believe that, with effective early-warning systems based on reliable data on climate security risks, we could improve forecasting in order to better prevent outbreaks. As Poland underlined on various occasions at Council meetings during our membership in 2018 and 2019, we find it important to give more prominence to climate security risks in the form of regular discussions of the Council and in resolutions in the context of country- and region-specific situations. Poland would be supportive of regular reporting by the Secretary-General on the links between climate change and armed conflict. Moreover, in order to ensure more effective conflict prevention, the Security Council should have a comprehensive approach to emerging challenges. It would therefore also be essential to include climate security risks in peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts and, where relevant, to consider them in the mandates of peace operations. In conclusion, addressing climate change security risks requires a multilateral response and regional cooperation, as no country is able to face these challenges alone. We hope that today's discussion will help us build shared understanding on the urgency of the issue and move this agenda forward. We should not lose momentum. As we struggle with the impact of the coronavirus disease, it is now more important than ever to build back better and greener and to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change.
