Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank you, Sir, for
giving Bangladesh this opportunity to speak. We
wish to thank you and, through you, all members of
the Council for the consensus adoption of the fairly
comprehensive presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22
this afternoon.

It will be quite reassuring to the Rohingya and
other communities forcibly displaced from northern
Rakhine state since 25 August that the Council remains
engaged with their prolonged suffering, insecurity and
uncertainty. We believe that the presidential statement
can be a critical building block to help the Council to
pursue timely, decisive and appropriate action until
the time when a peaceful, just and lasting solution to
this unfolding humanitarian crisis is achieved. From
our perspective, it is of paramount importance that the
Council speak in a unified manner on this situation,
even though time is of the essence.

Bangladesh thanks the Council for its recognition
of the efforts of our Government and people to stand
by those in desperate need of safety, shelter and
humanitarian assistance. We thank the United Nations
and relevant humanitarian partners for sharing the work
with us during this unprecedented influx of nearly
610,000 people, many of them children. I can assure
the Council that Bangladesh will continue to work
towards fulfilling what the Council has recommended
and invited us to do. We shall remain engaged with
Myanmar in good faith to find a lasting solution to
this dire humanitarian situation, provided that our
overtures and initiatives are reciprocated in a sustained
and meaningful manner.

This time around, we shall also seek the international
community's sustained engagement in and ownership
of our bilateral efforts with Myanmar. As we have said
time and again, Bangladesh stands ready to do our part
but, as we know from experience, we shall not be able to
make any headway unless the international community,
especially the Council, stays hands-on as custodian of
our efforts. The statement just made by my Myanmar
counterpart gives a hint of the complex challenges to
be encountered, not least the persistent denial of the
situation on the ground.

The presidential statement aptly recognizes that
the growing number of refugees and forcibly displaced
persons has a destabilizing impact on the region. On
the specific question of their repatriation, we are yet
to embark on any concrete steps between Bangladesh
and Myanmar. There has been a decision to constitute
a joint working group, but the details of its mandate
and parameters will need to be just, transparent and
comprehensive, without the imposition of unnecessary
caveats. The presidential statement offers some broad
guidelines for the process and recognizes the many
commitments and pronouncements made by Myanmar.
It will now be critical to make sure that those statements
of intent result in concrete deliverables so that the
Rohingya can gain the trust and confidence that they
may return to their homes in Rakhine state in safety
and dignity.

We sincerely hope that there will be some positive
and tangible progress in the situation on the ground
by the time the Secretary-General reports to the
Council in 30 days from now. In the meantime, the
General Assembly, through its Third Committee, is
poised to further strengthen the Secretary-General's
tireless efforts by giving him the mandate to appoint
a special envoy on the situation in Myanmar. We take
this opportunity to invite all Member States to support
the General Assembly's draft resolution in order to
reinforce the complementarity of the work of the
Assembly and the Council.

We reiterate our Prime Minister's observation that
the problem has its roots in Myanmar, and its solution
has to be found in Myanmar. For now, the priorities are
clear to all.

First, there has to be sufficient and unimpeded
provision of humanitarian assistance in northern
Rakhine state so that the remaining Rohingya
population - whatever small number remains - does
not feel compelled to leave. Secondly, the Union
Enterprise Mechanism for Humanitarian Assistance,
Resettlement and Development in Rakhine set up
by the Myanmar authorities must start making a
real difference on the ground in Rakhine state, and
the joint working group between Bangladesh and
Myanmar must start demonstrable, result-oriented
and sustainable work on the repatriation process.
Thirdly, the recommendations made by the Kofi Annan
Advisory Commission on Rakhine State must be used
as a Viable and comprehensive road map for restoring
the rights and freedoms of the Rohingya, including
their citizenship, with a view to ensuring their safety
and peaceful coexistence with other communities in
Rakhine state.

We hope the presidential statement adopted by the
Council today will give further impetus to addressing
these priorities. We wish to put on record our profound
appreciation to the delegations for the United Kingdom
and France for their relentless efforts in achieving this
consensus outcome in the Council.

Referring to the statementmade by the representative
of Myanmar, the allegation that Bangladesh abets
terrorism in Rakhine state is pure fiction.

The meeting rose at 3.30pm.
