Mrs. El Alaoui (Morocco): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement
(NAM). Allow me to begin by thanking you,
Mr. President, for arranging this debate on a critical
and a flagship activity of the United Nations. I would
also like to extend special thanks to Under-Secretaries-
General Le Roy and Malcorra for their comprehensive
briefings.

The Non-Aligned Movement is best placed to
contribute to an objective assessment of the challenges
facing the United Nations capacity in peacekeeping,
since its members have first-hand experience in the
field as troop-contributing countries (TCCs), providing
more than 87 per cent of personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and hosting most of the
current missions.

The sustained surge of today's peacekeeping has
been emphasized within and outside the United
Nations. The General Assembly, through its Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, is fulfilling its
mandate in addressing all aspects of United Nations
peacekeeping, including the effective planning and
management of United Nations peacekeeping
operations.

After the initial reform process launched by the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809), the Special Committee
considered and monitored the implementation of the
agenda for reform for 2010 and, more recently, the
restructuring of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the creation of the Department
of Field Support (DFS).

These reform efforts are recent and Member
States have not had sufficient time to assess their
impact, much less to rectify any shortcomings that may
have resulted from those reforms. In this context, NAM
strongly believes that the merit of any new initiative or
process, whether Member State- or Secretariat-driven,
should be carefully gauged in the context of its
relevance to and coherence with the ongoing reforms.

Such coherence, as well as continuity, should be
the guidelines of the Secretariat's endeavours. All
efforts should ultimately contribute to the common
vision of United Nations peacekeeping that continues
to save lives and prevents States from relapsing into
conflicts.

Following the 26 June briefing to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the heads of
both DPKO and DFS addressed the Council today on
the New Horizon non-paper as a contribution aimed at
restructuring our thinking and approach towards
peacekeeping. We would have preferred to receive the
Secretariat's entire non-paper prior to this meeting in
order to engage in a more meaningful debate.
Nevertheless, NAM. will provide its views when it
deems necessary.

The Non-Aligned Movement wishes to
underscore the importance of consistently applying the
principles and standards set for the establishment and
conduct of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and stresses that peacekeeping should observe the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter and
abide by the United Nations peacekeeping operations
guiding principles, which are the consent of the parties,
the non-use of force except in self-defence, and
impartiality. The defence of the mandates should be
consistent with United Nations principles.

The Non-Aligned Movement also emphasizes
that respect for the principles of the sovereign equality,
political independence and territorial integrity of all
States and non-intervention in matters that are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State
must be upheld.

These guiding principles are the foundation of
United Nations peacekeeping as they guarantee its
sustainability and its legitimacy as a universal tool for
the maintenance of peace and security.

Last January, in the Council, NAM. expressed the
view that the operational planning process deserves
sustained attention and called for rethinking it to
ensure coherence in vision, goals and objectives.

The concept paper prepared by the presidency
outlines some very useful thoughts on the importance
of meaningfully engaging with those countries that
provide troops and police. Indeed, TCCs should be
involved in the planning process and in all aspects and
stages of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Since mandates are ultimately to be implemented in the
field by troop-contributing countries, they should be
involved as a major partner right from the start - from

the formulation of policy - through the decision-
making process, and on to the deployment phases as
well. Troop-contributing countries' first-hand

experience, as I outlined previously, would contribute
to an objective assessment of where and when to
deploy and where to strengthen, where to cut or draw
down, having peace and security as the main objective
and benchmark. Resolution 1353 (2001) gave us the
full spectrum of what should be done in this regard.

In the light of the ongoing debate on how
adequately to meet the rising expectations for
peacekeeping today, the mechanism of triangular
cooperation between TCCs, the Security Council and
the Secretariat must be energized in a meaningful
manner. TCCs are bearing the burden of implementing
mandates crafted and authorized without their
involvement in the planning and decision-making
processes. Often they are the sole object of criticism
when missions face difficulties. Therefore, we should
build on the frequency of private meetings with TCCs
and briefings by the Secretariat in order to foster a
culture of interaction in which Security Council
members are fully engaged.

TCC involvement is a key to addressing the
current shortcomings and to ensuring the effectiveness
of United Nations action. Such involvement, formally
operationalized, would assist, inter alia, the Security
Council to better define clear and achievable mandates
and achieve a greater integration of efforts. In this
regard, I would like to thank Japan for all its efforts as
the Chair of the Security Council Working Group of
the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations.

United Nations peacekeeping operations cannot
continue to be supported by only a portion of the
United Nations membership. All developed countries
must share the burden of peacekeeping and engage
their troops in the field under United Nations command
and control. To ensure the appropriate level of response
in terms of the scope and scale of peacekeeping, the
entire membership should deal with the difficulties
stemming from deployments in hostile environments
and difficult political contexts. Furthermore, much
broader sharing and contribution by all Member States
would ensure unity of vision to reach our common goal
of peace and security.

Prioritization entails a political engagement that
is well conceived and supported by all the parties
concerned and by the international community. It also
requires a comprehensive planning process that ensures
mission coherence, clear lines of command and
control, integration between mission components,
training, deployment, and resources and guidance for
DPKO and DF S in the management of the missions.
TCCs can provide much-needed expertise for the way
forward.

The overextended state of United Nations
peacekeeping, along with the increasing demand for
renewed or expanded missions, requires a concerted
and genuine response from the entire membership. We
therefore call on all Member States to continue their
support for this important activity, despite the
challenges being faced as a result of global economic
turmoil. United Nations peacekeeping remains one of
the most important and cost-effective tools in the
United Nations arsenal for achieving international
peace and security.

In conclusion, NAM. is proud to have been
represented by its members in almost every
peacekeeping operation since 1948 and will remain
engaged in advancing the cause of peace and security.

