Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): A short
two months ago, the members of the Security Council
adopted a resolution containing a stern warning to the
parties to break through the mindset that was preventing
them from completing the military tasks agreed to in the
Lusaka Protocol and to get on with the business of
establishing a Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation. We can now be gratified that our message
was heeded and that we have seen significant progress in
identifying UNITA members for integration into the
Angolan Armed Forces (FAA), in quartering UNITA
forces in Cabinda, in dissolving UNITA's military
command structure and in completing many of the other
tasks we specified in resolution 1075 (1996). Today, we
received word that UNITA has made a formal declaration
on the completion of the quartering process and that the
Government of Angola has made an announcement on the
integration into the FAA of the nine generals provided by
UNITA.

Despite these advances, as of today the military tasks
remain incomplete and we find ourselves once again
considering how to urge or compel the parties to act
swiftly in meeting the obligations they took upon
themselves in Lusaka two years ago. In particular, we are
concerned that the quartering camps remain full of
UNITA troops, even though many have been selected for
integration into the Angolan Armed Forces and many
others are ready to be demobilized and returned to
civilian life.

These quartering camps, guarded by United Nations
Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III) forces, have
played a central role in the peace process. They have
permitted UNITA's armed forces to stand down gradually
from a state of combat readiness and to begin the
transformation to membership in the Angolan Armed
Forces or the return to civilian life. The success of the
quartering process is owed in large measure to the
presence of the neutral international military forces of
UNAVEM. III at the camps.

However, neither the quartering camps nor
UNAVEM. III were intended to be permanent. Both were
to be temporary measures, stepping stones from a state of
armed conflict to one of reunification and reconciliation.
The time has come for the camps to close and for
UNAVEM. to begin withdrawing. The Government must
work with UNITA to empty the camps rapidly and move

 

on to the political tasks in order to reintegrate UNITA into
a process in which problems are resolved through
negotiation and compromise, rather than through violence.
The Government and UNITA must take great strides to
train, equip and deploy integrated units to the areas of the
country formerly occupied by UNITA forces so that the
civilian populace in those areas will have the confidence to
move about freely while attending to their daily affairs.

UNAVEM. III itself must now begin to withdraw. The
two years projected for the duration of UNAVEM. III are
coming to an end - two years of relative peace for
Angola. The withdrawal of UNAVEM. III means not that
the international community is turning its back on Angola,
but that the time has come for formed military units to be
replaced by a follow-on international presence focused on
assisting Angola in the reconciliation and reconstruction
process that lies ahead.

The draft resolution we are adopting today takes into
account all of these issues. It calls on the parties to
complete the military tasks and move on to the political
tasks. It authorizes the Secretary-General to begin the
withdrawal of UNAVEM. III and to plan for a follow-on
United Nations presence. We expect that the Government
and UNITA have received the message the draft resolution
conveys: that rapid action on their part to integrate UNITA
personnel into the Armed Forces at all levels and to
demobilize those remaining in the camps is of the essence.

The resolution is not directed only at the parties and
UNAVEM. III. It contains an urgent message for other
Member States as well. This critical stage of the peace
process cannot succeed without immediate funding. The
generosity of donor States has made possible the success of
the peace process to date, but the peace process itself is
being put at risk at this critical moment. The immediate
unmet needs for quartering areas and demobilization exceed
$19 million, according to the Humanitarian Assistance
Coordination Unit (UCAH) projections. The international
community must act urgently to subscribe the required
funds so that demobilization can be completed within the
three months programmed by UCAH. Further delays will
only undermine and undercut the peace process and delay
the drawdown of the UNAVEM. III force, increasing the
drain on United Nations and donor resources.

Therefore, in order to strengthen the peace process and
set the stage for the new Government of National Unity and
Reconciliation, the United States announces today its
intention to contribute an additional $3,350,000 to United
Nations and bilateral programmes which support
demobilization and reconciliation in Angola. Furthermore,
the United States plans to contribute in the near future a
further $2,500,000 towards such efforts, if the parties
demonstrate adequate commitment to the peace process.
Additionally, the United States intends to provide, in
1997, $1 million in demining equipment and services to
be used by the United Nations Central Mine Action
Office, the Angolan demining Institute and the UNAVEM
demining School.

We urge others seriously to consider committing
additional funding for this critical stage of the peace
process. The representatives of the troika of observers
convened a meeting of potential donor countries in New
York last week to underline the serious need for funding
for the demobilization process, and received positive
responses from the United Kingdom, Sweden and Finland.

The international community, including this Council,
has devoted years of its attention to helping the Angolans
themselves put the hostilities of the past behind them.
United Nations personnel on the ground have shown great
devotion to this goal, some even giving their lives during
their service in UNAVEM. III. We honour their service.
We also wish to convey our appreciation to Mr. Beye, to
the Force Commander and to all the troops and staff of
UNAVEM. III for their hard work and unstinting
dedication. We hope the Angolans will seize the
opportunity for cementing a lasting peace, which is so
nearly in their grasp.

