Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, Sir, the
Philippines takes this opportunity to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and on having convened this
important meeting to take up the results of the recently
concluded Security Council mission to Timor-Leste. It
also commends Ambassador Natalegawa and other
members of the Indonesian delegation for Indonesia's
successful presidency of the Council last month.
Furthermore, it joins other delegations in thanking
Ambassador Kumalo for his exceptionally able
leadership of the mission to Timor-Leste.

This recent mission to Timor-Leste is a clear
reaffirmation of the Council's commitment to support
and assist Timor-Leste in consolidating peace and
security, which are vital to speed up the process of
democratic governance and the rule of law and to
promote long-term stability in that country. The
mission is also the Council's best way of getting a clear
field assessment of the situation and of obtaining an
eyewitness account thereof, conveying the strongest
message of encouragement for the Government, the
parliament and the people of Timor-Leste to work
together for national reconciliation and healing, and
sustainable economic and social development.

My delegation has taken note of the briefing
made by Ambassador Kumalo on 6 December 2007
(see S/PV.5791) and the report of the mission
(S/2007/711) and would like to highlight the following
points. First, the Philippines concurs with the mission's
view that Timor-Leste will continue to need United
Nations assistance in a number of areas, such as, inter
alia, governance, the rule of law, security sector reform
and economic and social development. It is of the view
that, in the pivotal short and medium term, the
Government of Timor-Leste would benefit from
priority action in the maintenance of law and order,
good governance and economic and social
development. The United Nations Integrated Mission
in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) is in a position to provide the
necessary assistance in these areas. The present police
and security forces are helping the Government of
Timor-Leste immeasurably, and their presence should
be continued and further enhanced. The mandate of
UNMIT to promote economic and social development
through the compact between Timor-Leste and the
international community, as stated in Security Council
resolution 1704 (2006), should be given more focus.
Needless to stress, my delegation fully endorses the
mission's recommendation to renew UNMIT's
mandate, which will expire on 26 February 2008.

Secondly, my delegation recognizes the abundant
reservoir of international goodwill for Timor-Leste.
This should be sustained. International assistance to
Timor-Leste should be geared towards self-reliance,
but it should not be arbitrarily narrowed or limited. The

Philippines has been consistently contributing to
Timor-Leste's nation-building and other endeavours
over the years. My country sent a 600-strong
humanitarian support mission composed of doctors,
nurses, dentists, construction engineers, agriculturists,
mechanics and explosive ordnance disposal personnel
as part of the International Force, East Timor
(INTERFET) in September 1999. Since then, the
Philippines has been successively participating in the
successive United Nations operations in Timor-Leste.
As part of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), the
Philippine battalion was composed of over 707 officers
and enlisted personnel, with former Philippine Army
Chief Lieutenant General Jaime de los Santos
appointed as its first Force Commander.

The Philippines is currently the largest
contributor of individual police officers to United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Most of those
officers are in UNMIT, which is the largest police-led
peacekeeping operation in which the Philippines has
taken part. The present UNMIT Police Commissioner
is Rodolfo Tor, Director of the Philippine National
Police.

Aside from peacekeeping, the Philippines has
made contributions in capacity-building, particularly in
human resource development. The Philippines has
extended a human resource development package to
Timor-Leste through the Third Country Training
Programmes of the Japan International Cooperation
Agency. Those programmes have included English-
language training, training in results monitoring and
evaluation, and a foreign service officer cadetship
programme for Timor-Leste diplomats, offered through
the Foreign Service Institute of the Philippines. In
addition, the Philippines is working with Timor-Leste
in facilitating the admission of Timorese students to
Philippine colleges and universities, as well as in
providing vocational training. The Philippines remains
ready to explore other areas of assistance to strengthen
Timor-Leste's capacities and institutions. The
Philippines hopes that the international community will
do likewise.

Finally, my delegation is concerned over the
mission's assessment that many of the causes of the
2006 crisis - especially those related to the issues of
governance, the separation of powers and the building
of sustainable institutions - have yet to be addressed.
Those are issues with which new and emerging or even
newly restored democracies are usually confronted.
Timor-Leste is a part of the United Nations, and any
failure in those areas of concern in Timor-Leste, as
well as in any other State with the same problems,
affects the integrity of the Organization. The United
Nations, through the Security Council, is expected to
act more decisively to address those concerns.
Foremost, of course, is assistance in the building and
strengthening of institutions. My delegation submits
that progress in that field could have been maintained
if the United Nations presence in Timor-Leste had not
been drawn down in 2006.

My delegation continues to maintain that Timor-
Leste is still one of the best examples of a successful
enterprise conceived and nurtured through the
sustained combined cooperative efforts of heroic
people and their leaders, the United Nations and
regional players and partners. The international
community should see to it that efforts to build Timor-
Leste are further invigorated and enhanced with
increasing fidelity and Vitality, in order to ensure that it
continues to be a success story.

