Mr. Oh Joon (Republic ofKorea): As I am speaking
for the first time this month at an open meeting of the
Council, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your presidency and to assure you of
our full cooperation. I would like to thank Lieutenant
General Maqsood Ahmed, Major General Kazura and
Lieutenant General Singha for their briefings. We also
welcome all the Force Commanderes who are here with
us today. I take this opportunity to acknowledge their
dedicated work and to pay special tribute to all the Blue
Helmets in the world operating under their command.

Today, peacekeepers face various and increasing
threats in carrying out their mandates. Many cases
of deliberate attacks against peacekeepers and of
their detention have been reported. Safety on the
basis of impartiality is no longer taken for granted.
One explanation for that changing environment may
be found in the recent surge of intractable non-State
actors. As they become radicalized, while often
enjoying impunity, their belligerence tends to become
more indiscriminate.
Such challenges should be met by the strengthening
of peacekeeping capabilities. Robust mandates and the
safety of the troops should always be ensured.

Implementing mandates in hostile environments
exposes peacekeepers to risks. What we must do in
the face of those challenges is to provide appropriate
training and the necessary equipment. Advanced
technologies would also help to reduce potential risks
for both peacekeepers and civilians. Priority should
be given to maximizing operational preparedness,
in accordance with the mandates. Peacekeeping
contingents with robust mandates need a sufficient level
of regional support in addition to the full cooperation of
the host country. Having said that, I would like to make
a few observations on today's briefings on peacekeeping
operations in the field.

First, the case of United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (MONUSCO) illustrates how peacekeepers
can actively protect civilians and mitigate the risk to
civilians. In addition to the Intervention Brigade, which
has already proven its value on the ground, MONUSCO's
recent steps, such as active patrolling, paying particular
attention to refugee camps and swift action, offer good
examples of a more mobile and versatile approach to
the protection of civilians.

Secondly, with the withdrawal of the Malian forces
from most of northern Mali and the drawdown of the
French operation, the safety of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), now virtually the only forces
on the ground, is increasingly threatened by terrorist
attacks. I take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
condemnation of the recent targeted attacks against
a MINUSMA convoy and camp. In the midst of that
heightened security risk, MINUSMA is required to
expand its outreach in the northern area, beyond the
main population centres, in accordance with resolution
2164 (2014). Far short of its ceiling of approved
personnel and without sufficient military enablers,
MINUSMA runs the risk of getting stretched too thin.
We would like to hear from General Kazura what kind
of support MINUSMA needs most to fulfil its mandate.

Thirdly, over the past few months the volatile
situation on the Syrian side of the Golan Heights
has significantly restricted the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)'s operation
in the Bravo zone. Insofar as that abnormality stems
from the crisis in Syria, it will take time before
stability can return. The Security Council is awaiting
the Secretariat's recommendations to allow UNDOF to
continue carrying out its mandate under the changed
politico-military circumstances ofthe Golan Heights. In
that regard, we would like to hear from General Singha
about how he thinks UNDOF should be strengthened
to cope with increased threats, and what approach he
is taking in dealing with the armed opposition groups
to prevent a recurrence of serious obstructions to
UNDOF's tasks.

Lastly, we would like to stress that the role of a
peacekeeping mission is to assist the Government
and people in taking the lead for the future of their
own country. Peacekeepers can do their work more
efficiently and more swiftly when national stakeholders
make progress in the political process. Therefore, we
believe that the Security Council and Member States
together should encourage national stakeholders to
expedite their political transition in an inclusive way.
Such efforts will undoubtedly help Force Commanders
and peacekeepers to do theirjob.

