Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, we would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for presiding over this meeting, as well as
to congratulate the United Kingdom on the successful
holding of the London Conference on Somalia on 7 May.
We also thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his statement. Weare honoured by the presence of
Somalia's Minister for Foreign Affairs.

We would like to touch on five particular subjects.

First, we believe that the London Conference
set an important precedent in reaffirming Somalia's
leadership position, given its role as co-host.
We acknowledge the great efforts that Somalia's
Government has made to leave behind two decades of
crisis. That also required a great collective effort on
the part of its closest partners, in particular the troop-
contributing countries to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM), the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and bilateral donors. We
appreciate the international community's commitment
to providing financial assistance in three vital areas
for the stability of Somalia, namely, security, justice
and reform of the administration of public finances. In
addition, we want to highlight the joint communique
by Somalia and the United Nations with regard to the
prevention of sexual violence. We hope that the Somali
Government will implement the recommendations set
out in that document as soon as possible.

Secondly, we thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Agustin Mahiga for his dedication.
We also welcome the appointment of Mr. Nicholas Kay
as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia (UNSOM). We hope that UNSOM
will manage to establish a constructive relationship with
the Somali Government to face key challenges, such as
national reconciliation and the distribution of power
and resources among the regions, the reconstruction
of State institutions and the strengthening of human
rights.

Thirdly, we agree that reform in the security sector
is a priority and we take note of the national security
plan presented by the Somali Federal Government.
Like others, we believe that it is vital to consolidate
the armed and police forces in Somalia. In the light of
the partial lifting of the arms embargo, it is important
that Somalia establish the safeguards that the Security
Council called for in resolution 2093 (2013) We also
cannot fail to acknowledge the work done by the
African Union Mission in Somalia. We hope that it can
count on the funding needed to extend its presence to
recovered areas.

Fourthly, we are concerned about the situation in
southern Somalia, and in particular about the issue of
"Jubaland". That situation must be resolved through
a constructive dialogue that respects the provisional
Constitution, with the common goal of consolidating a
federal State in Somalia. Stabilizing the region is vital
for the future of Somalia and, in that regard, we take
note of recent IGAD's visit to Kismaayo. Al-Shabaab's
links to the region and the revenues it derives from the
unlawful selling of charcoal is also of great concern.
We consider it important to ensure that the embargo on
that product be implemented.

Fifthly, we would like to reiterate the point that
the Secretary-General made in his most recent report
(S/2013/326), namely, that achieving stability in
Somalia is in everyone's best interest. We commend the
efforts that the new Government has made in building
links and trust with all its neighbours. In that regard,
we recognize IGAD's important role in supporting the
priorities of the Somali Federal Government.

Somalia has one of the longest coastlines in
Africa. In the past, its coasts have been used for illegal
activities such piracy, illegal fishing and the dumping
of toxic waste. However, we hope that the Somali coast
will soon become a source of revenue for the Somali
population, rather than a challenge to the country.

Finally, my delegation supports the draft
presidential statement that will be adopted at the end of
today's meeting

