Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic
welcomes the convening of this meeting and expresses
its appreciation to Ambassador Inocencio Arias,
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC),
for his extraordinary efforts over the past few months.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to the two Vice-Chairmen, the members of
the Committee, the experts and the Secretariat for their
successful efforts in fulfilling the mandate of the
Committee throughout its past eight stages.

The Counter-Terrorism Committee has succeeded
in fulfilling its responsibilities and mandate.
Furthermore, the Committee has worked intensively to
make progress in upgrading the capacities of Member
States with a view to enabling them to align their
national legislation with the requirements and
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). This success has
been due to the interaction between most Member
States and the Committee in the framework of
resolution 1373 (2001), as demonstrated by the second
and third reports submitted to the Committee. I am
pleased to say that Syria is one of the States that have
submitted their third reports in accordance with the
timetable. Subsequently, on 9 September 2003, in the
context of the sustained efforts made by Syria to
combat terrorism, the President of the Syrian Arab
Republic issued presidential decree number 59, which
includes legislation to combat money-laundering and
all other illicit financial transactions. That is yet a
further demonstration of our sustained determination to
coordinate efforts with the international community in
fighting terrorism and the financing of terrorism.

We are also pleased that the Committee is
continuing to maintain an open dialogue with all of the
Members of the United Nations, in a framework of
transparency, in order to facilitate the delivery of aid to
those States that have expressed a need for such
assistance with a view to upgrading their capabilities in
fighting terrorism. We are grateful for the efforts of the
assistance task force, which coordinates work between
those countries that request assistance, the donor
countries and those who are capable of rendering
assistance. We also appreciate the genuine interaction
between the Committee and regional, subregional and
international organizations in accordance with their
respective mandates.

Syria supports the ninth 90-day work programme
submitted by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (S/2003/995, annex). In that context, Syria
underlines its determination to continue all efforts to
implement that programme within the framework of
resolution 1373 (2001). My delegation also supports
the continued mandate of the current officers and the
current Chairman of the Committee, Mr. Arias, as we
highly appreciate his efforts and his dedication to his
work.

It gravely harms and distorts global efforts to
claim to be fighting terrorism while practising
terrorism daily on the ground, such as by committing
crimes against humanity, war crimes, massacres and
acts of aggression; displacing and killing civilians;
pursuing settlement policies; annexing territories;
violating international law and Security Council
resolutions; and breaching treaties.
The danger of international terrorism requires
joint global action without prejudice, double standards
or the muzzling of world public opinion. Terrorism
must be diagnosed in order to combat and end it. In
that regard, we wish to stress the necessity of defining
terrorism and of distinguishing between it and the
legitimate right of peoples to liberation. The right of
liberation is guaranteed by the Charter of the United
Nations. It is an inherent right that must be upheld by
all Member States, and all measures must be taken to
preserve it.

Syria here reaffirms its firm commitment to
combating terrorism and its continued cooperation with
all members of the world community that wish to
pursue that cooperation; it underlines the important
role played by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and
expresses its satisfaction at the work accomplished by
the Committee in carrying out its mandate.

