Ms. King (Australia): I would like to thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen and Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow for their comprehensive
briefings. We commend the Tribunals for the progress
made in relation to their respective mandates over the
past six months. As we mark the twentieth anniversary
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR), those reports serve to highlight the contribution
that all three entities continue to make to international
criminal justice. We agree with Judge Joensen that
they have forever altered the landscape of international
criminal law and that their contribution is not limited to
the ongoing development of international criminal law,
but extends to the provision of assistance and support
to victims and witnesses and to capacity-building
and legacy preservation. Australia also commends
both Tribunals on their efforts to complete their work
expeditiously, while ensuring that trials and appeals
are conducted in a manner consistent with fair trial
standards.

As the reports highlight, there is one remaining
appeal before the ICTR and four trials and five appeals
before the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is in all of our interests that the
work of the Tribunals not continue indefinitely, but
it is equally important that provision be made for the
successful completion of their case work. Australia's
view is that the terms of office of the Tribunals' judges
and prosecutors should therefore be extended until the
completion of their cases.

The successful completion of the Tribunals'
work will, however, require much more than just the
extension of the judges' terms. First, it is critical that
all stakeholders work together to ensure that the nine
remaining ICTR fugitives are apprehended. Member
States must cooperate with the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, which is not
only tracking the three fugitives over which it has
jurisdiction, but also providing assistance in tracking
the other six individuals whose cases have been
transferred to Rwanda. To that end, we welcome the
launch of the international fugitives initiative in Kigali
on 24 July by the ICTR Prosecutor, the Office of Global
Criminal Justice of the United States Department
of State, INTERPOL and the Prosecutor General of
Rwanda.

Secondly, we must work together to find solutions
to address the plight of the eight persons acquitted
by the ICTR and the three persons released by the
Tribunal who need to be relocated from Arusha. While
we welcome the recent resettlement in Belgium of one
individual, as is now well known the 11 individuals
who remain in Tanzania are effectively stuck in a legal
limbo without identity documents, proper immigration
status or the means to survive independent of the
Tribunal. The work of the Tribunals does not end with
the delivery of a final appeals judgement. The ongoing
welfare ofvictims and witnesses, as well as accused and
sentenced persons, is an integral part of the Tribunals'
mandate. The Council, through its Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals, must provide the
support the ICTR and Residual Mechanism need to find
a satisfactory solution to the relocation issue. We would
like to take this opportunity to thank Ambassador
Barros Melet and his team for Chile's leadership of the
Informal Working Group.

Thirdly, we note the concerns outlined in Prosecutor
Brammertz's report (S/2014/827, annex I) that there
has been insufficient progress in the cases transferred
to national institutions in the former Yugoslavia,
particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We encourage
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina to ensure that
cases transferred to its jurisdiction from the ICTY are
progressed as soon as possible. The arrest on 5 December
of 15 individuals said to have been involved in a 1993
massacre, following a joint investigation by Bosnian
and Serb authorities, is a welcome development.

We note with concern the barriers to reconciliation
outlined in Prosecutor Brammertz's report. Australia
encourages officials in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina to refrain from making statements
questioning or rejecting the ICTY's judgements, and
calls on them to ensure that steps are taken to reject
revisionism, including the denial of the genocide in
Srebrenica. Indeed, all efforts at revisionism and
genocide denial must be firmly rejected, as inimical
to reconciliation and accountability and deeply
disrespectful to all victims.

Finally, we continue to be concerned about the
negative impact that the loss of experienced staff
and difficulties in recruiting new staff is having on
the Tribunals' ability to meet their completion target
dates. We are ready to support any human resource
initiatives that will assist the Tribunals in addressing
those challenges.

It is imperative that the Council extend its full
support to the Tribunals and the Residual Mechanism.
We agree with Judge Meron that the Tribunals have
inaugurated a new era of accountability. The Council,
of course, was instrumental in ushering in that era
and it has a fundamental responsibility to continue
to support it. If the Council is committed to ensuring
that the victims and survivors of the tragedies in the
former Yugoslavia and in Rwanda get the justice they
deserve, and if the Council truly means what it says
when it speaks of the importance of the fight against
impunity for the most serious international crimes, it
will continue to provide all necessary support to the
Tribunals and to the Residual Mechanism so to enable
them to complete their work and conclude this particular
chapter in international criminal justice, which will
leave a lasting and vital legacy.

