Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Let me begin by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Kubis, for his comprehensive briefing on the
report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Afghanistan (S/2012/703). I would also like to warmly
welcome the Afghan Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, to New York and to thank him for
his insightful statement.

Afghanistan stands at an important crossroads
today. As responsibilities are handed over to Afghan
authorities at an accelerated rate, significant political
and economic challenges remain, many of which
have been highlighted in the Special Representative's
insightful briefing. Tackling those challenges and
building a sustainable, stable Afghanistan is crucial,
not only for the future of the Afghan people, but also
for peace and stability in the region, Asia and the world.
From our point of View, there are three key pillars
that will determine the result of the transition and
transformation process.

The first pillar is the international community's
approach to Afghanistan. A strong display of will
from the international community will strengthen the
hopes of the Afghan people for the future. From that
perspective, we welcome the pledge at the Chicago
and Tokyo Conferences of continued commitment
to the country's future stability and prosperity in the
transformation decade. While we are moving on to the
implementation of the Framework based on mutual
pledges and commitments, we must remain in touch
with the realities and developments on the ground.
Meanwhile, the continued engagement of the United
Nations in Afghanistan in all fields during the period
of transition and post-transition is crucial. We believe
that that is also the wish of the Afghan people.

The second pillar is to strengthen the Afghan
Government and move towards local ownership. The
people and the Government of Afghanistan are at the
centre of the transformation process. Empowering them
is essential. That is only possible by strengthening
governance and the rule of law. We welcome the
pledges of the Afghan Government following the Tokyo
Conference in that direction. Ensuring the concrete
implementation ofthose pledges with the support of the
international community will be a pressing issue in the
upcoming months.

Elections are another key element in providing a
smooth transition and local ownership. We would like
to commend the Afghan efforts and international actors
in the area, in particular, the Independent Election
Commission, the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the United Nations
DevelopmentProgramme. We also recognize the positive
steps taken towards democratization in Afghanistan in
the last few years. Finally, a comprehensive peace and
reconciliation process under Afghan leadership and
ownership is vital. Turkey will continue to support the
process in every way possible, with the best interests of
the Afghan people in mind.

The third pillar is the regional dimension. The role
of Afghanistan's regional partnerships in establishing
and sustaining a secure, prosperous and peaceful
Afghanistan is crucial. Sustained regional engagement
remains key to addressing common challenges, such as
terrorism, barriers to trade and investment, illicit drugs
and refugees.

The Istanbul process, which seeks to find creative,
comprehensive and pragmatic solutions to regional
solutions, has become an important milestone in that
respect. As the Council well knows, the Istanbul
process, which seeks to strengthen Afghan leadership
and regional ownership, aspires to collectively enhance
political dialogue among all of the Heart of Asia
countries in a results-oriented and practical framework.
The process recognizes Afghanistan's crucial role
and historical position in promoting connectivity and
cooperation across the heart of Asia. Indeed, as Special
Representative Kubis pointed out, the Istanbul Process
helps define regional assistance based on mutual
interests.

We are extremely pleased that the Istanbul process
is moving towards a development and implementation
phase based on the framework accepted at the Kabul
Ministerial Conference on 14 June. Several follow-up
meetings were held in the aftermath of the Conference
with senior officials, Kabul-based ambassadors and
technical-level working groups. The next senior
officials meeting will be held here in New York on
24 September.

Turkey, which co-leads the counter-terrorism
confidence-building measures implementation process
with Afghanistan and the United Arab Emirates, hosted
a technical working group meeting on 3 September in
Ankara. The follow-up meeting took place in the United
Arab Emirates on 18 September.

We are also glad to see the concrete progress in
other key confidence-building measures (CBMs),
underlining the region's commitment to the Istanbul
process. Pakistan will host a meeting on disaster
management on 20-21 September in Islamabad. India is
convening a technical-level meeting on the Chambers of
Commerce CBM. in New Delhi, I believe my colleague
mentioned. The Counter Narcotics CBM, led by the
Russian Federation and Azerbaijan, will serve as a
crucial tool to further efforts in combating illicit drugs.
There are concrete progress and regional commitment
on all other CBMs, fostering the spread of regional
cooperation.

As Afghanistan's regional and international
partners, we should spare no effort in contributing
to the vision of a secure, peaceful and self-sufficient
Afghanistan. That is to the benefit of us all. Turkey
will remain committed to the vision of a safe, secure
and prosperous Afghanistan. To that end, Turkey will
always remain in solidarity with the Afghan people.

In conclusion, I would like to voice our strong
support for the crucial role played by the United Nations
in Afghanistan. I would especially like to commend the
valuable efforts of the United Nations and UNAMA. in
particular in taking the Istanbul Process further, and to
express our heartfelt gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis and his team.
