Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): May I express
appreciation for the successful Gabonese presidency of
the Security Council. I should also like to thank Alain
Le Roy for presenting the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/127) and my dear friend Zahir Tanin, who sits
so patiently through every meeting, hearing everything
that can possibly be said around this table.

This is a timely debate on Afghanistan, with the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). Of
course, that calls for a renewal of everything else that
we intend to express here, but, at the same time, we
cannot forget that, enmeshed in that cruel cyclone that
has hit the world, the region has suffered along with
Afghanistan and, sadly, the situation has affected its
neighbours, especially Pakistan. Yet, I endorse and
express complete support for the international and
regional efforts for stability and peace.

The London Conference has, thankfully, been
taken over by past masters, who perhaps might produce
more expected results acceptable to a wider audience. I
hope that what we call Afghan ownership will become
more apparent if not for the security of the world, then
certainly for the security of Afghanistan and its people.
I remember Peter Galbraith when I speak of the
formation of the Electoral Complaints Commission,
and the technical assistance of UNAMA will further
help to improve the electoral process. We are confident
that the parliamentary elections this year will produce
more binding results.

Pakistan supports the reconciliation and
reintegration process, and I believe that anyone willing
to lay down arms or to consider the possibility should
be considered wholly without recrimination. However,
as suggested by the Secretary-General, we must be
very careful not to over-militarize the peace process,
and I picked that specifically from his report. The
civilian component of the strategy should be at the
forefront, and the military component should slowly -
and that will be the litmus test of our progress and
success - support the overall efforts. At the same
time, the international community must accept and
realize that there is a desire not just to build what is
physically visible, but also to promote the Afghan
national character to one that can support itself with its
head held high.

We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation that there can be no sovereignty without
capacity and responsibility. I think that the
international community understands that, and is

moving towards increasing capacity and assisting with
more responsibility. With great pleasure, I announce
that, in the recent meetings between President Karzai
and President Zardari in Islamabad, we have further
aided that process by increasing responsibility through
offering 2,000 university scholarships in Pakistan to
Afghans free of cost, and that, to increase capacity, we
have offered to train military and police forces in large
numbers in our institutions in Pakistan. I think that this
will help further the process and accelerate it towards
more sovereign Afghan action.

I would not like to forget Mr. Kai Eide. Yet, I
would like to congratulate Mr. Staffan de Mistura on
his appointment as the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan at this critical
juncture. UNAMA must play a pivotal role in
supporting and strengthening the capacity of the
Afghan Government to confront the enormous
challenges before it. UNAMA's supportive
disposition- and I stress supportive - would be
acceptable to the Afghan people.

We attach high priority to our close friendship
with Afghanistan, and I think that the joint declaration
signed in Islamabad on 11 March signifies that. I
believe that Pakistan remains host to over 3 million
Afghans. That gesture, despite our own economic
woes, remains close to our heart, and we carry on in
whatever way possible.

Pakistan supports regional efforts for stability and
peace in Afghanistan, and I think that the reflection of
our desire to make the best possible use of a regional
approach to peace, security and economic progress was
self-evident at the fourth trilateral summit of Pakistan,
Turkey and Afghanistan in Istanbul. We are also
looking forward to the joint jirga, as we call it, which
is the convergence of elders throughout our and the
Afghan areas hosting the Pashtun race, some time at
the end of April, as well as to the Kabul conference.
These and other actions taken by us, we hope, will
produce substantial results. And we continue to pursue
such actions.

What is the international community to do about
it? What is happening to that beautiful country - a
paradise lost, to which brave people, including
Ambassador Tanin here, return, giving up everything in
life to be a part of a process that rebuilds their beloved
land? If it is a paradise lost, I think that the first
important action is for the international community to
quash the various rumours of pull-outs and early
departure, as they are dampening and hurting the
process of peace in Afghanistan. Much like Satan
thrown out from the realms of paradise, the
international community will have to clench its fist in
defiance and, as Milton says, speak and show the
unconquerable will of the international community. I
believe that to leave Afghanistan alone with those
national challenges is not, in my mind, sound policy.

We must also make a very hard decision. Only 30
to 35 per cent of all aid filters down to those for whom
it was originally sent. The number is significantly low
and does not reflect the progress that will be needed for
Afghanistan.

On a lighter note, as I come towards my
conclusion, what is it that we desire from the Afghan
Government? The answer should be a partnership.
Well, if that is a partnership, I wonder how many
around this table can pontificate to their wives every
morning on how the partnership should be run. Very
few, I would guess. I believe we need to be more
concerned and sensitive to the Afghan Government's
efforts and to promote that relationship. Let them be
partners and not have to hear merely what is poured
into their ears over long periods of time.

In the end, we congratulate the hardy men who
are our partners in Afghanistan and the efforts they are
making today. Peace and security in Afghanistan are
the desire and dream of the Pakistani people.
Affiliation between the people of two countries is
based on historical, cultural and social ties. Stability
and progress in Afghanistan will have positive
implications for the security situation in Pakistan. We
also call on the international community to remain
steadfast in its commitment to Afghanistan.
