The Secretary-General: Let me begin by thanking
the Security Council for its action and engagement in
addressing the mounting crisis in South Sudan.

We are all deeply troubled by the events that
have unfolded in recent days. There are reports of
ethnically targeted violence, including extrajudicial
killings and mass graves. The displacement of civilians
is growing and spreading, with some 45,000 people
seeking protection at the bases of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I reiterate the calls
for maximum restraint by all communities in South
Sudan. There is no military solution to this conflict.
It is a political crisis that requires a peaceful political
solution. We are working closely with the regional
leaders and parties on the ground to establish a basis
for negotiations. At the same time, I am determined
to ensure that UNMISS has the means to carry out its
central task of protecting civilians.

I welcome the resolution adopted today (resolution 2132 (2013)), which calls for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and the opening of dialogue, demands that all
parties cooperate fully with UNMISS, and authorizes
the temporary strengthening of protection capacities
with additional troops, police and logistical assets from
other United Nations missions. I have spoken with a
number of regional leaders and want to acknowledge
their efforts and vital support.

I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries
that have agreed to the temporary relocation of their
personnel and assets. We are coordinating closely
with other United Nations missions to ensure that
the redeployments do not affect the implementation
of their respective mandates. I commend our brave
peacekeepers and all United Nations personnel who
are helping to protect civilians, provide humanitarian
assistance and monitor the human rights situation,
under very difficult circumstances. We have lost two
peacekeepers in the past week and one was wounded.
One International Labour Organization employee was
killed. Earlier today, three UNMISS personnel were
injured at the United Nations base in Bor, Jonglei state.

Attacks on civilians and United Nations
peacekeepers must cease immediately. The United
Nations will investigate reports of those incidents and
ofthe grave human rights violations and crimes against
humanity. Those responsible will be held personally
accountable. They should know that the world is
watching. Human rights are a cornerstone of our efforts
and I am urgently strengthening our human rights
capacity in the country.

I welcome the urgency and collective resolve of
the Security Council today. I trust that the Council and
other Member States will continue to do their part to
provide the personnel, equipment and logistical support
required to ensure a timely deployment of those
additional troops and enablers. Without such support,
the Secretariat will not be able to quickly deploy the
additional capacity required. Even with the ongoing
support, the strengthening of UNMISS protection
capabilities will not happen overnight. Even with
additional capabilities, we will not be able to protect
every civilian in need in South Sudan.

The parties are responsible for ending the conflict.
In the end, political dialogue is the only solution. I
have consistently called on President Salva Kiir and
opposition political leaders to come to the table and
to find a political way out of the crisis. Whatever the
differences, nothing can justify the violence that has
engulfed their young nation. They must do everything
in their power to immediately ensure that their followers
hear the message loud and clear: continued Violence,
ethnic or otherwise, is completely unacceptable.

Now is the time for South Sudan's leaders to show
their people and the world that they are committed to
preserving the unity of the nation that was born out of
their long struggle for independence.

