Mr. Kim Sam-hoon (Republic of Korea): Thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting today. In the light of your request for brevity,
my oral statement has been shortened from the original
text, copies of which have been circulated.

We are pleased to note that the Security Council
remains committed to addressing the problem of small
arms and light weapons in a timely and efficient
manner. In that regard, my delegation welcomed the 12
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2002/1053) on the ways and
means in which the Security Council can further
contribute to the fight against the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons.

My delegation would like to underscore the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes within the Security
Council's conflict-prevention and post-conflict peace-
building efforts. In recent years we have seen DDR
programmes make significant contributions to the
reconstruction of post-conflict societies. Unfortunately,
at the same time we have witnessed the problems that
ensue when DDR initiatives are not undertaken and
when large quantities of small arms and light weapons
fall into the wrong hands, thus prolonging conflicts and
hindering reconstruction efforts. In that context, we
would like to underscore the need to include in the
disarmament process comprehensive programmes for
arms management, such as measures to ensure the
effective collection, safe stockpiling and eventual
destruction of small arms and light weapons.
Accordingly, we support the recommendation that the
Security Council strengthen financing for disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration as it expands the
mandates and budgets of its peacekeeping operations to
include these important programmes.

The enforcement of Security Council arms
embargoes is also critical in the fight to curb the
proliferation of and the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. We commend the Secretary-General's
recommendation that each and every State take
appropriate action against any activity that is in
violation of a United Nations Security Council
embargo. Noting the Secretary-General's eleventh
recommendation, which calls for consideration of the
use of coercive measures against embargo violators and
the establishment of monitoring mechanisms, my
delegation is of the view that sanctions Committees,
under the guidance of the Security Council, could act
as a monitoring mechanism in close cooperation with
relevant bodies throughout the United Nations system.

Over time we have recognized that the scourge of
small arms and light weapons has become an even
graver threat to international peace and stability due to
the fact that it is closely linked to other problems of
national and global concern, such as drug trafficking,
money laundering and cross-border terrorism. My
delegation thus welcomes the Secretary-General's call
for the Security Council to continue its efforts to
identify these links and to develop innovative strategies
to combat them. We further support the proposals for
the establishment of a standing monitoring mechanism
for targeted sanctions and the illicit trade in high-value
commodities in armed conflicts.

At the 2001 United Nations Conference and the
subsequent First Biennial Meeting, held last year,
States acknowledged the crucial importance of marking
and of keeping accurate records that enable the timely
tracing and identification of illicit small arms and light
weapons. Successful tracing initiatives require
adequate marking and record-keeping, through which
Governments and concerned organizations are able to
identify the producers, end-users and uses of a specific
weapon. Against this backdrop, my delegation looks
forward to actively participating in the open-ended
working group tasked with the development of an
international instrument that would allow for the timely
and reliable identification and tracing of illicit small
arms and light weapons.

My delegation underscores the importance of
implementing rigorous export and import controls at
the national, regional and global levels. In this regard,
my delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
recommendation for the Security Council to call on
those States that have not yet done so to establish the
necessary measures to ensure effective control over the
import and export of small arms and light weapons.

Finally, my delegation would like to lend its
support to the Secretary-General's recommendation to
enhance transparency in armaments through, inter alia,
the universal and consistent participation of Member
States in the United Nations Register of Conventional
Arms. In this regard, my delegation commends the
work of the United Nations Group of Governmental
Experts on the Register last year, which agreed to
expand it to include man-portable air-defence systems
as a new sub-category. Such developments should
serve as a guide in our efforts to adapt our existing
mechanisms to threats in the changing security
environment.

