Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation welcomes the initiative taken by
Luxembourg to convene today's meeting. I would
like to welcome the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Luxembourg, His Excellency Mr. Asselborn, who
has come to New York to preside over our meeting. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon;
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Zerrougui; and
the Executive Director of UNICEF, Mr. Lake, for their
briefings. China also listened carefully to the statement
by Mr. Sawaneh.

Children represent our future and our hope. Ensuring
their safe growth is the common responsibilty of
national Governments and the international community.
In recent years, the international community has made
tremendous efforts and achieved positive progress in
protecting children in armed conflict. However, with
the increasing complexity of conflict situations, in
many regions of the world, children still bear the brunt
of armed conflict, and their overall situation is still
worrisome.

China opposes and condemns all violations against
children in armed conflict and urges all parties to
conflict to abide by the relevant international laws,
fulfil their obligations and respect and protect the
rights of children. The Security Council's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2143 (2014) clearly demonstrates
the international community's strong commitment
to strengthening the protection of children in armed
conflict. We support the international community
in continuing its common effort in providing
comprehensive protection of children in armed conflict.

In that regard, I wish to underscore the following
three points. First, the Governments concerned bear
the primary responsibility for the protection of children
in armed conflict. The key to the implementation of
Council resolutions on the protection of children lies in
the active support and cooperation of the Governments
concerned. On the basis of full respect for the ownership
of the countries concerned and through in-depth
communication and coordination with them, the
international community should support the countries
concerned in strengthening their capacity-building
and help them to resolve their practical financial and
technological difficulties. The international community
should also do its utmost to put an end to violations
against children by armed groups.

Secondly, in order to protect children in armed
conflicts, the various bodies within the United
Nations system should work on the basis of their own
responsibilities and strengths, fulfil their respective
mandates and generate synergy. The Security Council
should effectively fulfil its primary responsibility of
maintaining international peace and security and reduce
and curb conflicts through good offices, negotiations
and mediation so as to create a safe environment for
the growth of children. United Nations peacekeeping
operations should act in accordance with the Council's
mandate and increase their protection for children.
We welcome the "Children, not soldiers" campaign
launched yesterday jointly by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts and UNICEF. We hope that by
2016 we will reach the goal of complete elimination of
child soldiers in national armies.

Thirdly, in order to protect children in armed
conflict, we should address both the symptoms and
the root causes. The international community should
make the protection of children an integral part of
its overall effort to address conflicts and give it its
full attention in political negotiations and peace
agreements. In promoting post-conflict reconstruction
and implementing peacebuilding strategies, the
international community should prioritize children's
return to school and reintegration into society and
strengthen the institution-building of countries
concerned in terms of protecting children, providing
adequate resources and increasing development
assistance. It should actively support countries
concerned in their efforts to eliminate poverty, realize
universal education and protect children's rights so as
to eliminate the root causes of conflicts.

