Mr. Lowcock: Let me be clear from the outset that
there is a very real humanitarian problem in Venezuela.
The United Nations is willing and able to respond,
consistent with the long-standing mandate that Member
States have agreed for principled humanitarian action.
We can do more to relieve the suffering of the people
of Venezuela if we get more help and support from all
stakeholders.

Since Under-Secretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo
last briefed the Council on 26 February (see S/PV.8472),
the humanitarian situation has worsened. Recurrent
widespread power outages have affected the whole
country. Without electricity from the grid, many
hospitals have struggled to carry out essential surgical
procedures and to sustain intensive-care services and
dialysis treatment. Water and sewage systems have been
interrupted. Economic decline has continued, and the

purchasing power of ordinary people has fallen further,
rendering food even less affordable for many families.

The scale of need is significant and growing.
The United Nations is working in Venezuela to
expand the provision of humanitarian assistance. Our
efforts are in line with the humanitarian principles of
humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence,
as determined by the General Assembly in resolutions
46/182 and 58/114.

The Secretary-General has expressed his concern
for the people in Venezuela. I echo that concern. I
will focus my briefing today on, first, the priority
humanitarian needs in Venezuela; secondly, our efforts
to assist the most vulnerable people; and, thirdly, the
areas where we seek the Council's collective support.

We recently produced a draft overview report on
priority humanitarian needs in Venezuela. The review
was based on the best available data from all available
official and unofficial sources, including Government
data. We gave our draft report to the Government and
the National Assembly on 27 March.

We estimate that 7 million people in Venezuela
need humanitarian assistance. That is some 25 per cent
of the population. There are people in need throughout
the country, but needs are most severe in the three
states in the south and Zulia and Lara states in the west.
People with chronic health conditions, pregnant and
nursing women, children under five, indigenous people,
people on the move and those living with disabilities
are among the most vulnerable.

The context is a severe and continuing economic
contraction, with associated dramatic increases in
inflation on a scale seen in few if any other countries
around the world in recent years. Our review found
that access to nutrient-rich foods and a varied diet has
diminished. Historically, Venezuela has imported up to
75 per cent of its food. As a result of the crisis, the
availability and affordability of food have fallen, with
lower imports, reduced local production and declining
purchasing power. Many people depend on subsidized
food to meet their needs. Six million families across
the country reportedly benefit from food supplies
distributed by the Government.

Despite this, malnutrition has increased, especially
in areas with the highest poverty rates. The United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization has
estimated that in 2018, some 3.7 million people
suffered from undernourishment. The prevalence of
undernourishment has almost trebled over a five-year
period. Other aid organizations report an increase in the
global acute malnutrition rate among children under five.
We estimate that 1.9 million people require nutritional
assistance, including 1.3 million children under five.
More data is needed to improve our understanding of
the nutrition and food security situation.

The Venezuelan health system is strained by
shortages in personnel, medical supplies, equipment
and electricity. Reduced access to medicines has
increased the risk of morbidity and mortality from
diabetes, hypertension, cancer and HIV/AIDS.
Preventable diseases such as tuberculosis, diphtheria,
measles and malaria have resurfaced. The World Health
Organization registered more than 400,000 cases of
malaria in 2017, nearly 70 per cent more than the year
before. That was the largest increase in the world that
year. Overall, we estimate that some 2.8 million people
need health assistance, including 1.1 million children
under five.

Health problems are exacerbated by insufficient
access to clean water and inadequate sanitation
systems. One estimate suggests that 17 per cent of
people living in poverty have no access to safe water or
receive it only once a fortnight. Recent power outages
are making this problem worse. Some families have
resorted to using water from unclean sources because
they cannot afford safe water. Sanitation systems
have deteriorated, affecting solid waste management,
among other services. Basic hygiene needs like hand-
washing are undermined by the unavailability or
unaffordability of water and cleaning supplies. We
estimate that some 4.3 million people require water and
sanitation assistance.

The crisis has interrupted the education of more
than 1 million children. Many families cannot afford
the transportation, clothing or shoes that children need
to attend school. The population on the move is at
particular risk of protection violations, as are women
and girls, who compose 72 per cent of trafficking
victims. More than 3.4 million people have already left
the country. We estimate that some 2.7 million people
still inside Venezuela require protection assistance
and services.

Let me move on now to how we are assisting the
most vulnerable people.

The United Nations and other humanitarian
organizations are on the ground, and we have been
expanding our operations. Since 2017, the number of
United Nations staff has increased from 210 to nearly
400. United Nations agencies are working in all
24 states. Our efforts are particularly concentrated in the
vulnerable border states of Zulia, Tachira and Bolivar.

To support the expansion of humanitarian
assistance, I released $9 million from the Central
Emergency Response Fund (CERF) in late 2018.
Through this grant, as well as bilateral funding from
donors, the United Nations has provided 189,000
children with preventive and curative treatment for
acute malnutrition; expanded maternal and child health
care through the provision of medicines and supplies
from 74,000 health kits; donated 10 generators to
provide emergency power to hospitals; installed water
tanks in hospitals to ensure a safe supply of water for
Palestinian Authorityediatric and maternal services;
distributed 10 million tablets for the treatment of HIV
among 50,000 people across all 24 states; and delivered
176,000 doses of vaccine against measles, mumps and
rubella for babies and young children.

The United Nations and other aid organizations are
working with institutions and organizations across the
spectrum, including line ministries and national civil
society organizations, and we are in touch with the
National Assembly. Under the leadership of the United
Nations Resident Coordinator, we recently established
a cooperation and assistance coordination team,
bringing together United Nations agencies, the Red
Cross and non-governmental organizations in Caracas
to provide strategic-level guidance and coordination to
the humanitarian operation.

It is clear that much more is needed. We seek the
support of the Council for action in three areas:

First is improved respect for principled
humanitarian action. In Venezuela, there is a need
to separate political and humanitarian objectives.
Humanitarian assistance must be delivered on the basis
of need alone. The Secretary-General has repeatedly
stressed the importance of the humanitarian principles
and has called on Member States and others to respect
them. We seek the Council's support to safeguard the
neutral and impartial nature of humanitarian action.

The second area is an enabling operating
environment, including sustained and regular access
to people in need. I note recent steps taken by the
Government of Venezuela to facilitate the entrance of
additional United Nations staff into the country and
the expansion of humanitarian programmes, including
those of the Red Cross movement. Additional steps
are needed. We need more humanitarian organizations
with the capacity to meet urgent needs to establish a
presence and assist with operations in the country. We
also need more data and information to ensure our
understanding of needs evolves with the situation.

Thirdly, more money is needed to support the
expansion of humanitarian programmes. The resources
available now are extremely modest in relation to the
needs we see. I would like to thank Member States
that have contributed to the provision of humanitarian
assistance in Venezuela, including our generous donors
supporting the CERF. The Council's continued support
is critical, but we need a lot more.

