The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations. Members of the Council have before
them document 5/2006/961, which contains a letter
dated 6 December 2006 from the Permanent
Representative of the Congo to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a communique adopted by the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council endorses the
conclusions of the Addis Ababa high-level
Consultation on the situation in Darfur of
16 November 2006 and the communique of the
66th meeting of the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union held in Abuja on
30 November 2006. The Security Council
welcomes the stated commitment of the
Government of National Unity to the conclusions
and the communique.
the

"The Security Council calls for the
conclusions and the communique to be
implemented by all parties without delay, and to
this end calls on all parties to facilitate, per the
Addis Ababa and Abuja agreements, the
immediate deployment of the United Nations
Light and Heavy Support Packages to the African
Union Mission in the Sudan and a hybrid
operation in Darfur, for which backstopping and
command and control structures and systems will
be provided by the United Nations. The Security
Council requests the Secretary-General to keep
the Council updated.

"The Security Council reaffirms its deep
concern about the worsening security situation in
Darfur and its repercussions in the region. It
stresses that a peaceful settlement to the conflict
in Darfur lies in a comprehensive approach with
the concerted efforts of all relevant parties, in
accordance with the Darfur Peace Agreement, and
will contribute to restoring security and stability
in the region."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/55.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.
06-66925
