Mr. Osman (Somalia): As this is the first time
I speak before the Council under your leadership,
Sir, I would like to congratulate you on assuming
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
pledge our full support and cooperation to you and
your team. I would also like to acknowledge the role of
your predecessor in successfully leading the Council
last month.

Somalia welcomes the adoption of resolution 2431
(2018), and we warmly welcome the extension of the
mandate of the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM), as its presence remains critical as Somalia
moves into the next chapter. Somalia is pleased
that the resolution is grounded in Somalia's effort
to progressively assume responsibility for security
across the country. My country is embarking on the
transition to full sovereignty, national ownership and
leadership in an effort to realize the noble vision of a
secure, democratic and prosperous nation that is able
to meet the needs of its citizens independently. We in
Somalia know that the agreed transition plan is no easy
task, but with our full determination and unity and the
sincere support and commitment of the international
community, it is achievable. The logic of transition will
guide the way forward over the next three years.

I would also like also take this opportunity
to welcome the latest developments regarding the
protracted conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea. We
are further pleased with the signing and the steps
taken to implement the joint declaration of peace
and friendship to normalize relations between the
two brotherly countries. With this start, many more
achievements and challenges lie ahead of all of us, and
my country will spare no effort to work for a peaceful
and prosperous future for our region.

Since the adoption of the previous mandate,
Somalia has developed a transition plan with national
and international buy-in, including the endorsement of
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
forms the basis for a joint United Nations-African
Union review this year. We welcome in particular the
emphasis that the joint review has placed this year on
consultations with the Federal Government. This should
be a template for future reviews, and I look forward
to further engagement as we continue to implement
implement the plan.

As we enter a new phase of transition, we are
as committed as ever to the Somali security forces
assuming responsibility for security in due course,
and to gradually taking over the task and posts, such
as Mogadishu stadium, from AMISOM. While the
transition may take many years, it will enable detailed
planning to take place in a realistic time frame and
help to monitor progress and adjust plans accordingly.
In addition to beginning the implementation of the
priority location, as set out in the plan, the first phase
lays the foundation for longer-term capacity-building
over the next few years. Among other tasks, this
includes enhanced support for the regional security
council, rewriting the Somali military discipline code
and strengthening the community policing services in
selected population centeres.

Having said that, partnership will be key to a
successful transition. Somalia will need continued
partnership with the countries that contribute police
and troops to AMISOM, but it will also need the
partnership and support of donors to align the national
security architecture in light of the outcome of the
operational readiness assessment. This will help in
building a professional, inclusive security sector capable
of providing security so that Somalis can go about their
everyday lives free from the threat of the terrorist group
Al-Shabaab, while providing the country with a secure
border and coastline.

I would like to express my gratitude to AMISOM
troop-contributing countries for their commitment
and enormous contribution over more than a decade in
Somalia. Their deployment has created the space for
political progress, for humanitarian relief efforts and for
Somalia's political and State institutions to grow. There
is no doubt that without their support and sacrifice, we
would not have managed to degrade Al-Shabaab and
accomplish what we have in such a short period.

The logistical support that the United Nations
Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS) has provided
to the African Union Mission in Somalia under the
Security Council's mandate is crucial to my country.
While the situation has improved recently, the Support
Office needs to provide an appropriate level of funding
to fill the gaps in logistics and equipment for AMISOM,
which is underfunded, understaffed and unequipped.
We look forward to AMISOM'S operational readiness
assessment and reconfiguration to support the
implementation of the transitional plan. We welcome
the recommendation of the joint review and agree that
AMISOM. sector 6 should be closed and subsumed into
section 2 with a view to forming a multinational sector
in Jubbaland that is accountable and capable of assisting
the Federal Government of Somalia and federal member
states in implementing the total ban on the export of
charcoal from Somalia, including by facilitating access
of the monitors to the charcoal export ports.

Somalia's health-care system is very fragile and
we very are very concerned that a cholera outbreak
might take place if we do not control the financial and
human resources. The presence of AMISOM. camps
around the cities - big cities, especially - without
any environmental management policies adds a serious
challenge to our Government and a greater burden
on our health systems. Internal report 2017/145 of the
Office of Internal Oversight Services revealed horrific
environmental and health practices. In that regard,
we kindly ask UNSOS to urgently implement the
recommendations of the internal audit.

I wish to commend the efforts of the Swedish
Government to provide UNSOS with an environmental
expert for one year. That measure can mitigate the risk
of environmental pollution and prevent the spread of
a cholera epidemic or any other disease related to the
absence of environmental experts and the proper waste
management of AMISOM. camps near the towns and
big cities of Somalia

In conclusion, the Somali Government, under the
leadership of President Farmajo and Prime Minister
Khayre, will spare no effort to assume full responsibility
at all levels in order to provide the Somali people with
the security opportunities necessary for social economic
progress and the benefits of a society governed by the
rule of law. We thank the Council once again for the
adoption of the resolution today, and we hope that this
spirit of compromise and cooperation will flourish to
achieve a successful drawdown.

The meeting rose at 10.25 am.
