Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing on developments in the
Middle East. We have listened attentively to the
statements by the representatives of Palestine and
Israel.

As the Middle East is going through an
unprecedentedly intense and historic period, with
problems that have accumulated over the years
becoming more and more acute, the task of achieving a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement is especially
pressing. To attempt to sidestep this fundamental issue
of Middle Eastern politics would be a serious mistake.
Unfortunately, instead of stepping up international
efforts, which the Russian Federation has consistently
called for, we have already seen the ministerial
meeting of the members of the Quartet postponed
twice - and this time to an as yet undetermined date.
This is deeply disappointing, particularly since we and
our partners had already done much preparatory work
ahead of the meeting.

Today as never before, Israelis and Palestinians
need international assistance to transcend their mutual
mistrust, forge constructive dialogue on the familiar
international legal foundations, and move towards a
mutually acceptable two-State solution. The
fundamental task of resuming negotiations has been
further complicated by the fact that the frequent calls
of the international community on the parties to reject
unilateral action that prejudges a final settlement
remain unheeded. Israel continues to build settlements
in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. This illegal
practice must come to an end immediately.

The absence of any progress in diplomatic efforts
creates a vacuum that heightened confrontation and a
further build-up of mistrust threaten to fill. A sad
confirmation of this was the escalation of violence
around the Gaza Strip between 7 and 9 April, in which
dozens of people died or were injured, at a level not
seen since 2009. We strongly urge all sides to show
restraint and to implement the provisions of resolution
1860 (2009). We support the complete lifting of the
Gaza blockade. We recognize the importance of
protecting the unhindered access of humanitarian
assistance to and throughout the entire territory of
Gaza. However, we deem it important to avoid actions
that could be perceived as provocations.

An additional factor exacerbating the situation in
Gaza is the increased activity of radical groups. Like
everyone here, we were shaken by the killing by
extremists of the Italian human rights activist Vittorio
Arrigoni. We urge Hamas, the controlling authority in
Gaza, to do everything necessary to ensure security in
the Strip. Abductions and assaults on individuals
cannot be allowed to become daily political practice.
We believe that, in the context of the creation of an
independent, viable, sovereign Palestinian State with
territorial integrity, overcoming the divisions within
Palestinian ranks is of paramount importance. Russia
has consistently called for such unity, which would lay
the necessary foundation for substantive Palestinian-
Israeli talks and future agreements.

Considering that September is only months away,
it is incumbent on us to rekindle diplomatic efforts to
find a way out of this explosive dead end. I would like
to draw attention once more to the existence in the
Security Council's arsenal of a powerful tool: sending
missions to the region. In the current circumstances,
the Russian proposal to send a Security Council
mission to the Middle East is especially timely, since
its goal is to bring the parties back to the negotiating
table. I would also emphasize separately that the
mission's task is not to blame anyone but to listen to
the legitimate concerns of each side and attempt to find
some common ground. We are grateful for the support
voiced today for this initiative.

It is the Russian Federation's consistent belief
that a complete, fair and lasting settlement in the
Middle East is possible only with the inclusion of all
settlement tracks: Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese.

Turning to events in Syria, we support the
maintenance of law and order and the achievement of
stability, internal consensus and social peace in that
country in order to prevent unfavourable developments
and casualties. That, as we see it, is the aim of the
efforts of President Al-Assad to institute domestic
reforms, including the lifting of the state of emergency.
In that respect, we deem unacceptable any external
interference in Syrian affairs or those of other States in
the region.

We are hoping for a speedy conclusion to the
process of forming a Government in Lebanon on the
basis of a consensus that will incorporate the views of
all Lebanese. It is important that this process take place
within constitutional parameters. We expect the
country's new Government to remain firmly committed
to Lebanon's international obligations, and we urge
both the Lebanese and Israeli sides to continue to work
to implement the positions articulated in resolution
1701 (2006).

