Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): Since 13
March, when the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Legwaila Joseph Legwaila,
briefed the Council on the situation in Ethiopia and
Eritrea, a great deal of progress has been made. It is
therefore with particular pleasure that I can report
today on that progress in the peace process.

Yesterday, 18 April, the Special Representative
announced the establishment of the Temporary Security
Zone (TSZ), which marks the formal separation of the
Ethiopian and Eritrean forces. This is an important
stage which will allow for the restoration of the
Eritrean civil administration and the return of displaced
persons to the Temporary Security Zone.

The United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea welcomed Eritrea's announcement on 16 April
that it had concluded the repositioning of its forces out
of the Temporary Security Zone, as proposed. As the
members of the Council are aware, UNMEE verified,
on 7 March, the redeployment of Ethiopian armed
forces out of the Zone.

In a statement issued yesterday, Special
Representative Legwaila commended Ethiopia and
Eritrea for the establishment of the Temporary Security
Zone, as stipulated in the Algiers Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities. The United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea is continuing to work with both
parties to resolve a number of outstanding problems
concerning the southern boundary of the TSZ.

Mr. Legwaila's statement also notes that both
parties have sought to make adjustments to the
southern boundary of the Zone as presented to them by
UNMEE after the 6 February meeting of the Military
Coordination Commission. In this connection, UNMEE
has expressed its regret that Ethiopia did not
communicate the full nature of its redeployment plans
in the Irob area. As members of the Security Council
will recall, UNMEE protested on 22 March the
presence of Ethiopian troops inside the then-proposed
Temporary Security Zone. However, the Mission
expects to reach agreement on the clarification of the
redeployment lines provided by Ethiopia and to gain a
more accurate understanding of the differences
between the parties on the ground in specific localities.
This will ensure, insofar as possible, the inclusion in
the Temporary Security Zone of the villages to which
Eritrean internally displaced persons are expected to
return.

At a press conference on 18 April, the Special
Representative reminded the parties that it was their
obligation to ensure that all returnees are able to go
back to their villages of origin. In addition, UNMEE
has reported that some Ethiopian military forces in the
eastern sector have moved forward slightly in the
Temporary Security Zone from the confirmed
redeployment position. Discussions on the subject with
the Ethiopian authorities are ongoing.

In accordance with the 18 June 2000 Cessation of
Hostilities Agreement, the establishment of the TSZ
will permit the restoration of Eritrean civilian
administration, including police and local militia, and
allow preparations to be made for the return of the
population. On 17 April, UNMEE and the Government
of Eritrea signed a protocol that will govern relations
between UNMEE and the police and militia units that
will return to, and be present in, the Zone. That
protocol establishes, inter alia, that police and militia
should be clearly identifiable and are allowed only to
carry personal weapons, with an arms permit. While
Eritrea has not yet shared with UNMEE all of its plans
for the restoration of civilian administration to the
Zone, some militia and police members have already
started returning to areas in the TSZ. UNMEE is still
awaiting notification from the Eritrean side of the exact
numbers of police, militia, customs police and border
police that will return to the Zone.

(spoke in English)

The most immediate challenge now facing
Eritrea, and the international community, is indeed the
return of displaced persons to the Temporary Security
Zone. In a meeting with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General held on 18 April, President
Afwerki confirmed that Eritrea considered the return of
displaced persons prior to the rainy season to be a top
priority. Accordingly, Eritrea is planning for the return
of approximately 300,000 displaced persons to the
Zone within the next six to eight weeks. So far, there
have been only a few thousand returnees, most of them
to areas of the TSZ which were under Eritrean control
during the hostilities. UNMEE has made clear to the
Eritrean authorities that a precipitous return could put
returnees in a dire humanitarian situation. Linked to
these returns is the threat posed by the large quantities
of landmines and unexploded ordnance in the areas of
return.

A steering committee for humanitarian assistance
in the Temporary Security Zone, with the participation
of the Eritrean authorities, the United Nations Resident
Coordinator/Humanitarian Coordinator and UNMEE,
was established in March. Between 2 and 5 April, a
rapid village assessment was conducted in the area of
Gash Barka, where many returns are expected. The
Eritrean Relief and Refugee Commission and the
humanitarian community team conducting the
assessment noted the importance of the returns'
beginning in time for the annual planting season. It
also recommended, inter alia, that mine-related
interventions and projects aimed at providing basic
services - especially water, shelter, food, health care
and education - be implemented, as they are essential
to encourage returns. A similar rapid assessment rapid
is planned for Debub region beginning 23 April.
Sectoral working groups chaired by the Government of
Eritrea have been convened to address these
recommendations.

The quick-impact project programme launched by
UNMEE offers a limited but fast source of funds
disbursement for essential projects in the Zone. As the
Council will recall, the budget for UNMEE includes
$700,000 for the implementation of such projects in the
TSZ and adjacent areas in both Eritrea and Ethiopia. So
far, 14 projects - for a total budget of over
$160,000- have been approved by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. However,
quick-impact projects are, as their name indicates, a
stop-gap measure, which cannot substitute for much-
needed larger-scale interventions. The humanitarian
challenges linked to the establishment of the
Temporary Security Zone are enormous. The United
Nations calls upon the international community to
contribute generously to the United Nations Country
Team appeals of the two countries.

As I mentioned before, UNMEE remains very
concerned about the landmine situation. In response to
repeated requests from the Mission, Eritrean authorities
recently provided 313 minefield records, which are
currently being examined by UNMEE. The Ethiopian
authorities have also provided some minefield
information, but additional clarifications are being
sought. As regards demining operations in the TSZ,
these have been restricted to limited clearance
operations, reportedly conducted by the military forces
of both sides prior to their redeployment and
realignment, and to the demining tasks undertaken by
UNMEE's engineer units in support of the deployment
of the peacekeeping operation. Currently, there are
limited mine and unexploded ordnance clearance and
minefield-marking activities being carried out inside
the TSZ. In addition, an international demining non-
governmental organization is conducting a dangerous
area survey in the TSZ. Mine-awareness activities have
been initiated throughout the mission area.

Turning to operational issues, I am pleased to
inform the Council that the deployment of the Mission
is now almost complete. As of 17 April, the strength of
the military component of UNMEE stood at 4,360
personnel, of which 501 are national support elements.
This figure includes 218 military observers. I am also
pleased to inform members of the Council that the
Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA) with Ethiopia was
signed on 23 March. We also hope that progress will
soon be made in our ongoing negotiations on the SOFA
with Eritrea.

The issue of direct flights between Addis Ababa
and Asmara, on which the Council was extensively
briefed on previous occasions, is still unresolved.
UNMEE continues to face repeated restrictions of
movement in all three sectors. These are being
addressed with military authorities on a case-by-case
basis. In this connection, I would like to remind the
parties of their obligations under the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities, in particular the granting of
unfettered direct-access flights and freedom of
movement throughout UNMEE's area of operations.
During the reporting period, there has been no
significant violation of the ceasefire and the situation
remains calm. I regret to inform Council members that,
on 16 April, three Jordanian soldiers were injured, two
of them seriously, when their vehicle overturned on a
road in sector West.

As indicated in the Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, and as UNMEE has reiterated to the parties
on numerous occasions, the TSZ is temporary in nature
and does not prejudge the final status of the contested
areas, to be decided by the Boundary Commission
established by the 12 December Algiers agreement. In
this connection, it should be mentioned that the
Boundary Commission held its first informal meeting
in The Hague on 25 and 26 March, with the
participation of the agents for both Ethiopia and
Eritrea. At that meeting, the Commission presented to
the parties a tentative timeline of activities. A team
from the Office of the Secretary of the Commission is
currently in Asmara drawing up a plan of action for the
on-site activities required by the delimitation and
demarcation of the border.

However, the formal orders putting in motion the
work of the Commission can be issued only once the
challenge to one of the Commissioners, interposed by
Ethiopia, is resolved. At the request of the President of
the Boundary Commission, the Secretary-General has
been asked to resolve this challenge. He has a similar
responsibility with regard to the challenges interposed
by both parties to three out of five members of the
Claims Commission. The Secretary-General met
yesterday with the Permanent Representatives of
Ethiopia and Eritrea to seek a solution to the current
impasse.

The Presidents of both Commissions have
requested the parties to make deposits to cover the
initial costs of these two bodies, pursuant to the
commitments undertaken by the parties in the 12
December Algiers Agreement. While some
contributions to the Claims Commission have been
received, the parties have not yet made any deposits to
the Boundary Commission.

In conclusion, I would suggest that the Security
Council express its appreciation for the remarkable
progress achieved so far. At the same time, the Council
may wish to encourage the parties to cooperate fully
with UNMEE and the United Nations in the resolution
of all outstanding issues and, in particular, with the
Secretary-General in his efforts to resolve the impasse
regarding the composition of the Boundary
Commission and the Claims Commission. As members
of the Council are aware, the exit strategy of UNMEE
is linked to the successful completion of the work of
the Boundary Commission. It is therefore essential that
the Commission be able to begin its work without
further delay.

