Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank you, Mr.President, for
convening today's meeting. I also thank Mr. Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and
Ms. Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their
engagement, briefings and appeal to act.

We recognize the commitments made by the
Government of Myanmar since the adoption of the
presidential statement S/PRST/20l7/22, on 6 November,
but urgent action is now required to implement those
commitments and achieve real change on the ground. The
support and continued engagement of the international
community and the United Nations system, including
the Security Council, remain important.

The crisis is far from over. Hundreds of people
continue to cross the border into Bangladesh every
day, having brought the number of refugees to well
over 620,000, as we have heard. Reports of ongoing
trafficking in human beings, including children, are
extremely worrisome. The risk of radicalization in the
camps is also a real concern. There are clear implications
for regional peace and stability. It is essential that our
attention not wane.

Sweden's Foreign Minister, Margot Wallstrom,
recently visited Bangladesh and Myanmar. While
there, she engaged with the leaders of both countries.
She also met with leaders from the region to hear their
perspectives, and used the opportunity to convey the
messages of the Council. From the camps outside Cox's
Bazar in Bangladesh, Minister Wallstrom was able to
hear first-hand accounts, not only of the enormity of
the humanitarian crisis but also of the horrific violence
and abuse, including sexual and gender-based violence
against the Rohingyas by Myanmar's armed forces.

Ms. Patten's graphic briefing today and numerous
reports, including from the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
clearly illustrates the seriousness and horrific nature
of those crimes. The Minister was particularly struck
by the precarious situation of children and young
people caught up in the crisis. Numerous reports
of systematic, widespread and coordinated acts of
violence strongly indicate that crimes against humanity
have been committed. It is important that the facts and
circumstances on the ground be fully established. The
fact-finding mission mandated by the Human Rights
Council is an important resource in that regard, and we
urge the Government of Myanmar to provide it with
full access.

We have fully supported the Secretary-General's
efforts to resolve the crisis in Rakhine state. After
listening to Under-Secretary-General Feltman's
comprehensive briefing today, it is clear that the
three areas requiring urgent action identified by the
Secretary-General when he briefed the Council on
28 September (see S/PV.8060) remain relevant and
urgent. Ofimmediate concern is the need to ensure that
assistance reaches the estimated 865,000 people who
need it inside Rakhine state and elsewhere in Myanmar.
It is unacceptable that humanitarian access in northern
Rakhine is insufficient and still severely limited.

Restoring peace and stability and ensuring full
humanitarian access, as well as addressing the root
causes of the crisis, will require real change in Rakhine
state. Only then will the conditions exist for those who
fled to return in a safe, dignified and voluntary manner.
The people who decide to return should be able to do so
to their places of origin. That requires the establishment
of a credible verification mechanism.

The creation of camps for internally displaced
persons or camp-like conditions is unacceptable.
We take note of the arrangement reached between
the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
regarding the voluntary repatriation of refugees. Like
others, we feel that the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees must be invited
to participate in the joint working group that will
oversee the return so that the group can fully carry
out its mandate and help work towards arrangements
that would enable refugees to exercise their right to
return, in line with international law. I also note Under-
Secretary-General Feltman's recommendations today,
including on the much-needed reconciliation efforts in
northern Rakhine.

The implementation of the recommendations set out
in the report of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine
State is needed without delay. The Commission's report
provides the road map needed to deal with the root
causes of this long-running crisis, in particular the
systematic discrimination of the Rohingya, including
by addressing the issue of citizenship.

We encourage the Government of Myanmar to
continue to cooperate with Bangladesh and countries
in the region. We urge Myanmar to cooperate fully
with the United Nations and to counter narratives and
rhetoric that seek to undermine the Organization's
ability to do its work. In addition, as mentioned in
presidential statement S/PRST/2017/22, we continue to
see value in giving consideration to the appointment
of a special adviser, or envoy, to offer assistance to
the Government.
Sweden and the international community stand
ready to support the Government and the people of
Myanmar as the country continues its democratic
transition. Now is the time to rebuild trust between
the communities within Rakhine state and between
Myanmar and its neighbours and the international
community. Doing so can create the conditions for
peace and development that will benefit all the people
of Rakhine state and the people of Myanmar.

We encourage the Government of Myanmar to
seize this opportunity, including by implementing its
commitments. The Security Council should remain
very actively engaged.

