The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore, for presenting
the report on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), which
she heads, as well as her detailed statement concerning
the situation in the country. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims of Hurricane Matthew,
which tore through the Caribbean last week. We hope
that Haiti, with the help of the international community,
will be able very quickly to rebuild after this natural
disaster.

We take note of the fact that, owing to the hurricane,
the presidential and parliamentary elections in the
country have been postponed yet again. We hope that
Ms. Honore will present the next report when Haiti has
a duly elected President.

We continue to follow the development of the
internal political situation in the country. More than
three months after the expiry of the l20-day term of the
provisional President, the National Assembly has yet to
adopt measures to ensure continuity in the functioning
of the executive, in line with the provisions of the
agreement of 5 February. Unfortunately, the country
continues to face political and institutional uncertainty,
which poses an obstacle to its sustainable economic
and social development. We urge all key stakeholders
in the country to make efforts jointly to tackle the
most relevant task today, that is, the conclusion of the
electoral process and the appointment of the new head
of the executive, so as to serve all Haitians.

We welcome the intention of the Government to
ensure transparent and democratic elections, which are
to take place without any external intervention. We are
satisfied that technical preparations for this important
event over the past month have gone smoothly, and we
hope to see a successful finish to the electoral race.
Haiti cannot afford any fresh stalemates in the light
of the numerous social and economic issues facing
its people.

We wish also to express our concern regarding a
certain surge in the number of cholera cases. On the
one hand, we welcome the vigorous measures taken by
the United Nations to counter this dangerous disease
and overcome its impact. On the other hand, Port-au-
Prince must also do its part to deal with issues such the
provision of water as well as sanitation and health-care
services. Resolving these problems will depend not
only on outside financing but also on the efforts of local
administrative bodies. Another priority is providing
people with information about the disease and ways to
avoid infection. Indeed, forewarned is forearmed.

We would like to see the full implementation of
MINUSTAH's mandate. The capacity of the Haitian
National Police is ever- growing, and it has demonstrated
its ability and determination to ensure law and order. It
is encouraging that the rise in crime is being contained.
Any strikes are essentially for social and economic
reasons, just as in other countries of the world. The
police have been able to ensure control over mass
events; they still receive support from MINUSTAH but
in the near future should become fully operationally
independent, in line with national law.

We stand ready to carefully study the review of
the United Nations presence in the country, which
ideally should be carried out after the elections and
the swearing-in of the new President, and should
involve also an assessment of the professionalism
and number of Haitian National Police troops. We
hope that the document will contain information as
to the results of activities carried out in past years as
well as arrangements for a gradual drawdown of the
United Nations presence in the country. In the context
of preparations for this forthcoming stage, we need to
develop a plan for the transition period and persistently
strengthen MINUSTAH.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Haiti.

