Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the Head of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), Ms. Leila
Zerrougui, for her valuable briefing.

In my statement, Iwould like to address three issues:
first, the political situation; secondly, the security
situation; and thirdly, the humanitarian situation.

With regard to the political situation, we welcome
the positive steps taken by President Tshisekedi since
he took office. We commend his visits to Kenya,
Angola, Uganda, Rwanda, Burundi, Tanzania, Gabon
and Equatorial Guinea to enhance cooperation with
the countries of the region and to discuss stability,
security and peace. We also welcome the steps taken
by the President to open the political space by releasing
political detainees and guaranteeing freedom of speech.
Those positive steps reflect his commitment to creating
an environment conducive to development and reform.

We also welcome the fact that the President has
activated the National Oversight Mechanism of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region. We
commend him for focusing on reforming the justice
sector, fighting impunity and supporting disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes, and we
welcome the meeting held on 5 and 6 June in Kinshasa
at the initiative of the National Oversight Mechanism,
with the participation of the heads of intelligence and
security services of Uganda, Tanzania, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda. That meeting led to
the adoption of a number of recommendations to follow
a comprehensive approach to combat the capabilities
of armed groups in eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

We welcome the support provided at this very
important juncture by regional organizations such
as the African Union, the Economic Community of
Central African States, the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and the Southern African
Development Community, as well as all international
partners of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We hope that the support will continue throughout the
upcoming phase.

We call on all Congolese parties to give priority to the
public good and to support the Congolese Government
and the positive steps taken by the President. We call
on them to refrain from all acts of violence and to move
on to a new phase of reconstruction and development in
order to consolidate the gains achieved thus far.

As for the security situation, it has generally
improved in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
However, violence and armed conflict are still
ongoing and are cause for concern in some parts of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, especially in
the east, in North Kivu province, which is now seeing
armed escalation that is directly affecting the lives of
unarmed civilians and putting them in harm's way.

In addition, we are witnessing deliberate killings,
kidnappings and attacks on positions of Government
military forces and Ebola response centres. We call on
all parties that commit violent acts to refrain from doing
so in order to protect the lives of civilians and achieve
stability and security. We commend MONUSCO and
its personnel for their efforts to combat those armed
groups and ensure the protection of Congolese civilians.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, it
unfortunately remains dire in some areas as a result of
ongoing conflict among armed groups. Approximately
12 million people are still in need ofurgent humanitarian
assistance and approximately 13 million suffer from
food insecurity.

Chronic diseases, such as cholera and measles,
still persist in some parts of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in addition, of course, to the spread of
Ebola in North Kivu and Ituri provinces. We commend
the efforts of the Congolese Ministry of Health, in
coordination with the United Nations and the World
Health Organization, to fight Ebola and we call on
all armed groups to halt active violence in the areas
affected by Ebola. They must end such attacks,
especially those on health workers and facilities. We
hope to be able to eradicate Ebola once and for all in the
not-too-distant future.

In closing, we would like to express our
deepest gratitude to Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MONUSCO. We also thank all Mission personnel for
their tremendous efforts and for their continued support
to the Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

