Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The Philippines
associates itself with the statement to be delivered
by the representative of Viet Nam on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

The protection of civilians is at the front and
centre of the dialogue on peacekeeping operations.
It has been 20 years since an explicit mandate on
the protection of civilians was established for the
peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone. The late former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan called for a culture of
protection to permeate the United Nations system and
the mindset of those in the field. In 2015, what are now
the Departments of Peace Operations and Operational
Support defined the protection of civilians around three
tiers of protection - protection through dialogue and
engagement, the provision of physical protection and
the establishment of a protective environment.

In theory and practice, the protection of civilians
has gained traction among Member States and has
become a priority in nine United Nations peacekeeping
missions to which 95 per cent of peacekeepers are
currently deployed. However, the implementation of
the protection-of-civilians mandate is beset by three
key challenges. First, missions tend to implement the
protection-of-civilians mandate in a process-oriented
way or based on activities; secondly, there is a disconnect
between the protection of civilians and political
strategy; and thirdly, there is the question of how to
apply a whole-of-mission strategy, which involves the
political, civilian, military and police components,
in order to pursue a protection-of-civilians mandate.
We are hopeful that those challenges will be clearly
addressed by the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under the
Secretary-General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative,
adopted by 151 Member States in September.

We commend Indonesia, in its presidency of the
Security Council, for today's ministerial-level open
debate on the subject, an appropriate follow-up to the
open debate on investing in peace (see S/PV.8521)
held two weeks ago. Much is expected of the mandate
giving first priority to the protection of civilians in
peacekeeping, with an emphasis on the protection of
children and on combating sexual exploitation and
abuse. As it should be, it is the standard by which
the performance of United Nations peacekeeping is
measured, affecting its legitimacy and credibility. The
Philippines reiterates its support for Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions that underscore the
principal issue of preventing conflicts and protecting
civilians if conflict does break out. We would like to
make the following suggestions.

First, predeployment training should be incentivized
to draw on existing policy, guidance and training
resources to explain what the protection of civilians
means in a given operational context, defining the
responsibilities, opportunities and constraints that
peacekeepers deployed in that context face. The
Philippines encourages Member States to host centres
of excellence by region to deliver training packages
to troop- and police-contributing countries consistent
with United Nations standards.

Secondly, the Philippines encourages the
deployment of more women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, including in positions of
command. The Philippines has an all-female civilian-
relations company from the Armed Forces of the
Philippines and the Philippine National Police to assist
in the rehabilitation and recovery of internally displaced
persons from the Marawi crisis. They complement
peacekeeping operations by helping internally displaced
persons, conducting peace education and extending
psychosocial debriefing among the traumatized,
particularly women, children and young people.
Finally, the Philippines calls on the Secretary-
General and Member States to promote unarmed
strategies and unarmed civilian protection as a key
complement to the protection-of-civilians toolkit - no
arms, no mistaken intentions and therefore no excuses.
The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process acknowledges civil society's active role in
bringing peace to Mindanao through, for example,
Ceasefire Watch, Spaces for Peace, Mothers for Peace
and Tiyakap Kalilintad, or Care for Peace, which partner
with Government agencies. In 2009, the Philippine
Government and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
agreed to expand the mandate of the international
monitoring team to include civilian protection. That
civilian-based ceasefire monitoring and response
is a model for other countries in conflict. Grass-
roots leaders from various countries have travelled
to Mindanao to learn more about it on the ground. In
May 2017, the Government of the Philippines and the
Moro Islamic Liberation Front established a peace
corridor to first provide a safe and secure corridor for
the rescue of trapped individuals in conflict areas, and
secondly to provide a secure space for humanitarian
assistance to pass through the province most affected
by the Marawi crisis. At the end of its operations in
Marawi, a total of 255 civilians were rescued and safe
passage of aid was provided to many Government and
humanitarian organizations.

I want to conclude by noting that an effective
protection-of-civilians mandate must be anchored
in human rights and international humanitarian law,
particularly with regard to vulnerable groups, as well
as in adherence to the principles of accountability,
conflict sensitivity and peacebuilding.

