Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to welcome the presence of His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia
and of Mrs. Vlora Citaku, the representative of Kosovo,
who have come to the Council with important
statements that merit our full attention and
consideration. I also appreciate the comprehensive
briefing presented by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, which attests
to the importance of the mandate and the significant
contribution of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights in that country in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

Colombia has followed with interest the recent
election and institution-building activities in Kosovo.
We believe that effective democracy is essential to
strengthening governance, generating citizen trust and
promoting an atmosphere of greater harmony among
Kosovars of all ethnicities, as well as to the continued
improvement in relations with the countries of the
region.

We share the concerns with regard to the impact
that events surrounding the elections on 12 December
2010, referred to in the report (S/201l/43) of the
Secretary-General, could have on the evolution of the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade. Colombia
hopes that the firm commitment expressed by both
sides is reflected in concrete steps by taking advantage
of the European Union's readiness to facilitate the
process, which the General Assembly welcomed last
September in its resolution 64/298.

That regional support could help bring together
Pristina and Belgrade and provide broader perspectives
for addressing issues and differences between the two
countries, taking into account the experience and
participation of regional organizations in the
stabilization process of Kosovo in support of UNMIK'
mandate.

Yesterday we had an opportunity to listen to the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania (see S/PV.6481), who in his capacity as Chairman-in-Office
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe referred to some of his organization's
contributions in Kosovo. Likewise, the Secretary-
General's report and Mr. Zannier's briefing have
highlighted UNMIK's cooperation and coordination
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo and with NATO's International Security F orce.
In that context, it is appropriate for the Security
Council to decisively support the process of dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade while also continuing to
promote efforts to encourage an environment of
political, social and multicultural stability throughout
Kosovo.

The Secretary-General's report refers to the
recurrence of incidents and tension of ethnic nature,
especially in Northern Kosovo. It is imperative to
ensure adequate respect and coordination by Kosovo's
authorities with regard to UNMIK's competencies
throughout the entire territory, including the northern
area of the country. In addition, strategies that foster
increased contacts and exchanges among the different
communities should be agreed upon. The positive
experiences with regard to interreligious dialogue and
the reconstruction and preservation of cultural heritage
on the ground in Kosovo are avenues that should be
further explored towards more harmonious coexistence.

Colombia considers very serious the references to
the possible commission of war crimes related to illicit
trafficking in human organs in Kosovo. The Security
Council should evaluate this issue against the backdrop
of the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and the value of justice in the
promotion of peace, and then determine the course to
be pursued.

Colombia supports the work of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
aimed at consolidating an enabling political, social and
economic environment in the country that leads to
definitive peace and stability in the Balkans.

