Mr. Ahu Odeh (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
Let me begin, Sir, by congratulating you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and by expressing my country's full confidence
that you will guide the Council's work in such a way as to
guarantee its success.

I take this opportunity also to express my delegation's
respect for your predecessor, His Excellency Ambassador
Karel Kovanda of the Czech Republic, who guided the
Council's work so skilfully last month.

I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting
to discuss the threat to peace and stability and to the peace
process arising from the Israeli Govemment's recent
decision to confiscate additional Palestinian lands in
Jerusalem and to build settlements on them. As we
participate in the discussion, we reaffirm our strong beliefs:
Jordan is participating because it is genuinely dedicated to
peace and does not wish to destabilize that peace or call it
into question. In fact, only seven months ago Jordan signed
a peace treaty with Israel, and is today working with Israel
to implement its provisions, through measures that have
already been adopted, measures that are now being
adopted and through agreements on cooperation between
our two countries.

Members of the Council know that the Madrid Peace
Conference, the ensuing negotiations, the Declaration of
Principles signed by the Palestine Liberation Organization
and Israel in September 1993 and the peace treaty signed
by Jordan and Israel in October 1994 all came about with
the blessing and the support of the United Nations.
Moreover, the United Nations has always attached great
importance also to relations between Lebanon and Israel
and between Syria and Israel; it continues to declare its
commitment to the success of those two processes,
especially since hope has arisen among the peoples of the
world that the Middle East will soon achieve the peace
and stability that it has lacked for decades.

In Jordan's view, peace must be comprehensive, just
and lasting. This concept accords with the United Nations
concept of the peace we hope to see in the Middle East
and with the stated Israeli concept of that peace. Yet it is
clearly a grave event that has obliged Arab and Islamic
States to bring the question of Jerusalem to the Security
Council, even as the peace process that began in Madrid
continues.

What is at stake here? In February the Security
Council met to discuss Israeli violations of the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949 because the Israeli
Government was continuing its policy of establishing
settlements on Palestinian territory. Unfortunately, the
Council was unable then to adopt an appropriate
resolution and limited itself to a discussion. Less than
three months later the Council is meeting again,
compelled to discuss similar violations by the same party.
But what is new this time is that this violation of the
Fourth Geneva Convention is taking place in Jerusalem.

The Council will be aware that this is not the Israeli
Government's first violation of international law in
Jerusalem. Indeed, since Israel's illegal 1967 occupation
and annexation of Jerusalem, the Israeli Government has
persisted in the Judaization of the city. This Judaization
takes the form of confiscating Palestinian lands, of
tightening the noose around the Palestinian population, of
establishing settlements and residential areas, and of
relocating Israeli settlers to those settlements and areas,
not to mention the Israeli Government's excavations in
the precincts of the Al-Aqsa mosque.

 

Following each such Israeli action, Arab countries
have complained to the Security Council; in response to
each complaint, the Council has adopted a resolution. This
has been going on for some 28 years: Israeli expansion;
Arab complaint; Security Council resolution. The Council's
resolutions attest not only to Israel's violations of the
Fourth Geneva Convention, but also to Israel's stubborn
persistence in its policy of the Judaization of Al-Quds Al-
Sharif and its determination to continue such violations.

To be fair to Israel, it must be recognized that it does
not conceal its ultimate goal - hence the continued
violations. Successive Israeli Governments have always
stated that the Holy City of Jerusalem, above all its eastern
part, is a part of "Yerushalaim, the eternal and united
capital of the State of Israel".

The confiscation of Palestinian land there has gone
beyond the question of individuals or individual rights. At
stake is the very future of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. This is an
international issue. The situation is therefore clear. There is
an occupying authority which knows that the annexation of
the eastern part of Jerusalem is legally null and void and is
therefore trying to create a new reality on that land which
reflects the Jewish nature of the city. Moreover, all the
declarations of the municipality of Jerusalem regarding the
developments in the numbers of Israeli and Palestinian
residents of the city are merely periodic summaries of the
progress Israel has made in the its Judaization of that city,
with the aim of implementing its stated final goal of
integrating the eastern part of Jerusalem into "Yerushalaim,
the eternal capital of the State of Israel".

Does the plan for implementing that objective accord
with the wishes of the United Nations and Israel's
statements, as well as with the principles to which the
Palestinian party is dedicated and the aspirations of those
Arab States that have signed peace treaties with Israel or
other Arab States that are continuing to negotiate with it?
Has that ultimate goal - the achievement of a just, lasting
and comprehensive peace - been implemented? I sincerely
doubt it, as I doubt that the peace can be a lasting one.

Indeed, Jerusalem represents the same thing to Arabs
and Muslims as it does to Israelis and Israel. It is not
merely a question of land and population: it is also a
question of beliefs. Because of this particular and unique
blend, the city has, in the collective consciousness of Arabs
and Muslims, become an integral part of their personality,
dignity, heritage and culture. Thus, how can we
envisage the achievement of a lasting peace - and I insist
on the word "lasting" - when the dignity of the nation is
flouted and its legacy cut off? How can we establish
natural and normal relations between Arab countries and
the Israeli people in the present circumstances? A peace
based on such an imbalance can only be an armistice.
History is replete with such examples, including the
history of our region, which is sincerely and genuinely
trying to establish a lasting peace.

How can one leave the solution to a problem such as
that of eastern Jerusalem to the whims of politicians
whose sole aim is to be re-elected for four more years
rather than to dedicate themselves to their national
interests and the peace and security of their people? If we
were to accept that, then it would be better to deplore
peace than to glorify it. If we were to do that, we would
not in fact be achieving peace: we would be limiting
ourselves to empty words.

Of course, I would have preferred not to go into
historical and cultural details concerning Jerusalem, but
the statements of the Permanent Representative of Israel
at this meeting have compelled me to do so. There are
Jewish psalms and songs glorifying Jerusalem, but there
are also dozens of Arab poems and songs which do the
same thing. Moreover, it is well known that the Al-Aqsa
mosque and its surroundings - namely Jerusalem - are
mentioned in the Koran and the Hadith. For those here
who are unaware of it, the verses of the Koran represent
the words of God Almighty and not remarks made by
historians or folklore handed down by storytellers.
As for the attempt of our Israeli colleague to
convince us that Jerusalem can only be Jewish because
there has been a continuous Jewish presence there for
3,000 years and because the city has only been the capital
of the Jews - this is not true. Indeed, the Jewish
presence in the city has not been maintained continuously
for 3,000 years. Quite the contrary, that presence was
interrupted by the exile in Babylon, for example, and by
the Byzantine domination of the city. When the gates of
Jerusalem were opened by the Caliph Omar Bin Al-
Khatab during the first half of the seventh century, we
know that one of the demands made of the Muslims by
the Orthodox Patriarch Saphronius was to prevent the
Jews from living in Jerusalem. The aim of the Patriarch
in making that demand was to ensure that the Muslims
would maintain the Byzantine policy of keeping the Jews
outside the city.

In the light of this debate, it is paradoxical that today
it is the Muslims themselves who have allowed the Jews
to reside in Jerusalem. When the eleventh century

 

Kingdom of Jerusalem was established, there were no
Muslims and Jews left in the city except those very few
who had escaped the massacres perpetrated by the
Crusaders and had accepted menial jobs in order to survive.

Thus, Jerusalem was the capital of the Jews for less
than 100 years, before the rule of the Greeks and Romans
and the emergence of Christianity.

Why did the Muslims never make the city a capital
when it was under their domination for nearly 1,200 years,
with the obvious exception of the era of the Crusades and
the time of the British Mandate over Palestine after the
First World War? Why was it never the Muslim capital?
Up to this very day, the Muslims have never even declared
Mecca to be a capital. We know, for example, that Riyadh,
and not the Holy City of Mecca - where Mohammed, the
Prophet of Islam, was born - is the capital of Saudi
Arabia. It is there that his first revelation was granted him.
The city of Mecca is the location of the Kaaba, the Holy
City to which all Muslims direct their prayers, wherever
they may be across the globe. It is there that they carry out
their pilgrimage, regardless of their race or colour. They
carry out the amra throughout the year. The Prophet
himself did not make the Holy City of Mecca a capital
even after he had conquered it, nor did the four Well-
Guided Caliphs, who came after him. The Muslims,
therefore, did not make Jerusalem their capital. The famous
Muslim leader Amr Bin Alas, who reigned over southern
and central Palestine after the departure of the Byzantines
in the seventh century, chose the city of Lod, one day's
horseback ride from Jerusalem, as the administrative centre
of his region. He did not choose Jerusalem.

The Umayyads later also moved the administrative
centre to Ramallah, which is very close to Lod. They did
not choose Jerusalem. However, they were the ones who
created the Dome of the Rock and the Mosque itself, which
today is a historical monument in East Jerusalem.

Would it not have been easier to choose Jerusalem as
the administrative centre rather than Lod or Ramallah?
Nothing prevented them from doing so except one very
important thing: their acute feeling for and perfect
understanding of the need to keep the political and
administrative centre of the State away from the Holy
Places, which are visited by pilgrims from both within and
outside the region. One might, of course, have hoped that
today's politicians would have achieved that level of
understanding.

I say this not to deny the attachment of the Jews to
Jerusalem but rather to suggest that Muslim and Christian
Arabs were perhaps even more attached to the city. The
concept of exclusivity is a very serious one, for it hinders
the achievement of a balanced solution to the question of
Jerusalem in both its political and religious aspects. Such
a solution is possible, and it is crucial. Having the Israeli
capital in West Jerusalem and the Palestinian capital in
East Jerusalem is a problem that can be resolved. Indeed,
Jerusalem is the key to a lasting peace and to the
achievement of a just and balanced solution.

Between 1948, when the State of Israel was
established, and 1967, when Israel occupied East
Jerusalem by force, the Israelis had sovereignty over West
Jerusalem and the Arabs over East Jerusalem, including
the Holy Places of the three revealed religions, one of
which is the Wall. Since peace did not prevail at the time
in the region, the Israelis were prevented from visiting the
Wailing Wall, just as the Arab Christians could not Visit
the city of Nazareth in Israel. This also means that
political sovereignty was not a problem: there was Israeli
sovereignty over the West and Arab sovereignty over the
East political sovereignty was thus not restricted to one
party to the exclusion of the other: each side had
inclusive, not exclusive, sovereignty.

But today, we see Israel trying to annex East
Jerusalem and to make Yerushalaim the united capital of
Israel. This is an attempt to reverse the course of events
and to revert to the situation as it was before the war of
1967 in order to make political sovereignty over
Yerushalaim and East Al-Quds exclusive while keeping
the non-Jewish Holy Places inaccessible to Arabs. This is
exactly the situation pre-1967. Just as that situation was
unbalanced, so is the one now: the only difference is that
the imbalance then resulted from the state of war, while
today Israel itself is contributing to it - even now there
is peace.

How then can we achieve the peace we desire when
peace alone is still not enough? The Palestinian and
Israeli negotiators decided in Oslo to defer discussions on
the status of Jerusalem to a later stage. We believed that
this could be done and were very hopeful that a just and
balanced solution to all questions, including that of
Jerusalem, could be achieved. We believed that the
question had been deferred because of its complexity and
that confidence would be created between the two parties
in order to achieve a balanced solution. We would never
have believed that the Declaration of Principles could be
transformed into a wall that some could hide behind while

 

others threatened it by threatening the peace process itself.
And we never would have believed that deferring the
question of Jerusalem could be an opportunity for Israel to
continue to Judaize East Jerusalem by imposing a fait
accompli on the Palestinians, the Arabs and the world until
such time as the question is ultimately debated.

In this light, I believe that this meeting of the Council
is extremely important, for a very serious problem is at
stake. It has its origins in the Israeli measure, which
threatens peace and security in the Middle East because it
contravenes Security Council resolution 242 (1967) - the
very basis of the peace process that is under way - and
other relevant resolutions of the Security Council. This
measure also violates the Fourth Geneva Convention of
1949 in its most sensitive aspects and distort the spirit and
the letter of the Oslo agreements.

Finally, out of respect to the obligations that you, Sir,
are shouldering in this Council under the provisions of the
Charter and given the policy of preventive diplomacy
adopted by the international community, to avoid friction
that might strike sparks and touch off a conflagration in the
region and to express our wish that the present negotiations
culminate in a comprehensive, lasting and genuine peace,
my delegation hopes that this Council will fully shoulder all
its responsibilities and will adopt and implement the draft
resolution before it.

