The President (spoke in French): After
consultations among members of the Security Council,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, bearing in mind its
primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
acknowledges the importance of the settlement of
disputes by peaceful means and promoting
necessary preventive action in response to threats
to international peace and security.

"The Security Council recognizes the
important role of regional organizations in the

07-4920]
prevention, management and resolution of
conflicts in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations as well as its
relevant resolutions and Presidential statements.
In this regard it welcomes the increasing
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union.

"The Security Council recalls that the
prevention of conflict remains a primary
responsibility of Member States.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 1625 (2005) on
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa,
requests the Secretary-General to report to the
Council within sixty days on options for further
implementation of its resolution 1625 (2005), and
recalls the relevant Presidential statements, in
particular S/PRST/2006/39, S/PRST/2006/45,
S/PRST/2006/57, S/PRST/2007/1, S/PRST/2007/3,
S/PRST/2007/7, S/PRST/2007/22 and S/PRST/2007/24.

"The Security Council also stresses the need
to carry out efforts to increase women's
participation as contributors and beneficiaries in
conflict prevention and peacebuilding. In this
regard, it calls for the further implementation of
its resolution 1325 (2000).

"The Security Council notes the varied
nature of conflicts, which involve not only
conflicts between States and within States, but
also new emerging threats, and thus reiterates its
determination to strengthen its role in preventing
and resolving conflict in all its forms.

"The Security Council recalls its previous
Presidential statements concerning the various
factors and causes that play a role in inciting,
worsening or prolonging conflicts in Africa, and
in particular the factors and causes that have been
highlighted and addressed by the Council.

"The Security Council supports the
comprehensive and global approach
recommended by the Secretary-General in his
report on the prevention of armed conflict
(A/60/891), namely: structural prevention, to
address the root causes of conflict; operational
prevention, to ensure the effective operation of
early warning mechanisms, mediation,
humanitarian access and response, the protection
of civilians and targeted sanctions in the face of
immediate crises; and systemic prevention, to
prevent existing conflicts from spilling over into
other States.

"In this context, effective coordination
between and within United Nations organs,
programmes, funds and agencies involved in
policy formulation and implementation is vital
for ensuring better coherence of the existing
mechanisms and the appropriate balance between
peacekeeping operations and preventive
activities. Such coordination should be
undertaken taking into consideration the ongoing
debate on how to improve systemic coherence
within the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes recent
developments regarding the long-term prevention
of conflict, including best practice and policy
work on: security sector reform; disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration; transitional
justice and the rule of law; electoral practices;
peacebuilding; democratic governance;
development; humanitarian assistance and
protection; and the safe and voluntary return of
refugees and internally displaced persons. The
Council encourages further progress and greater
coherence on these issues, and requests the
Secretary-General to include in the report
requested above proposals for how better to
coordinate the positions and expertise of the
relevant United Nations organs, programmes,
funds and agencies, including through regular
interaction with the Member States.

"The Security Council notes the
recommendations in the report of the Secretary-
General on the prevention of armed conflict,
(A/60/891) welcomes the efforts that have been
made to strengthen the risk assessment and
conflict prevention capacities of the United
Nations, and encourages the Secretary-General to
continue those efforts in order to improve the
United Nations' early warning, mediation support
and other preventive activities in Africa and
around the world. In this connection, the Security
Council stresses the crucial role of the Special
Advisers to the Secretary-General on the
Prevention of Genocide and Mass Atrocities and
on matters relating to the prevention and
20

resolution of conflict as well as, where
appropriate, the contribution of United Nations
bodies such as the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Human Rights Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact
that the Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution, particularly in Africa, has taken
the initiative of giving greater thought to these
questions and taken a special interest in the
problem of the elaboration of an effective global
conflict prevention strategy - the subject of a
seminar to be held in November 2007.

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of a regional approach to conflict
prevention, as applicable, and in this connection
welcomes the growing contribution being made
by regional organizations in addressing issues of
peace and security, and looks forward to the
report of the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the relevant regional organizations, in
particular the African Union, and pursuant to
PRST/2007/7, on specific proposals on how the
United Nations can better support arrangements
for further cooperation and coordination with
regional organizations on Chapter VIII
arrangements, in order to contribute significantly
to the common security challenges in the areas of
concern and to promote the deepening and
broadening of dialogue and cooperation between
the Security Council and the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union.

"The Security Council underlines the need
for a stronger and more structured relationship
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union,
contributing to the achievement of the goals of
peace and stability in the context of the
arrangements provided for in Chapter VIII of the
Charter. The Council thus welcomes the
agreement reached between the United Nations
and the African Union at Addis Ababa on 16
November 2006 which consolidates the basis of
partnership necessary to address the underlying
causes of conflict. The Council also reaffirms the
joint communique agreed with the African Union
Peace and Security Council on 16 June 2007
(S/2007/386).

"The Security Council welcomes the work
done by the African Union to set up its Panel of
the Wise and Continental Early Warning System,
which are key components of the African Peace
and Security Architecture.

"The Security Council also recognizes the
important contribution of subregional bodies and
underscores the need for African subregional
bodies to enhance their capacities in early
warning and conflict prevention in order to allow
these important actors to respond more promptly
to the emerging threats to security in their areas.

"At the same time, the Security Council
encourages Member States to make further efforts
to ensure adequate consultation between civil
society and national institutions, on the one hand,
and the United Nations and the international
community, on the other hand, so as to be better
equipped to address the global character of
questions of peace and security".

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/31.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m.

07-4920]
