The President: Before we go on to the item on
the agenda I would like to tell members of the Council
that because of other business as President of the
Security Council, I shall have to be vacating the chair
at about 10.20, and my colleague Hilary Benn, Minister
in the Department of International Development, will
be taking it for that short period.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

Justice and the rule of law are vital for the proper
functioning of States. They are essential elements in
creating and sustaining stable, peaceful and democratic
States, so our theme today is important and fundamental.

The United Nations and this Council have long
wrestled with the challenges of bringing countries out
of conflict and into societies based on justice and the
rule of law. The United Nations family as a whole has
much expertise and experience on these issues. The
debate is therefore an opportunity to affirm again the
central importance of the rule of law and justice in the
work of the United Nations. It is also, I hope, the start
of a process. On 30 September there will be an open
meeting of the Council, and that will be followed by
further meetings, which we hope will involve the wider
United Nations family.

In sharing and learning from experience, our aim
in the presidency is practical. How can the
international community be better prepared to support
States coming out of conflict? Can we anticipate better,
and in an integrated way, the need to make laws, to
establish judiciaries and to police and implement laws
so that we can maximize the chances of States
succeeding in their transformation to justice and
stability? I invite my colleagues here today to offer
their comments and analyses of what the Council has
achieved in the past and to offer thoughts and advice
on how the Council and the wider United Nations
system should address these issues in the future.

In view of the demanding schedule of all
participants, I should like to remind Council members
of the understanding reached among ourselves to limit
our statements to eight minutes each. I thank you very
much for your understanding and support on that.

I give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan.

