Nana Akufo-Addo: I must begin, in the name of
the Chairman of the Authority of Heads of State and
Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), His Excellency John
Agyekum Kufuor, President of the Republic of Ghana,
and the leaders and peoples of the Community, by
thanking the Secretary-General for the report before
the Security Council (S/2004/200) and for the occasion
it affords us to discuss before the Council the matters
dominating the life of the Community.

This report attempts to analyse the problems of
West Africa in all their manifold expressions, and
while not entirely perfect, it certainly provides much
food for thought.

I would also like to thank the Security Council
for the continuous efforts it has been making to find
long-lasting solutions to the myriad of problems that
have rocked West Africa and undermined peace,
security and development there for the past two
decades. The timeliness of this special meeting cannot
be overemphasized, given the precarious security
situation in our region, which has until recently been
one of the most volatile and conflict-prone areas in the
world.

The security situation in West Africa today,
however, engenders both cautious optimism and
justified concern. While there has been commendable
progress - the ending of Sierra Leone's decade-long
civil war and the holding of successful elections in that
country in May 2002, as well as progress in other
countries such as Ghana, Nigeria, Benin, Mali and
Senegal - continuing instability in other parts of the
region threatens the peace of the area.

Conflict and misery in one State tend to spill over
into the territories of its neighbours, due to the
resultant problems of internally displaced persons and
refugees and the transborder movement of guerrilla
groups and mercenaries. The spill-over of instability in
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau and, lately, Cote
d'Ivoire has been a major source of concern for the
leaders in the region.

Political turmoil and civil conflicts, and their
potential for the rapid spread of instability within the
region, have underlined the need for the development
of a comprehensive approach which would focus,
through a range of activities, on addressing the many
interlinked root causes of these problems.

This understanding led to the adoption of a
"declaration on a subregional approach to peace and
security" by the heads of State and Government of
member States at a meeting held in Abuja on 28 May
2003, in which the leaders of ECOWAS reaffirmed
their determination to strengthen peace and stability in
West Africa; reaffirmed the importance of a concerted
regional approach to the resolution of the crises
affecting the region and impeding integration efforts;
re-energized their collective efforts to restore and
preserve security in the region; reaffirmed their
commitment to abide strictly by the ECOWAS
Moratorium on the Importation, Exportation and
Manufacture of Light Weapons and the provisions of
the United Nations and Africa Union conventions on
banning, recruitment, use, financing and training of
mercenaries; and undertook to ban the recruitment and
training of militias and irregular armed groups,
reiterating their determination to take all measures to
fight conscription and use of child soldiers and to
demobilize them.

Furthermore, the leaders adopted certain key
instruments to govern their conduct, which are fully set
out in the printed version of my presentation.

While noting the report of the Secretary-General
and the efforts that the United Nations system
continues to make to help ECOWAS solve the
problems of the region, we would like, with the
Council's indulgence, to raise some concerns for the
consideration of the Council.

Without wishing to sound in the least churlish, it
is nonetheless somewhat disheartening to note that the
United Nations Office for West Africa, which was set
up to help the region deal with its problems, seems to
have consulted more with national government
organizations and civil society groups in preparing the
report, and made no such effort to consult with member
States or the ECOWAS secretariat. This is an anomaly
which should not be repeated.

Relations between Liberia and the other members
of the Mano River Union, namely, Guinea and Sierra
Leone, have been very poor owing to suspicion and
mistrust. With the war over in Sierra Leone and Liberia
and democracy gradually being restored, ECOWAS is
hopeful that the persistent suspicions between the
leaders will be a thing of the past, to be replaced by
understanding and goodwill.

The Secretary-General's recommendations for
joint security patrols and common border management
are, thus, laudable. As our borders are porous, any
breach of the peace in a neighbouring country will
open the uncontrollable floodgates of people and arms
into other countries. Therefore, ECOWAS believes that
the best solution is to find a way to restore peace to the
entire region. Thus it is strongly recommended that we
consider how to bring permanent peace to the countries
of the Mano River Union and Cote d'Ivoire.

For instance, the drawdown of the United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), which began last
year, is expected to be concluded by the end of this
year. Although a lot has been achieved with regard to
the five benchmarks set by the Council, a great deal

still needs to be done. There is the need to ensure that
UNAMSIL's withdrawal continues to take into account
the Sierra Leone Government's ability to assume its
primary responsibility for the nation's overall security,
to enhance control of natural resources and to
consolidate civil administration throughout the country.

Towards this goal, ECOWAS has identified some
potential destabilizing factors, including the possible
return of Sierra Leonean ex-combatants from Liberia.
In the context of the regional approach to peace and
stability, it is vital that UNAMSIL continues to monitor
the movement of armed elements along Liberia's
borders in order to prevent incursions - a particularly
important task - at a time when the United Nations
Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has launched that
country's disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme.

The successful disarmament of the combatants by
UNMIL is about to resume, following the construction
of containment sites. There is the heightened
expectation from Liberians that successful
disarmament will be carried out. However, there is no
doubt that for successful disarmament in Liberia, there
must be the whole-hearted commitment of the leaders
of the neighbouring countries of Cote d'Ivoire, Sierra
Leone and Guinea. The United Nations Office for West
Africa should be seized with this assignment and be
actively involved in getting those leaders to stay
actively engaged in that disarmament process to its
very end. Their involvement will help UNMIL to
monitor the possible concealment of arms in the
territory of Liberia's neighbouring States.

The Security Council should, furthermore,
recognize the importance of the linkage between
establishing peace in Liberia and consolidating
stability in Sierra Leone and the Mano River Union
subregion. The disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme in Sierra Leone should be
thoroughly assessed by the United Nations system. A
sudden and total withdrawal of UNAMSIL would
represent a factor of destabilization for the region. The
withdrawal should be progressive to avoid jeopardizing
the fragile situation in Sierra Leone. Considering the
porous nature of our borders, ECOWAS believes that
UNAMSIL should remain in Sierra Leone until the end
of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
processes in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire, when a region
free of armaments is achieved. This is the surest
guarantee for lasting peace in the Mano River Union.

To date, the implementation of the ECOWAS
Moratorium has made a considerable advance even
though there remains a lot to be accomplished. The
absence of an ECOWAS structure on small arms and
light weapons within the Executive Secretariat makes it
difficult for ECOWAS to exercise its political
ownership of the Moratorium. Indeed, the experience
gained within the Moratorium's five years of existence
and its evaluation has enabled relevant lessons to be
drawn regarding the mode of its implementation.
Therefore, to alleviate the structural, political and
financial problems in the implementation of the
Moratorium, ECOWAS has established a Small Arms
Unit in the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat.

The establishment of the Unit is expected to
strengthen the ECOWAS political ownership in the
implementation of the Moratorium. Furthermore, it will
reinforce the ECOWAS Executive Secretariat's
institutional capacities to implement effectively the
Moratorium.

The Unit will perform a whole host of tasks,
which are fully set out in the printed version of this
presentation. To reinforce the institutional capacities
the Unit will send missions to member States to ensure
that existing national arms production is brought to a
halt in conformity with the spirit of the Moratorium. In
order to enhance transparency, it will provide the
ECOWAS secretariat with an annual report on the
ordering or procurement of weapons, components and
ammunition covered by the Moratorium, from both
national and international sources. It will develop
procedures for inter-State cooperation between the
agencies responsible for customs and law and order on
the one hand, and all other relevant officials involved
in monitoring and implementing the Moratorium on the
other, and will develop guidelines for intra-State
cooperation among those officials.

It is also expected to develop and implement an
information strategy in support of the Moratorium,
incorporating and building on the activities that are
already under way. The strategy will enhance
understanding of the support for the Moratorium within
the ECOWAS region, throughout Africa, and among
international organizations and potential external
funding partners.

Paragraphs 1 and 2 of article 51 of the Protocol
Relating to the Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management, Resolution, Peacekeeping and Security
states that ECOWAS shall take all the necessary
measures to combat illicit trafficking and circulation of
small arms and that ECOWAS shall strengthen its
institutional and operational capabilities and those of
its member States for the effective implementation of
those measures.

Therefore, the idea of settling up a Small Arms
Unit is not to replace the Programme for Coordination
and Assistance for Security and Development
(PCASED), but to reflect better the ownership of the
Moratorium on Small Arms by the secretariat. It will
work in full collaboration with the PCASED
secretariat. Although there is a moratorium on small
arms and light weapons regulations, it is about time we
considered the regulation of external weapon suppliers
to strengthen the fight against proliferation.

The last three years of the Programme for
Coordination and Assistance for Security and
Development have seen eight more national
commissions being established. So far, only Liberia
and Cote d'Ivoire are yet to set up their national
commissions. We would, however, call for support in
the area of equipment and other resources for the
strengthening of the commissions.

Efforts are continuing to ensure the effective
take-off of the Department of Political Affairs, Defence
and Security. Directors have been appointed for the
Political Affairs, Humanitarian Affairs and Defence
and Security Departments and for the Observation and
Monitoring Centre.

Regarding the four zonal bureaux, located in
Banjul, Ouagadougou, Monrovia and Cotonou, the
procedure for the recruitment of a limited number of
staff members will be completed with the assumption
of duty of the zone-3 - Monrovia - support staff.
However, the staff of the zonal bureaux will require
special working tools and specialized training in order
to be in a position to carry out their duties effectively.

We are aware of the persistent complaints about
the obstacles and frustrations of all kinds that travellers
and business people go through. The reality, as has
been borne out by victims of such a situation, is that
the ground operators at our borders have not
demonstrated the expected commitment and, perhaps,
the inherent sacrifice that go with the performance of
their functions. Let me assure the Council that we are
driving home as forcefully as we can the ultimate
benefits of systematic economic activities and their
positive implications for citizens of member countries
as well as for integration. This requires intensive public
education, integration, dissemination, sensitization and
reorientation with respect to our attitudes as well as to
our policies and programmes.

ECOWAS has also accepted a role for civil
society in developing its conflict mechanism. In fact,
civil society's potential to provide information on
conflict trends played an important role in creating the
ECOWAS early warning observatory, ECOWATCH.
Yet, as much as ECOWATCH depends on civil
society's involvement to increase its effectiveness, the
capacity of civil society to remain involved in these
efforts is still uncertain. The financial weakness of
most civil society groups in West Africa continues to
limit their ability to contribute more effectively to the
ECOWAS early warning system. The progressive
improvement in the work of the Council of Elders, an
important mediatory body composed of eminent
citizens of the Community, will also serve to
strengthen the operations of an early warning system.

Incomplete disarmament and demobilization, as
well as the transformation of militia and rebels into
national armies without the requisite training, greatly
contribute to the deterioration and degeneration of the
security situation. It should, however, be understood
that security sector reform should not encompass only
military issues. We in ECOWAS want to consider
human and economic security issues as well.

Achieving lasting peace in the region is the most
serious challenge to be met in order to ensure
integration and development. In 2003 alone, the
Community and its friends devoted considerable
amounts of human and financial resources to conflict
resolution in the region. The direct consequences of the
conflicts on the economies of crisis-torn countries have
served as a constant reminder to us that we need to do
everything in our power to find a lasting solution to the
conflicts. Conflict prevention and resolution, as well as
peace-building, are our watchword as we formulate
strategies for 2004 so as to create a region where peace
will finally reign supreme.

The Economic Community of West African States
is confident that it can, as usual, rely on the unflinching
support of the Security Council in its efforts to secure
lasting peace and stability in the region, and appreciate
the initiatives of the Security Council in this regard.

The peoples of West Africa continue to manifest
their determination to participate in the global
movement for the universal establishment of the values
of democratic accountability, respect for human rights
and the rule of law. They are also increasingly exacting
the acceptance of these values from their leaders, a new
generation of whom is emerging to help build a new
West Africa on modern and progressive principles.
They need the Council's support at this difficult stage
of their development, and I can assure members that,
ultimately, they will not let the Council or the global
community down.

Once again, we thank the Council for its deep
interest in the preservation of peace and security in
West Africa.

