Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to thank our briefers, beginning with
Mark Lowcock for his very useful briefing. I commend
his teams for their outstanding work in responding to
the humanitarian emergency in Syria. I would also
like to thank the Executive Director of the Syrian
American Medical Society for his very enlightening
briefing. It is clear - we are indeed witnessing another
humanitarian disaster in north-west Syria. We also
took note of the information conveyed by the Russian
Reconciliation Centre for Syria. Now more than ever,
we must focus our efforts on three priorities, namely,
the preservation of the ceasefire in Idlib, respect for
international humanitarian law and the quest for a
lasting political solution.

First, preserving the ceasefire in Idlib is an absolute
imperative. Given that another tragedy is unfolding in
the north-west of the country, we must do everything
in our power to prevent Idlib from becoming another
Aleppo - the lives of more than 3 million civilians,
including 1 million children, are at stake. We strongly
condemn the strikes that have indiscriminately targeted
the city of Idlib and its population in recent days. The
risk of escalation is at its peak, as illustrated by the
regime's attacks on Turkish patrols this month.

We call on the signatories to the ceasefire agreement
to honour their commitments and ensure an effective
ceasefire in the north-west, the end of hostilities and
a nationwide ceasefire, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015). Russia in particular must exert all the
necessary pressure on the regime to return to the front
lines agreed in Sochi. Discussions between Turkey and
Russia must also continue to allow for an immediate
de-escalation of the situation. Iran must also play its
part. We hope that upcoming deadlines set by the
international community will enable substantial and
lasting progress to be made on the situation in Idlib.
In addition, I reiterate that, in the event that chemical
weapons are used again, France will be extremely firm
and stands ready to act.

Secondly, respect for international humanitarian
law is binding on everyone and not negotiable. I would
like to recall two absolute priorities in that regard.
The first is the need to protect civilians, including
humanitarian and medical personnel. The fact that health
infrastructure, in particular facilities that have been
de-conflicted and schools, remain the targets of attacks
in the north-west of the country is unacceptable. We
strongly condemn the regime's attack on an ambulance
on 20 June in Maarat Al-Numan. Attacks on hospitals
and health workers, which are part of the regime's
military strategy to forcibly reclaim areas beyond its
control, constitute war crimes. 1 echo the remarks
made by my German colleague: those crimes will not
go unpunished. Furthermore, we take note of the letter
from the United Nations to the Russian Federation and
await Russia's response. We must understand what that
will mean for the United Nations de-confliction system.

In addition to the protection of civilians, the
other absolute priority is ensuring immediate, safe,
secure, comprehensive, sustainable and unhindered
humanitarian access throughout Syria. I recall that
humanitarian aid must reach those who need it most.
In that context, the whole-of-Syria humanitarian
architecture - put in place by the United Nations to
respond to the needs of the most vulnerable Syrians
through the most effective channels - must be
maintained. It is also urgent that a new aid convoy be
immediately deployed to the Rukban camp. That is
vital. We also call on those with the means to do so to
exert the necessary pressure on the regime to ensure
unimpeded humanitarian access to all areas under its
control, in particular the territories it reclaimed in 2018
in the south-west of the country and in eastern Ghouta.
The fact that only 60 per cent of the requests for access
made to the Syrian regime during April and May were
approved is unacceptable. Lastly, I would mention
the Al-Hol camp, where it is essential for the United
Nations to have sustainable access that is as direct and
effective as possible so as to provide assistance to the
73,000 people living there.

The third priority, which is inextricably linked to
the other two, is the launching of a sustainable political
process under the auspices of the United Nations. We
will no spare no effort to support the Special Envoy in
the implementation of a political solution based on all
the provisions of resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522,annex). It is essential that the
Council do the same during our consultations with Geir
Pedersen on Thursday. In that regard, I refer to the key
issues of the constitutional committee and elections.
In line with resolution 2254 (2015), we must now
reflect on the conditions that will ensure that election
results are not determined in advance, as in the past;
that the elections will be free and fair; that all Syrians,
including refugees, can speak freely in the process and
that the United Nations will be involved in overseeing
the process. The Special Envoy has our full support to
move forward in that regard.

Only the establishment of a credible political
process will make it possible for refugees to return
to Syria, which must take place in safe and dignified
conditions and under the auspices of the United Nations.
Those conditions are clearly not being met now. In any
case, it is essential that the United Nations be given free
access to Syrian territory to monitor refugee returns
in a transparent manner. Council members know our
positions on issues related to reconstruction, the lifting
of sanctions and normalization. Our positions, which are
also those of the European Union, remain unchanged.

