Ms. Mohammed: First ofall, I would like to convey
to you, Mr. President, the greetings of Chairperson
Moussa Faki Mahamat and his thanks for the invitation
extended to the African Union Commission to brief the
Security Council on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular on the recently
held elections in that country.

That invitation is a further illustration of the
close partnership that exists between the African
Union and the United Nations on matters relating to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The partnership has been significantly strengthened
over the past few years. One its main features is the
promotion of African leadership and ownership as a
key principle for ensuring sustainable solutions to the
peace and security issues of concern to the continent.

The situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is a matter of the utmost importance to the
African Union. Peace and security in the Congo is
critical to the well-being of its people, but also to the
overall stability and prosperity of the region and the
continent as a whole. The African Union has therefore
been actively involved in efforts to assist the Congolese
stakeholders in reaching the required political
consensus towards the holding of the recent free, fair
and transparent elections, in order to consolidate the
gains made over the past decades. Let me take this
opportunity to also express the African Union's deep
appreciation to the United Nations for its invaluable
support to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through the deployment of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

In that context, the African Union, in response to
the invitation received from the Congolese authorities,
decided to dispatch an election observation mission to
monitor the polls that took place 30 December 2018.
The African Union deployed 80 long- and short-term
observers, under the leadership of former President
Dioncounda Traore of Mali. The team included members
of the Pan-African Parliament and election management
bodies on the continent, as well as civil society
representatives. On election day, the African Union
election mission deployed 23 teams in 13 provinces,
which observed voting and tallying operations in 317
polling stations that served as samples. It is important
to highlight that there were 75,000 polling stations in
total, including those located in the provinces where
the voting was eventually postponed due to security
and health concerns.

The mission made the following observations
relating to the polling stations it visited. First, the polling
stations opened on time, although in some of them
the commencement of voting operations was delayed.
Secondly, voting materials were available in most of the
polling stations and polling staffwas present throughout
the operations. Thirdly, the elections took place in a calm
and peaceful atmosphere. There were, however, isolated
incidents of violence and shortcomings that marred
the voting operation. Fourthly, the representatives of
the candidates were present in all the visited polling
stations. And, fifthly, closing and tallying operations
were conducted in accordance with the existing legal
framework. The observation mission strongly urged
that, first, the results that will be proclaimed should
reflect the will of the people. Secondly, the Congolese
stakeholders should preserve the climate of peace that
prevailed during the voting. And, thirdly, any challenge
to the result should be channelled through the existing
legal process.

As members are all aware, the Commission
electorale nationale independante proclaimed the
provisional results of the elections yesterday. As far
as the presidential election is concerned, Mr. Felix
Tshisekedi, from Cap pour le changement, was declared
the winner. Given that the Commission is the only legally
mandated body to proclaim the results of the elections
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African
Union can rely only on the outcome as announced. It is
important to note in that connection that the African
Union election observation methodology focuses on
the process that leads to the outcomes of the elections.
Additionally, given the limited number of polling
stations that were observed by the election observation
mission, the African Union, even if it were granted that
power, is not in a position to provide figures on the
outcome of the election.

Obviously, the results that were announced, while
welcomed by Congolese stakeholders and part of the
population, have been challenged by others, including
in street protests that led to unfortunate loss of life.
In line with the rule of law, it is the African Union's
position that such challenges, including claims relating
to discrepancies between the proclaimed results and
the verdict of the ballot boxes, should be addressed
peacefully and through recourse to existing legal
avenues and political dialogue.

Clearly, the 30 December 2018 elections were a
watershed in the history of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The Congolese people and the institutions
involved in the electoral process should be commended
for their efforts. The Congolese stakeholders owe it
to their people and their country to act in a manner
that fosters democracy and preserves peace. In that
respect, the African Union is of the strong view that
the current situation in the Congo calls for as large a
consensus as possible among all Congolese based on
respect for democracy and human rights, as well as the
maintenance and consolidation of peace. The African
Union is ready to assist to that end in any way deemed
to be appropriate.

The statements issued by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Chairperson of
the Southern African Development Community on
10 and 11 January, respectively, clearly articulate the
views of the continent on the issue at hand. It is our
hope that the Security Council, as it has done before,
will extend full support to the African-led efforts to
assist the Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
people to successfully complete the electoral process
and overcome related challenges. That approach is the
surest path towards effectively achieving our shared
objective of peace, democracy and stability in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

