Ms. Tachco (United States of America): I wish
to thank Mr. Toure, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his briefing and Ambassador
Vieira not only for his briefing but also for his
leadership of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Recently, the Security Council has witnessed
significant success in West Africa in places that have
experienced years or even decades of violence and
tragedy. Such success includes the first democratic
transfer of power in Liberia in more than 70 years
and the continued consolidation of democracy in The
Gambia, as well as strong economic growth in countries
across the region.

However, there remain many serious and profound
challenges, such as the terrorist threat posed by Boko
Haram and the Islamic State in West Africa, elections
and reform challenges facing countries with upcoming
democratic transition, and humanitarian crises and
displacement, all of which merit the continued attention
of the Security Council. Given the urgency and
magnitude of such problems, the United States believes
that a self-inflicted 30-month political impasse, such as
that in Guinea-Bissau, is unacceptable.

For too long we have gathered to hear updates
on fits and starts of political progress that eventually
fade to obstruction and obfuscation from the
country's leadership. The United States is profoundly
disappointed by the decision of President Vaz to
ignore the Conakry Agreement by failing to appoint
a consensus Prime Minister and to create an inclusive
Government. President Vaz must take urgent steps
towards a unity Government that will pave the way for
peaceful legislative elections in May.

The people of Guinea-Bissau are understandably
frustrated at the failure of their Government to make
progress on the implementation of the Agreement.
They deserve better. Time is running out. We have
witnessed rising tension. Political gatherings in
Bissau have provoked clashes as the people of Guinea-
Bissau publicly express their frustration at the skeletal
political process. Those clashes led to a crackdown by
the Guinea-Bissau leadership. The Government must
respect the people's right to peaceful expression and
protect that right.

On 4 February, the Economic Community of West
African States took the ambitious step of sanctioning
19 spoilers of the Conakry Agreement, including
their family members. The United States applauds
such efforts to hold those in power accountable and to
compel them towards finally doing what is right for the
people of Guinea-Bissau. We also applaud the renewal
of the mandate of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-
Bissau and encourage the Guinea-Bissau military to
continue its political non-interference, while playing its
constitutional role.

For years, the international community and the
United Nations have put resources into Guinea-Bissau
to do important things for the benefit of its people.
However, with a Government at an impasse, important
issues such as security sector reform and combating
transnational organized crime, narcotics and human
trafficking cannot be adequately addressed. That
is unacceptable.

As Ambassador Haley noted in the peacekeeping
context, the United Nations cannot operate effectively
in environments with uncooperative Governments.
That also applies to political missions such as the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-
Bissau (UNIOGBIS). For UNIOGBIS to continue on
that path would not be the continuation of a partnership
with a willing Government but would simply enable
its obstruction. Elections must take place on time and
will require support. However, first, the Government
must first end the impasse to convince its partners that
international support will build on established political
progress and a willingness to overcome differences to
enable the Government to function again.

In conclusion, we once again draw attention to
the ordinary people of Guinea-Bissau who, for the
better part of their lives, have not known the stability
of sustainable democratic governance. The Security
Council must keep them in mind as we take steps to
put pressure on leaders to abandon their self-serving
wilfulness and to take action to better the lives of their
people. They should know that our patience has now
run out.

