Ms. Luna (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert for
her valuable briefing and the work she has been doing
since her appointment, in December, as Head of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI).
We also thank the Permanent Mission of the United
States for drafting and facilitating the recently adopted
resolution 2470 (2019), on the renewal of UNAMI's
mandate. We strongly support UNAMI's work to help
Iraq achieve stability, development, peace and security
in a sustainable manner.

First, we would like to commend the Iraqi authorities
for last year's conduct of a democratic, transparent
and peaceful electoral process, which included the
participation of various sectors of the country, followed
by a smooth transfer of power.

With regard to the political aspect, we regret that
no agreement has been reached in Parliament on the
election of the persons who would occupy leading
ministry posts that remain vacant, which has delayed
the full formation of the Cabinet and, in turn, the
implementation of the Government programme.
We appeal to political actors to reach the required
consensus and take a decision with a view to setting up
a Government with efficient institutions, and for those
institutions to seek to ensure the security, prosperity
and progress of their people.

We call for that political will to be extended, in
turn, to the establishment of the Kurdistan Regional
Government and to the implementation of the Iraqi
reconstruction plan drawn up at the International
Conference on the Reconstruction of Iraq, held
in Kuwait.

Among the governmental measures taken by
the Basra Provincial Council, we can highlight the
implementation of various programmes on water
and electricity services in order to address the water
shortage that is negatively impacting the health of the
population and the economy.

We hope that the Government will continue
to develop inclusive policies where women have a
significant role in decision-making in various aspects
of society, including the management of public
institutions. In that regard, we welcome the fact that
four women were elected as Chairpersons and four
as deputies of committees of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament. Similarly, Iraq has adopted the first action
plan on women and peace and security in the Middle
East, being the first country of the region to submit
its report on the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) on the participation of women and the inclusion
of a gender perspective in peace negotiations, conflict
prevention, peacekeeping operations and governance.

We also call for concrete action to ensure
accountability and end impunity for grave human rights
violations, such as exploitation and sexual violations,
particularly those perpetrated against women and
children, including those affiliated with the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). In addition, we call
for the development and adoption of a plan of action with
the United Nations to end and prevent the recruitment
and use of children by the popular mobilization forces.
We also condemn the use of torture and coerced
confessions of children and call for the investigation
and prosecution of those responsible of such acts.

With regard to security, we highlight the successful
efforts of the Iraqi Government and allied countries
in combating terrorism and defeating ISIL. However,
we note with concern that terrorism continues to pose
a latent threat to the peace and security of citizens
in various parts of the country. That is why security
agencies must revitalize their current counter-terrorism
mechanisms and strengthen border security measures.
To that end, Iraq requires regional and international
support and solidarity, as well as continued assistance
from UNAMI in the areas of logistics and capacity-
building. We cannot allow violent insurgency by any
group, or the unspeakable acts committed by ISIL
against the Iraqi people to be repeated.

On another note, with regard to the issue of
unfinished business with Kuwait, we welcome the
activities and meetings held with the authorities of
the respective nations, as well as with representatives
of UNAMI, to discuss ways forward concerning the
search for prisoners and missing persons reported by
Kuwait, and the return to Kuwait of human remains,
assets and the national archives. We also note with
satisfaction that the Iraqi Government returned to the
Kuwaiti authorities, in accordance with resolution
2107 (2013), numerous objects of value, including
thousands of books from the National Library of the
State ofKuwait. That step demonstrates the willingness
of the Iraqi Government to strengthen relations with a
neighbouring country and comply with the provisions
of the tripartite agreement on resolving outstanding
issues that date back 28 years.

In reviewing the reports on the humanitarian
situation in Iraq in the current context, we underscore the
importance of continuing to meet the multiple needs of
the millions of Iraqis who remain displaced and provide
them with the conditions to gradually rebuild their
lives in a voluntary, dignified and safe manner. In that
connection, we stress the need to bolster the protection
mechanisms for those populations, in particular women
and children, who continue to be exposed to great risks.
We are concerned about the impact ofthe conflict on the
entrenchment of poverty and on national infrastructure,
which poses great challenges to achieving sustainable
development in the country.

Finally, we would like to express our solidarity
with the Iraqi people and support them in their efforts
to resume the course of their history towards stability,
peace and prosperity. About 4.1 million people have
returned to their homes following the end of the
conflict, with the desire and determination to rebuild
their communities. That is testament to the admirable
level of resilience they possess and their firm resolve to
rebuild the country and live in dignity.

