Mr. Shen Bo (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller and Mr. Mogae, Chairperson of the
Joint Monitoring and Evaluation Commission.

Late last month, thanks to the concerted efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the international community, the High-
level Revitalization Forum was successfully held,
and the South Sudanese parties signed the Agreement
on Cessation of Hostilities, Protection of Civilians
and Humanitarian Access. China welcomes these
developments and appreciates the active efforts made
by IGAD.
China is ready to continue to support IGAD, the
African Union and other regional and subregional
organizations in playing a leading mediation role on the
question of South Sudan. But we should also be mindful
of the fact that the current political and security situation
in South Sudan remains fragile and continues to face
many severe challenges. The international community
should further increase its support and assistance to
South Sudan. It is imperative to continue to promote
the political process in South Sudan, as a political
solution is the only way out in addressing the question
of South Sudan. China has noted that after the cessation
of hostilities agreement was signed, there have been
multiple incidents involving clashes and fighting.

China supports the 12 Januaryjoint statement ofthe
Secretary-General and the African Union Chairperson
on the question of South Sudan. We urge the parties to
seize the important opportunity offered by the High-
level Revitalization Forum, take concrete actions to
implement the ceasefire agreement, immediately cease
the fighting and violence return to the negotiating table.

The international community should continue to
support the mediation efforts of IGAD, the African
Union and other regional organizations and focus on
assisting them to succeed in the second phase meetings
of the High-level Revitalization Forum. Meanwhile, it
is necessary to fully motivate the Government of South
Sudan and enhance communication and coordination
with the Government, while respecting the country's
ownership and leadership of the political process.

I agree with what was said by the representative of
Ethiopia. The Security Council should remain united
on South Sudan and speak with one voice. We should
provide constructive assistance to South Sudan.

Secondly, it is crucial to further increase
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan is dire. China calls
on the international community to continue to provide
necessary humanitarian assistance and economic
support to South Sudan, and on the parties in South
Sudan to provide the necessary humanitarian access.

China supports the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS) in continuing to fulfil its mandate,
and we appreciate the efforts and contributions it has
made to maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan.
We hope that UNMISS and the Secretariat will continue
to communicate with the South Sudanese Government
and the UNMISS troop-contributing countries. We
hope that the Secretariat will conduct an objective
and comprehensive strategic review and assessment of
UNMISS and focus its efforts on helping South Sudan
to maintain peace and stability, restore development
and put forward feasible recommendations on future
adjustments of the functions and size of UNMISS.

China has always supported the peace process in
South Sudan and been committed to assisting South
Sudan to achieve peace and development. China stands
ready to continue to play a constructive role in achieving
lasting peace, stability and sustainable development in
South Sudan.

