Mr. Ouattara (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to express the gratitude of the
Ivorian Government to the Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
Ambassador Cristian Barros Melet, and the members of
the Security Council for this opportunity us to discuss
the sanctions regime imposed on my country. As in
2014, our task is mainly to assess the effectiveness of
these measures and to identify together prospects based
on progress.

The Ivorian Government is committed to the
process of cooperation with the Security Council,
the 1572 Committee and its Group of Experts for the
implementation of measures arising from resolution
2153 (2014) and others. In this context, we welcome the
working visit to C6te d'Ivoire by Ambassador Barros
Melet from 2 to 7 November 2014, which, according
the Group of Experts, helped to increase the level
of cooperation between the Group and the national
authorities. I reiterate the continued commitment of the
Ivorian Government to full and exemplary cooperation
leading, through the work of the experts, to an objective
assessment ofthe situation in C6te d'Ivoire. Ambassador
Barros Melet will always be welcome in Cote d'Ivoire.

The Ivorian Government notes the findings of
the report of the Group of Experts (S/2015/252). The
recommendations therein will be the subject of analysis
in view of their implementation, taking into account
the requirements of security and national defence.
The Ivorian Government wishes here to welcome the
progress made by Cote d'Ivoire, as identified by the
Group of Experts. This includes progress on procedures
for transmitting notifications and exemption requests to
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1572
(2004), as mandated by resolution 2153 (2014), as noted
in paragraph 27 of the report.

The Group acknowledges the political commitment
of the Ivorian authorities to the security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
(DDR) processes through the direct involvement of the
President of the Republic and and the establishment of
a single institutional framework, the National Security
Council, by decree in August 2012 to coordinate the
planned reforms, as set out in paragraph 50. In that
regard, I note that a framework for reflection has
been established to identify prospects for the period
following 30 June, which is the deadline for completing
the DDR process in cote d'Ivoire.

A legal framework has been established for the
post-30 June 2015 period that defines, inter alia, the
strategy for reforming the security apparatus and the
national security strategy. Another area of progress
is the marking by the National Commission on the
Proliferation of Small Arms and Light Weapons since
October 2012 of all weapons belonging to the the State
of Cote d'Ivoire, as indicated in paragraph 83, as well as
efforts to rehabilitate and improve the armouries in Cote
d'Ivoire. The Group note that, to date, approximately
40 per cent of armouries of the defence and security
forces have been rehabilitated, as noted in paragraph
86.

As indicatred in paragraph 132, the water and
forestry authority, the gendarmerie, the police and the
customs administration were present at the borders. In
January 2014, the Ivorian Government adopted a plan of
action for the eviction of the occupants of Mount Peko,
in close collaboration with the Burkina Faso authorities.
There are about 30,000 people on Mount Peko, who are
mostly citizens of Burkino Faso. We have to keep their
humanitarian needs in mind.

In terms of progress made by the Ivorian
Government, it is also important to note the conclusion
of the Group of Experts made in paragraph 153 of the
aforementioned report that it did not observe materiel
being imported in violation of the sanctions regime.
The Group says that it cannot confirm that there are
individuals in Cote d'Ivoire who are determined to
sabotage the peace and national reconciliation process,
as indicated in paragraph 192. The Group also notes in
paragraph 122 that it did not receive reports concerning
cross-border security incidents with Burkina Faso,
Ghana, Guinea or Mali, and that the army has been
fully deployed at all borders.

Above all, the Group of Experts established by the
1572 Committee acknowledges not having received
any information to suggest that natural resources are
being exploited or used to purchase arms or materiel or
for related activities, as noted in paragraph 229. This
progress clearly reflects the firm will of the Ivorian
authorities to consolidate the gains made since 2011
with the support of the international community. Cote
d'Ivoire has the requisite tools for marking and tracing

firearms, and will pursue its efforts in the area ofborder
control and inventory management.

Upstream, I note that the country intends to
strengthen the existing technical and legal instruments
for the control of arms transfers, such as the Economic
Community of West African States Convention on
Small Arms and Light Weapons at the regional level
and the Arms Trade Treaty, which my country has just
ratified. My country is also committed to controlling
the flow of arms, to preventing cases of diversion, and
especially to effectively fighting illicit flows, like all
other States Members of the United Nations.
In 2015, care d'Ivoire will hold elections that our
President and all Heads of State and the Government
want to be credible, transparent, open and inclusive.
Regarding the preparations for these elections, the
Ivorian Government welcomes the reforms made
within the Independent Election Commission aimed
at establishing optimal conditions for organizing the
elections. In addition, arrangements are being made for
the funding ofpolitical parties in order to increase their
financial capacities, which will help them to meet the
challenges of future elections.

The Ivorian Government also intends to strengthen
the partnership between the Forces republicaines de
Cote d'Ivoire and the United Nations through the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to prepare
for the 2015 deadlines. In that respect, the cooperative
support of UNOCI is welcome in strengthening the
capacities of staff officers in planning at the national
and regional levels; in the field, with support for site
investigations for future deployment; in providing
assistance in security, joint patrols, a deterrent presence
in some areas, and support in transporting election
materials and ballots; and in a cross-disciplinary tasks
such as joint exercises in preparing for making the
electoral process safe and secure.

My Government believes that sanctions should
be considered as one instrument in the service of a
comprehensive approach to conflict resolution and
management, in the sense that the partial or complete
implementation of obligations imposed should result
in the Council's adoption of gradual and reciprocal
measures, such as the reduction or complete lifting of
sanctions, ifpossible. That is why I take this opportunity
to express my deep gratitude to the members of the
Committee and the Council who, in seeking an objective
analysis of progress in Cote d'Ivoire, decided in 2014
to ease the sanctions regime by adopting resolution
2153 (2014). My Government hopes that the ongoing
consultations will ultimately lead to a total lifting of
embargo measures.

In our opinion, the draft resolution that members
of the Council will adopt in the near future should be
a transitional document towards the complete lifting of
sanctions so that Cote d'lvoire can finally be removed

from the Security Council's agenda. That will enable
us to maintain a classic support relationship with
the United Nations in meeting the challenges to our
economic and social development.

