Mr. Evans: Thank you, Mr. President, for giving
me the opportunity to take the floor on behalf of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

NATO recognizes that protecting children from
the effects of armed conflict is a moral imperative. The
nature of contemporary warfare has created significant
threats against children, who have been used and abused
by unscrupulous armed forces and armed groups.
They are frequently the victims of indiscriminate
attacks, and they are subjected to sexual violence. In
my statement, I will describe the substantial measures
that NATO, supported by its operational partners, has
taken to implement resolution 1612 (2005) and related
resolutions.

The protection of children in NATO-led operations
and missions was addressed by NATO at our 2012
Summit in Chicago. At that meeting, NATO's Heads of
State and Government tasked NATO with developing
practical, field-oriented measures to address violations
against children. Following that Summit, the North
Atlantic Council approved NATO military guidelines
on children and armed conflict. Those guidelines
seek to integrate resolution 1612 (2005) into NATO's
operational and exercise activities and to educate and
train our troops on the obligations stipulated in the
relevant resolutions.

Another important step was the launch, in 2013, of
an online course developed jointly by NATO and the
United Nations. The course aims to raise awareness
among NATO-led forces before deployment, as
mentioned in resolution 2143 (2014), adopted a year ago.

But we did not stop there. At the NATO Summit
in Wales in September last year, NATO's Heads of
State and Government expressed their deep concern
about the damaging effects of armed conflicts on
children and reaffirmed their commitment to the
further implementation of resolution 1612 (2005). They
decided that we should assess how to ensure that NATO
was sufficiently prepared whenever and wherever the
issue of children and armed conflict is likely to be
encountered. We are doing so in close cooperation with
the United Nations.

We are basing that work on our experience in
leading the International Security Assistance Force
in Afghanistan (ISAF). That mission came to an end
last December and has provided many lessons for
future operations. The ISAF experience has laid the
groundwork for our efforts in relation to the protection
of children.

We are continuing this important work in our current
mission in Afghanistan, Resolute Support. That mission
aims to train, advise and assist the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces and Afghanistan's security
institutions with a view to ensuring their durability and
ability to sustain themselves. The protection of children
is an important theme in that assistance programme.

For the first time, the position of child protection
adviser has been included in a NATO-led mission.
Such an adviser will focus on further implementing
resolution 1612 (2005), with the aim of ingraining
the ethos of child protection into the Afghan National
Defence and Security Forces. We are assisting the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its efforts to help Afghanistan to take the steps required
to justified Afghanistan's removal from the list annexed
to the Secretary-General's annual report on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339).

Building on the task set by the Wales Summit, the
North Atlantic Council just this week issued a policy
paper entitled "The Protection of Children in Armed
Conflict 4 The Way Forward", which seeks to enhance
the effectiveness of the NATO military guidelines on
children and armed conflict in all future NATO-led
missions and operations. The paper provides NATO's
military authorities with additional guidance on the
further integration of resolution 1612 (2005) and
related resolutions into the Alliance's military doctrine,
education, training and exercises. That will ensure that
the imperative to protect children affected by armed
conflict is included in the planning and preparation
stages of all NATO-led missions.

That guidance will result in more robust reporting
during operations. A robust reporting procedure will
help provide timely and reliable information on the
violation of children's rights, particularly the six
practices identified by the Secretary-General as grave
violations. In short, our commanders and deployed
personnel have better, more precise guidance on how
to proceed whenever and wherever they encounter such
violations.

In developing that guidance and in integrating
resolution 1612 (2005) into NATO's military doctrine,
NATO has regularly consulted the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Zerrougui, and her excellent staff. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank her, on NATO's behalf,
for her leadership and her support.

Every day, we see horrifying reports in the news
about atrocities committed against children, such as
mass kidnappings, sexual violence and the forcing
of child soldiers to commit unspeakable acts. But I
believe it is possible through the concerted efforts of
all international actors to help make such barbarity
a thing of the past. It goes without saying that there
remains a long way to go. But let me assure the Security
Council that NATO and our partner nations place the
highest importance on fulfilling our responsibilities
under resolution 1612 (2005) and related resolutions.
We will continue to work conscientiously and seriously
to ensure that we meet the goal set out by our leaders at
the Wales Summit. Through our continued engagement
on this issue, I am confident that NATO can make a
lasting contribution to the wider international effort to
help protect children affected by armed conflict.

