The President (spoke in French): As this is the
first meeting of the Council in the month of December,
I should like to take this opportunity to pay tribute, on
behalf of the Council, to His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Permanent Representative of Austria,
for his service as President of the Security Council for
the month of November 2009. I am sure I speak for all
members of the Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991

International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and
Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory
of Neighbouring States between 1 January 1994 and
31 December 1994

Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the
President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2009/587)

Letter dated 12 November 2009 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991 addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2009/589)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kenya,
Rwanda, Serbia and Sweden, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
2
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Judge Patrick
Robinson, President of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia; Judge Dennis Byron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda;
Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and Mr. Hassan
Bubacar Jallow, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

It is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the following documents: 8/2009/589, which
contains the text of a letter dated 12 November 2009
from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia addressed to the
President of the Security Council; 8/2009/587, which
contains the text of a letter dated 12 November 2009
from the President of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda addressed to the President of the
Security Council; S/2009/394, which contains a note
by the Secretary-General dated 31 July 2009,
transmitting the sixteenth annual report of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia; and
S/2009/396, which contains a note by the Secretary-
General dated 31 July 2009, transmitting the fourteenth
annual report of the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the President of the International Tribunal
09-63003
for the Former Yugoslavia, the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the
Prosecutors of those two Tribunals.

I now give the floor to Judge Patrick Robinson,
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia.


