Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Although the Government of Uruguay has already
conveyed its sympathy directly to the Government of
Colombia, once again, it extends the solidarity and
condolences of the people of Uruguay to Ambassador
Maria Mejia Velez, following the tragedy in Putumayo.

I thank the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General Mr. Jean Arnault for his comprehensive
briefing and, above all, for the work he and his team are
conducting in Colombia.
Our statement today aims to reiterate Uruguay's
encouragement to and support of the peace process
in Colombia and its principal protagonists - the
Government, the people of Colombia and the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia - Eje'rcito del
Pueblo. We continue to reiterate that for us, they have
shown and continue to show a commitment to peace
and are persistent in conveying a message of hope
to the international community - where there is a
will, objectives can be achieved in spite of the many
difficulties that may be encountered along the way.
That is why we are taking the initiative, during our
presidency of the Security Council next month, to have
the members of the Security Council visit Colombia
from 3 to 5 May as a demonstration of our direct
support to all those taking part in the peace process and
trust in their work. It also serves to send a clear signal
about the importance that the Council has given to its
commitment to support the peace process and provide
monitoring through the establishment of the United
Nations Mission in Colombia.

Some months ago, we said that the peace talks and
the signing of the Final Peace Agreement were the easy
part ofthe process; the hard part started the day after the
agreement was signed. We are guided on the path ahead
by the resolute will of the parties and by our support
of and commitment to the peace process. We would
like to point out that we believe that both the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2017/252) and Mr. Arnault's
briefing are very encouraging. They show that, in
spite of the challenges in various areas, considerable
progress has been made in implementing the peace
agreement. We believe that the role of the Commission
for the Follow-up, Promotion and Verification of the
Implementation of the Final Agreement, which is
made up of three Government representatives and
three FARC-EP representatives, is to supervise the
implementation of the agreement within the deadlines
set. We believe that progress should be achieved
simultaneously in all sections of the agreement. It is
therefore important to identify delays or flaws early in
the implementation process.

We stress the vital importance of the promulgation
ofthe amnesty law on 30 December 2016 and the decree
for its enforcement on 17 February, the submission to
Parliament on 1 February of a draft bill on the political
reintegration of the FARC-EP and the adoption by
Congress of the legislative bill on the Comprehensive

System of Truth, Justice, Reparations andNon-repetition,
including a Special Jurisdiction for Peace. That system
of transitional justice is a fundamental component of
the peace agreement and that is why we stress the need
for ongoing legislative adjustment.

The Mission has continued to make progress in its
work. We have been informed that during the reporting
period, the Government, the FARC-EP and the Mission
have cooperated effectively at the national, regional and
local levels. We note, inter alia, that communication
strategies have improved and there has been progress in
finding solutions to logistical problems and in providing
medical care. We call on the parties to redouble their
efforts to solve the logistical challenges that remain a
source of concern, such as insecurity in rural areas,
which are greatly affected by the conflict due to their
links to the illegal economy, violence against human
rights defenders and the reintegration of members of
the FARC-EP into the civilian, economic, social and
political life of the country.

Uruguay pays particular attention to the rights of
women, children and vulnerable social groups. We
welcome the implementation of the protocol for the
separation of minors from the ranks of the FARC-EP
and the launch of a reintegration programme, with the
support of the Red Cross, UNICEF, the International
Organization for Migration and Colombia's Presidential
Council for Human Rights.

Lastly, we welcome the joint communique issued
on 26 March by the Government of Colombia and the
FARC, in which they reported on the meeting held to
evaluate the 100 days of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement, especially as it relates to the laying down
of weapons and the status of gathering areas for FARC-
EP members, including their reintegration into civilian
life. That exercise in assessing the implementation
of reciprocal obligations contributes to building
confidence between the parties and to cohesion within
the FARC-EP, as well as reassuring those who might
feel threatened or whose expectations are diminished.
To all those involved, we are confident that their
perseverance will result in the successful conclusion of
the peace process.

