Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to sincerely congratulate the delegation of Viet Nam on its successful presidency of the Security Council in January. I also thank Ms. DiCarlo and Ms. Mueller for their valuable briefings. A new year has begun, and the Palestinian people continue to endure the Israeli occupation of their territories and the daily violation of their legitimate rights. The Palestinian territories continue to endure practices that violate United Nations resolutions and international humanitarian law, including continued settlement activities in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, as well as the demolition of houses and systematic attacks against the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Such acts affect the socioeconomic situation of the Palestinians and undermine prospects for peace in the region. In that context, the Kingdom of Morocco and King Mohammed VI, who chairs the Quds Committee of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation, reiterate their solidarity with the Palestinian people and support for the achievement of their legitimate rights and the establishment of an independent State within the 4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. The Kingdom of Morocco reiterates the need to stop settlement activities and implement resolution 2334 (2016). The Kingdom of Morocco considers East Jerusalem to be a Palestinian territory that has been occupied since 1967 and should be the capital of the Palestinian State. It is one of the final-status issues that have yet to be resolved through negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis; it is at the heart of the Middle East conflict and is key to a genuine political solution between Palestinians and Israelis. Furthermore, we reject any unilateral measure against Jerusalem that would contravene Security Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). We must preserve the historic and legal status of Jerusalem in accordance with the values of tolerance and coexistence among religions that Morocco has always supported. His Majesty King Mohammed VI, together with Pope Francis, signed the Al-Quds/ Jerusalem declaration when the Pope visited Morocco in March 2019. On that occasion, His Majesty the King and the Holy Father stressed the need to preserve the city of Jerusalem so that it can continue to be part of the world heritage of all humankind. Jerusalem must be promoted as a multi-faith city and free access to the city must be ensured for all believers of the monotheistic religions. The role of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, headed by His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al-Hussein as custodian of all the holy sites in Jerusalem, is important and must also be preserved. The Kingdom of Morocco also reiterates its support for the mandate of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and for the Agency's efforts to alleviate their suffering in countries of the region while enabling them to access basic services and medical care, especially for children. The Al-Quds Committee continues to carry out its mission to protect Jerusalem and support the well-being of its people through the implementation of various projects aimed at protecting the city's cultural and architectural heritage, while preserving the national Palestinian archive. The Agency has also launched phase two of renovating and reforming the Moroccan Cultural centre in Jerusalem, the Moroccan House.The Kingdom of Morocco continues to believe in the existence of solutions to the Palestinian question, but the absence of negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis has prevented an end to the violence and led to a lack of trust between them. The international community must take control of the situation and work actively to bring Israelis and Palestinians back to the negotiating table in order to achieve a two-State solution within the 4 June 1967 borders and to ensure that East Jerusalem becomes the capital of the State of Palestine. Such negotiations must be conducted in good faith and on a clear basis with a view to restoring confidence between the parties and to laying the foundations of a viable Palestinian State, living side by side with Israel in peace and security, in accordance with international resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative. We also appreciate international efforts to achieve lasting peace and security in the Middle East region.
