I thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting, providing for an exchange of practical experience in implementing resolutions 2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018), as well as an exploration of recommendations on actions to strengthen the role of young people in strengthening peace and security. Colombia has reiterated its commitment to young people by promoting the establishment of legal tools promoting their participation in conflict-resolution and peacebuilding processes. Moreover, these norms seek to prevent and protect against the violation of young people's rights, to promote the effective exercise of their rights, to provide access to the necessary resources for their full enjoyment of their rights, and to ensure their participation in society's various dialogue and decision- making mechanisms. Established under the technical coordination of the "Young Colombia" National Youth System Directorate under the auspices of the presidency of the Republic, the Sacudete programme is one of the national Government's principal tools for driving social transformation, highlighting the importance of young people as agents of change in the transition towards an inclusive society, based on the three principles of the Government of President Ivan Duque: legality, equity and entrepreneurship. Under this programme, there are currently 1,400 activity centres, such as conservatories; youth counsellors are being elected across the country; and there is a virtual marketplace, among other things. This tool equips young Colombians with the tools they need to overcome social, cultural and economic barriers to their potential. Colombia recognizes that the only way to achieve stability in areas afflicted by violence is to create opportunities for the participation and empowerment of young people. That is why the implementation of projects designed by young people for young people is among the integral components of Government policy, especially the policy of peace with legality. It is in the context of vulnerability and discrimination that phenomena such as forced recruitment by illegal groups most frequently occur. It is therefore necessary to tackle the lack of employment and recognition for this segment of the population in all regions of the country. Young people have potential and play a crucial role in conflict resolution, violence prevention and peacebuilding, thereby breaking cycles of violence. The grave situation facing the world today due to the coronavirus disease outbreak is a matter with far-reaching consequences. We are all exposed and young people play a vital role in stopping its spread, primarily by ensuring that the most vulnerable do not fall sick. Young people should approach the pandemic crisis as an opportunity to show that by working together in solidarity, not only at the local level but also at the national and even international levels, we can overcome this crisis. We are facing a new kind reality unlike any seen in our lifetimes. While we know that the outbreak affects everyone, its consequences are most acute in the most vulnerable areas. We must therefore devote attention to the most disadvantaged and marginalized groups, such as pregnant and lactating young women and girls, persons with disabilities, ethnic minorities, refugees and displaced persons, and make use of relevant channels of communication to ensure that the years of hard-won progress in these communities do not fall by the wayside. The Government of Colombia will continue making every possible effort to build a country and a world in which the human rights and fundamental freedoms of young people are protected and respected, including those relating to their freedoms of movement and of expression and their political and civic participation, and supporting the establishment of a safe environment so that they may work in peace and security. Colombia will not stop at peacebuilding. This process with young people calls for commitment and support on all sides to continue forging ahead on the promising path we are on. I thank you, Sir, for providing a venue for a range of stakeholders to share their visions and understand those of others, for recalling the goals and for recognizing the achievements thanks to the Security Council's resolutions on youth and peace and security.
