Mr. Berger (Germany): The United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) was
established in 1974. It has been operating for more
than 37 years now. We salute the men and women who
serve and have served to support UNDOF in the
discharge of its mandate. We look forward to receiving
in the next report of the Secretary-General an
assessment of the capacity of UNDOF to ensure the
appropriate operational capability in the future.

On 15 May and 5 June, demonstrations in the
UNDOF area of operations resulted in a number of
civilian casualties that, to quote paragraph 3 of the
Secretary-General's report (S/2011/359), "put the long-
held ceasefire in jeopardy", an assessment we fully
share. We deeply regret the loss of life and are gravely
concerned about these events, which are the most
serious incidents since the establishment of UNDOF's
mandate.

Such events cannot go unreflected, which is why
we deviated from the long-standing practice of
reiterating the same resolution as in previous years.
While we call on both parties, Israel and Syria, to fulfil
their obligations under the 1974 status-of-forces
agreement, we note that these demonstrations would
not have been possible without Syrian consent, and we
call on Syria to refrain from any action that could
provoke further unrest. Throughout the country, Syrian
authorities have been cracking down with the utmost
brutality on demonstrations against their Government.
On 15 May and 5 June, however, they actively
encouraged demonstrations against Israel in one of the
most sensitive areas of the country. Syria seems to be
willing to risk an international conflict in order to
divert attention from its repression of the legitimate
calls for political freedom voiced by its population.
Subsequent riots in the Yarmouk refugee camp indicate
that Palestinian refugees have realized that they and
their aspirations were manipulated and abused in this
very dangerous game.

The violence in Syria must stop. Imprisoned
demonstrators must be freed, and instead of spreading
fear, meaningful reforms must be implemented.
Playing off parts of Syria's multifaceted society against
each other will not work. We join in the
11-39599
Secretary-General's call to the Security Council to
express itself on the situation in Syria. For us, this is
long overdue.

