Ms. Korpi (Finland): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Central and Eastern
European countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association countries members of the
European Economic Area - Iceland and Liechtenstein -
align themselves with this statement.

The European Union wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his thoughtful report on the ways in which
the Security Council, acting within its sphere of
responsibility, can improve the physical and legal
protection of civilians in armed conflict. Its action-
oriented recommendations can contribute to reinvigorating
international efforts to protect civilians in armed conflict.
The Security Council has a special responsibility in this
context. Large-scale human suffering, as was noted in a
statement by the President of the Security Council issued
this past February, is a consequence of and sometimes a
contributing factor to instability and further conflict.
Massive and systematic breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law can constitute threats to
international peace and security, and therefore demand the
attention and action of the Security Council. The
European Union welcomes the Security Council's concern
regarding threats to human security, as demonstrated by
a series of resolutions it has adopted in recent years -
including those that established international ad hoc
criminal tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and for
Rwanda. We have seen in recent days how much the
world looks to the Security Council for action.

The question of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict deserves to figure higher on the international
political agenda. Looking at the present global situation
one can only feel a profound concern about the widening
gap between existing international norms and respect for
them. In today's conflicts the important distinctions
between combatants and civilians have often become
blurred, and the safety of humanitarian workers is not
respected. Women, children, the elderly, the sick, refugees
and internally displaced persons suffer greatly and have
been specifically targeted and used as shields. In some
cases aggressors have used ethnic cleansing and forced
population movements - often across international
borders - not only as a weapon, but also as a strategic
objective. International humanitarian law, human rights
law and refugee law are often unknown to parties to
conflicts, or they are ignored or wilfully disrespected. The
European Union deplores the persistent violations of
international humanitarian law.

The recommendations proposed by the Secretary-
General to address the failure to comply on the one hand,
and the lack of effective enforcement measures on the
other, head in the right direction. Our objective should be
to ensure respect for and full implementation of
international human rights and humanitarian law. The
primary responsibility to ensure application and
enforcement of these fundamental norms rests with States.

 

However, the Security Council can in various ways draw
the attention of States to the importance of ratifying the
major instruments, ensuring their implementation in practice
and heightening awareness and acceptance of humanitarian
law among all sectors of society. In this respect, the
European Union welcomes innovative approaches to
strengthening the respect for international humanitarian law
by developing codes of conduct, ground rules and clear
principles of engagement, as well as by building on relevant
legal norms. The measures proposed by the Secretary-
General include promoting adherence to international law
as well as, in certain well thought-out cases, enforcement
measures under Chapter VII of the Charter.

Irregular forces are increasingly a feature of today's
conflicts and often bear significant responsibility for
disrespect, grave breaches and serious violations of
international humanitarian law as well as for serious human
rights violations. We therefore call upon non-State actors
that are parties to conflicts to strictly observe and respect
international humanitarian and human rights law.

It is also essential that violations of the international
instruments pertaining to protection of civilians are
addressed through appropriate judicial processes, either
nationally or through the efforts of the international
community. The International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda were important steps in
establishing individual accountability for atrocities. The
European Union is of the view that the Security Council
should consider all measures to induce compliance with
orders and requests of the two ad hoc tribunals. The
European Union would also like to stress the importance of
the early establishment of the International Criminal Court
and its important future role both in deterring grave
breaches and serious violations of international
humanitarian law and serious human rights violations, and
in ensuring that those responsible for atrocities are brought
to justice. In this context it is to be noted that the Rome
Statute of the International Criminal Court also foresees a
major role for the Security Council in referring situations
to the Court where they involve most serious crimes of
concern to the international community and are deemed to
constitute threats to international peace and security.

It is increasingly difficult for the international
community to provide protection and assistance to those
living in the midst of a conflict. Denial of access to
civilians in need of humanitarian assistance has in many
instances become a tool of warfare. Humanitarian and
peacekeeping personnel are deliberately targeted, since they
are seen by many armed groups as a threat to their
objectives. In this context, the European Union wishes to
stress that under the Statute of the International Criminal
Court, attacks against humanitarian or peacekeeping
personnel are war crimes. The proposal to extend the
scope of the 1994 Convention on the Safety of United
Nations and Associated Personnel to cover other
categories of United Nations and associated personnel,
including locally recruited staff, merits serious
consideration.

The report rightly highlights the plight of internally
displaced persons in many parts of the world. The
European Union agrees with the report's emphasis on the
work of the United Nations system to assist internally
displaced persons, while noting that the primary
responsibility for the protection of and assistance to
internally displaced persons lies with the Government and
the country concerned. The European Union supports the
wider use of the Guiding Principles on Internal
Displacement in the work of the United Nations at the
country level.

The European Union supports the Secretary-
General's continuing efforts to place increased emphasis
on the prevention of conflicts. The promotion of
economic and social development, establishment and
consolidation of democracy, good governance and the rule
of law as well as the full implementation of human rights
are of great importance in conflict prevention.

With regard to confidence-building, effective public
information is vital. The United Nations must enhance its
public information capability at mission level. In this
respect, it is also crucially important to prevent the media
from being used as a tool of conflict. Serious
consideration should be given to the Secretary-General's
recommendation relating to hate media.

Better use should be made of existing mechanisms,
such as the International Fact-Finding Commission under
article 90 of the first Protocol Additional to the 1949
Geneva Conventions. The services of this existing body
can be called upon whenever violations of international
humanitarian law occur in armed conflict. It can conduct
enquiries into the alleged breaches of the Geneva
Conventions or their Protocol I and facilitate, through its
good offices, the restoration of an attitude of respect for
international humanitarian law.

Peacekeeping itself has to be seen as part of a
continuum, stretching from prevention to conflict
resolution and peace-building. In the area of conflict

 

prevention, the European Union fully agrees with the
recommendation to consider wider use of preventive
peacekeeping operations or other preventive monitoring
presence. The United Nations Preventive Deployment Force
in The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was the
first ever United Nations preventive deployment mission. It
serves as a positive and encouraging experience from which
many lessons can be drawn for the future.

The European Union strongly agrees with the
recommendation to strengthen the Organization's capacity
to plan and deploy rapidly. Quick action may often limit or
even prevent conflict and breaches of human rights and
international humanitarian law. In this respect, the European
Union welcomes the steps taken to establish a rapidly
deployable mission headquarters within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and looks forward to its early and
full operation. The European Union stresses the importance
of providing adequate resources to that headquarters.
Deployment of international military or civilian police
observers to monitor the situation in camps for refugees or
internally displaced persons is also a measure that must be
seriously considered.
The European Union agrees with the recommendation
to make greater use of targeted sanctions so as to improve
the effectiveness of sanctions while minimizing their
humanitarian impact. Targeted sanctions, aimed at specific
individuals and entities of the targeted country, have
already been adopted by the Security Council on certain
occasions. We also agree that the proposals made by the
President of the Council to the sanctions Committees in
January 1999 form a good basis for further efforts to
develop standards and rules aimed at minimizing the
humanitarian impact of sanctions.

The protection of civilians is fundamental to the
purposes and principles of the United Nations. The
international community must not stand by, helpless, in the
face of humanitarian catastrophes. The tragic events taking
place in East Timor before the eyes of the world are the
most recent unfortunate example of why the United Nations
must act. We all have fresh in our minds the violent attacks
unleashed on the civilian population of East Timor
following the popular consultation of 30 August this year,
with the complicity of elements of the Indonesian armed
forces and police. In the case of East Timor, the Security
Council has demonstrated its capacity to react swiftly,
effectively and in line with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General. In this light, the European Union
welcomes the adoption of resolution 1264 (1999)
authorizing a multinational force to assist in restoring law
and order in East Timor.

The Security Council has a special responsibility and
special powers to authorize coercive action when
international peace and security are threatened as a result
of systematic and widespread violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law, ranging from the
imposition of arms embargoes or sanctions to intervention
- when all other measures prove ineffective - to protect
the civilian population from immediate threats to their
lives and to ensure the safe passage of humanitarian
convoys. The European Union believes that the factors
presented by the Secretary-General to be considered in
extreme cases when contemplating an intervention are
relevant in that context and may help the Security Council
to further develop an active policy aimed at preventing or
alleviating profound human suffering wherever it occurs.

In conclusion, the European Union would like to
express its appreciation for the present report, which is
very action-oriented and provides a good basis for further
active engagement by the Security Council to ensure
improved protection of civilians in armed conflict.

