Ms. Braun (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Luxembourg thanks the Belgian presidency of the Security Council for organizing this debate on transitional justice to bolster efforts to achieve sustainable peace. Luxembourg fully subscribes to the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union. Ten years after the Secretary-General's guidance note on the United Nations approach in this area, the concept has proved its worth and its importance for the sustainability of peace, in general, and the restoring or strengthening of the rule of law, in particular, is no longer in doubt. However, it is also clear that the dynamics of ongoing conflicts require us to reassess our methods. The challenges to consolidating the gains made on this concept are legion and their management requires sustained efforts. The call for the implementation of a comprehensive approach to transitional justice, launched in the context of resolution 2282 (2016), therefore remains relevant. Despite considerable efforts and achievements over the past decade, we must redouble our efforts, rethink our way of working together and devise responses that are better adapted to different contexts. Although all approaches to transitional justice must be based on the principle of the universality of human rights, we know today that there is no magic formula. Nonetheless, we also believe that the approaches developed in the framework of transitional justice are essential to strengthening the rule of law. The establishment of appropriate channels of justice in the face of human rights violations makes it possible to build reliable institutions and to lay the foundations for lasting peace and sustainable development. In that respect, Luxembourg remains committed to strengthening international standards in this area in order to promote transitional justice that combines asserting victims' rights; promoting lasting peace, reconciliation and democracy; and ensuring the implementation of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, particularly Sustainable Development Goal 16. On the occasion of this debate under the Belgian presidency, Luxembourg wishes to renew its commitment to participatory and inclusive transitional justice. Victims and civil society must be fully engaged in transitional justice processes, whether in the pillar of truth, justice, reparations or guarantees of non-recurrence. Therefore, we also believe that the inclusion and participation of the perpetrators of human rights violations, who are the subjects of transitional justice processes, is often critical, given that the goal is reconciliation, a fundamental precondition for the sustainability of peace. In that regard, Luxembourg would like to mention its collaboration with the International Center for Transitional Justice, which, in 2009, was consolidated through a first partnership agreement. Luxembourg pays particular attention to the Centre's work in Tunisia, which is aimed at helping victims, civil society and State actors to promote victim-centred, gender- sensitive transition processes. In conclusion, transitional justice will have an important place in the review of Luxembourg's humanitarian strategy, which will be carried out in 2020. We will be guided in that undertaking by our desire to better respond to the short-term needs of victims and to better coordinate strategies over the long term while maintaining a balance among advocacy, diplomacy and work on the ground.
