Mr. Ibragimov (Uzbekistan): First of all, I would
like to commend you, Mr. President, for convening
this quarterly debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan. I thank Ambassador Tadamichi
Yamamoto, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Ms. Samar for their informative briefings
and Mrs. Raz, Ambassador of Afghanistan, for
her statement.

In Uzbekistan we continue to closely follow the
situation in Afghanistan because the prospects of
stable and sustainable development in Central Asia are
directly intertwined with the achievement of a durable

peace in that country. Uzbekistan traditionally pursues
towards Afghanistan a policy based on the principles
of mutual respect, equality and non-interference in
each other's internal affairs of and fully supports a
Government elected by the Afghan people. Given such
circumstances, engagement in the process of finding an
ultimate solution to the current situation in Afghanistan
and the maintenance of good-neighbourly relations with
that fraternal nation are among the top foreign policy
priorities of Uzbekistan. Tashkent's principal position
stems from the firm belief that the Afghan Government
should be the main party to any peace process, which
should also encompass all political forces and ethnic
groups of the country. Only an Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned political process can lead to a peaceful settlement
of the current conflict.

For its part, Uzbekistan continues to render
assistance to Afghanistan in launching such a peace
process. As a practical step in that direction, in the
past year the Uzbek side met with representatives of
the Qatar-based Taliban Political Commission both
in Tashkent and in Doha. During those meetings the
Uzbek participants underlined the importance of
enforcing a ceasefire and its extension to the operation
of delivering humanitarian assistance and to large-scale
economic projects to be implemented in the country.
The Taliban movement has welcomed Uzbekistan's
efforts in settling the situation in Afghanistan.

We should emphasize that Uzbekistan closely
coordinates all its contacts with the Taliban with the
Government of Afghanistan. In particular, we conduct
prior consultations with the Afghan authorities on our
upcoming meetings with the Taliban and brief them on
the outcomes.

Uzbekistan also actively participates in various
international negotiation formats on Afghanistan,
such as the Kabul process, the Moscow format, the
International Contact Group, the Heart of Asia-
Istanbul Process forum, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization-Afghanistan Contact Group and the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan (RECCA). Our main objective from
such participation is to support the international
community's efforts to find a workable solution to the
Afghan conflict.

In that regard, I would like to cite the President of
Uzbekistan, His Excellency Mr. Shavkat Mirziyoyev,
who, in his address at the high-level conference on
Afghanistan held in Tashkent last year, said:

"We stand ready, at any stage of the peace process,
to create all necessary conditions for organizing
on the territory of Uzbekistan direct negotiations
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban movement."

That statement clearly shows the strong
commitment of Uzbekistan to facilitating the peace
process in Afghanistan by creating conditions for direct
negotiations between the Government and the Taliban
movement without any preconditions.

Uzbekistan is also rendering practical assistance
to Afghanistan in rebuilding its social and economic
infrastructure and transport links by training local
personnel and involving the country in regional projects.

In the autumn, in Tashkent we are planning to
host next meeting of the RECCA, which will be
another excellent opportunity to discuss issues of
the rehabilitation of Afghanistan. As the President of
Uzbekistan said at the recent Conference on Interaction
and Confidence-building Measures in Asia held in
Dushanbe, the settlement of the situation in Afghanistan
and the implementation of large-scale infrastructural
projects in the country would open up new strategic
opportunities for the whole continent.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that
Uzbekistan will continue its efforts to support the
earliest launch of the peace process between the
Government of Afghanistan and the Taliban movement,
aimed at creating a peaceful future for all people
of Afghanistan. In that regard, Uzbekistan remains
committed to continuing close cooperation with the
Government of Afghanistan, the United Nations and
other stakeholders in bringing long-awaited peace to
the country.

