Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (Spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. O'Brien for his briefing.

Albert Einstein once said that insanity was doing
the same thing over and over again and expecting a
different result. Today, 60 years after Einstein's death,
it seems that some Governments are still not familiar
with that reality. They continue to repeat their mistakes
and miscalculations and to expect different outcomes.
It is undeniable that interference in countries' domestic
affairs leads only to the destruction of the country
concerned, creates humanitarian crises, leads to chaos
and devastation and creates fertile ground for terrorism
and murderers. That is clear from the destruction of
Iraq, Libya and other countries. Foreign interference
has brought us Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front, the Khorasan
group and other groups. Terrorists now have a State - a
caliphate, as some like to call it.

In spite of all that, failing to adhere to Einstein's
logic, certain States continue to press on with the
implementation of this deadly recipe in Syria, using the
same slogans, even as everyone else has realized that
the resulting devastation is more than clear. Tony Blair,
former Head of the British Government, has said, 12
years after the British-American invasion of Iraq, that
that act of aggression was based on erroneous and false
information. Fourteen years after the terrorist attack
against the World Trade Center in New York, we see
that the strategy adopted in the context of the war on
terrorism has created hundreds of Bin Ladens, instead
of getting rid ofjust one Bin Laden. Instead ofjust one
Al-Qaida in Afghanistan, we have dozens of groups
throughout the world that have adopted its doctrine.
Terrorism has now come to those who support it.

A look at the humanitarian situation reveals the
same thing: the stubbornness of some to carry out the
same misguided policies while expecting different
results is more than evident. Some claim to want to
remedy the humanitarian crisis in Syria, but they
refuse to prioritize the fight against terrorism. They
continue to impose unilateral economic measures
against the Syrian people. They continue to deny the
Syrian Government its role, refusing to coordinate their
efforts with it in providing humanitarian assistance and
combating terrorism. Five years since the crisis began,
today it is absolutely clear to everyone that this policy
has failed to resolve the humanitarian crisis. Moreover,
it is undeniable that it has aggravated the crisis and
worsened the suffering of the Syrian people, forcing
a large part of the population to become refugees or
internally displaced persons. It is therefore essential to
change the way in which we address the situation, if
we want to have different results, that is, to tangibly
improve the humanitarian situation in Syria. To do so,
we need to take the following steps.

First and foremost, the main reason for the crisis
has to be resolved, namely, the creation and spread
of terrorism supported from abroad. That requires
the implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council, in particular resolutions 2170 (2014),
2178 (2014) and 2199 (2015), in collaboration with and
with the cooperation ofthe Government of Syria. Those
who believe that cooperating with the Government is
beneath them, whose sole interest is to undermine the
Syrian Government, President and army and who prefer
to deal with the demons of terrorism rather than with
the Government in order to tackle those demons are
creating an absurd situation that has nothing to do with
the rules of sane behaviour and thinking, nor with the
principles of political science and strategy.

This absurd situation has led to the presence in
Syria and Iraq of tens of thousands of foreign fighters
from more than 100 countries - as illustrated in the
nine reports of the Security Council Committees on
Al-Qaida and Counter-Terrorism, among other places.
Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and associated groups did not
emerge from a vacuum. They were nurtured, financed
and trained. Their travel was facilitated via airports
and across borders. They were given visas. Through
Turkish intermediaries, they have even been allowed to
engage in trade in oil and gas. It is therefore necessary
to end the practice by the Governments of some
States of continuing to fund, arm and train terrorists.
We cannot talk about ending Syria's pain and ending
the crisis and at the same time maintain a deafening
silence in the face of Turkey and Jordan using their
territories to allow the passage of foreign terrorists and
mercenaries, or while Saudi Arabia and Qatar support
terrorism with great generosity, rather than promoting
the financing of the humanitarian plan, which is only
37 per cent funded - in spite of the various pro forma
conferences held here and there for that purpose - and
at a time when the United States has spent half a billion
dollars, which would be enough to close the gap, as part
of its programme to train and equip the "moderate"
opposition, which now includes just five groups, the
Al-Nusra Front having regained its weapons thanks to
the United States.

The issue of combating terrorism brings me to the
second element necessary for ending the humanitarian
crisis, namely, supporting a political solution. Fighting
terrorism will contribute to the success of a political
solution, which must include a dialogue among
Syrians, under Syrian leadership, without external
interference and with full respect for the sovereignty
and independence of Syria, as well as its unity and
territorial integrity. That is in line with the provisions
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and all
the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, as well
as the Charter of the United Nations and international
law.

In that regard, I would like to recall that the
Government of Syria announced in the General
Assembly, via its Minister for Foreign Affairs (see A/70/PV.25), its agreement to participate in the working
group proposed by Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General Staffan de Mistura, based on our belief that a
political solution is the only way to resolve the crisis.
The problem lies with the other parties, who do not want
such a solution to be reached. That was also the case
with regard to Mr. De Mistura's suggestion following
the Geneva II conference for a cessation of fighting in
the city of Aleppo, as well as with regard to the Kofi
Annan plan. In spite of all that, there are still some who
unfairly say that the Syrian Government is refusing
a political solution. Meanwhile, they protect the very
parties who have refused Mr. De Mistura's initiatives.

We have reviewed the report (S/2015/813) of the
Secretary- General on the implementation of resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014). It is a biased
and politicized report, with many gaps and falsehoods.
We have transmitted two letters in that regard to the
President of the Security Council and the Secretary-
General. I shall limit myself to saying that the report
fails to draw attention to the fact that the forces of the
so-called coalition have targeted innocent civilians
as well as infrastructure in Syria, including roads,
bridges, refineries, schools and hospitals. Also targeted
was a power station in western Aleppo, the only one in
the entire city. In addition, a centre for children with
special needs in Raqa was destroyed, killing dozens of
innocent children, under the pretext that Daesh was the
target. Since the beginning of the coalition airstrikes,
we have seen greater numbers of Daesh terrorists
brought from abroad and the expansion of their areas
of influence. Thus we are surprised that the report uses
misleading accounts that are of unknown source, have
no credibility, and seek only to fish in troubled waters
and cast shadows over the joint Russian-Syrian efforts
under way to tackle Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and
other terrorist groups, on the basis of a request from
the Syrian Government and the Charter of the United
Nations, which has led to the retreat of terrorist groups
in more than one place and forced them to withdraw
from several areas that were under their control.

We have said in the past that the term "non-State
armed opposition groups" is unacceptable and runs
counter to what we are seeing on the ground in Syria.
It also goes against what the Security Council's own
sanctions committee describes. What the report
describes as non-State armed opposition groups are,
in fact, the Army of Conquest, which was created by
Turkey and which includes elements of Ahrar Al-Sham
and the Al-Nusra Front. Simple math - one plus one
equals two - makes clear that the Army of Islam plus
the Army of Conquest equals the Al-Nusra Front, which
is on the list of terrorist entities. The Army of Islam,
which is active in rural Damascus, includes mercenaries
from Chechnya, other countries of the Caucasus and
elsewhere who are financed by the Saudi Arabian secret
service and have declared their allegiance to Daesh.

The Yarmouk Martyrs Brigade, financed and run
by a joint Arab-American operations room in Amman,
includes 8,000 Jordanian Salafists and thousands of
other terrorists. Al-Nusra Front terrorists, openly
supported by Israel, are attacking the peacekeeping
forces in the Golan and have abducted Filipino and
Fijian soldiers. They not only receive support but are
also given medical attention by Israel.

All of this is summarized in a report of the
Secretary-General under "non- State armed opposition";
but are these not foreign mercenaries?

