Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and
Ambassador Alotaibi for their briefings today.

I will focus my invention on three issues: the
security, humanitarian and political situations in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

First, the deterioration in the security situation
in North Kivu and Ituri provinces is particularly
concerning. Civilians continue to face killings and
kidnappings in Beni territory. In the Petit Nord,
citizens face illegal taxation, rape and killing from
armed groups, like the Nduma defense du Congo-
Re'nove. Attacks against Ebola responders in North
Kivu continue to undermine the response to the
outbreak. The Government must do more to protect
civilians and responders and to provide greater general
stability, including by holding perpetrators to account
in the courts and doing more to address the underlying
drivers of conflict. We note with concern that armed
groups in North Kivu are reported to have perpetrated
over half of all documented cases of sexual violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo during the
reporting period.

As the Ambassador of Kuwait noted during his
briefing, some members of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo have expressed an
interest in listing individuals, including based on the
sexual violence designation criteria. In that regard,
the United Kingdom encourages the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo to provide
the Committee with updated information on the
sanctioned individuals and entities and also to provide
statements of case, in relation to the sexual violence
designation criteria.

It is particularly alarming that some elements of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo armed forces
are alleged to have colluded with the Nduma defense
du Congo-Re'nove, the largest perpetrator of attacks
against civilians in North Kivu. The United Kingdom
welcomes the issuing of a warrant for the arrest of
Guidon Shimiray Mwissa, the leader of the Nduma
defense du Congo-Renove, who is also under United
Nations sanctions. We look forward to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo taking action
against Mr. Guidon and investigating and holding
to account any members of the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo found guilty of
using armed groups as proxies.

In Ituri, we note with concern that renewed violence
has caused the significant displacement of civilians and
increased humanitarian needs. We also note that a hiatus
in the political process to demobilize the armed group
of the Forces de resistance patriotiques en Ituri has led
it to increase its activity. We look forward to President
Tshisekedi's support to enable the disarmament process
of the Forces de resistance patriotiques en Ituri to move
forward, including the signing of a peace agreement
between the Government and that group.

Secondly, the humanitarian situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is dire and deeply
concerning. More than one in ten Congolese are
expected to be in need of protection and humanitarian
assistance in 2019. The United Kingdom is at the
forefront of the humanitarian response. In 2013, we
provided $124 million to humanitarian appeals, making
the United Kingdom the second-largest humanitarian
donor in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
largest contributor to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo multi-donor humanitarian fund.

We echo the Secretary-General's call for donors
and partners to provide the necessary support in order
to close the humanitarian funding gap as quickly as
possible. That is particularly relevant to the appeal for
further funding to address the Ebola outbreak, where
much more is needed, and we urge other countries,
particularly those that have a presence and history
in the region, to support the response with funding,
technical expertise and political support.

Finally, let me say a brief word on the political
situation. Despite some positive developments, which
we have heard about today, attention must not drift
from the ongoing electoral process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in particular the local elections
planned for late 2019 and 2020. In that regard, we
call for the prompt appointment of a new, balanced,
inclusive leadership of the Independent National
Electoral Commission. The production of an electoral
calendar for the upcoming local elections will also help
efforts to ensure that they are credible, free and fair. By
taking those steps, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo would help to generate trust
among the population in future electoral processes and
strengthen democracy in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The United Kingdom recognizes some positive
steps taken by President Tshisekedi since his election,
including the release of several political detainees and
efforts to promote regional collaboration. However, that
is just the start. It is vital that when the new Government is
finally formed, it makes concrete progress on President
Tshisekedi's commitments to improving human rights,
strengthening transparency and the rule of law, driving
forward poverty reduction and tackling the Ebola
outbreak. The United Kingdom therefore urges all
Congolese parties to engage constructively to enable
the swift formation of a Government - a Government
that can deliver the change that the Congolese people
clearly voted for.

