Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank the
Chairperson ofthe Human Rights Council's independent
international fact-finding mission, Mr. Marzuki
Darusman, for his detailed and very worrying briefing.

The alarming findings presented in his report
show that the problem is grave and should be dealt with
accordingly. I would like to underline the importance of
accountability. While welcoming the State Counsellor's
commitment to bringing all the perpetrators of human
rights violations and other criminal acts to justice, we
stress that the credible allegations of serious human
rights violations and abuses must be investigated.

We call on all sides to put an immediate end to
all violence. We particularly urge Myanmar to ensure
the protection of all civilians without discrimination
and to fully abide by international human rights law.
We further reiterate the call on the Government of
Myanmar to take every possible step to defuse the
tensions between communities and to grant full, safe
and unconditional humanitarian access without delay.
We call on the Government and its security forces to
ensure that security, the rule of law and accountability
prevail in Myanmar, including in Rakhine, Kachin
and Shan states. We must also seek a comprehensive
and durable solution addressing the root causes of the
problem, including the elimination of statelessness,
discrimination and underdevelopment, as outlined in
the recommendations of the Advisory Commission on
Rakhine State. We hope the Government of Myanmar
will swiftly and fully implement the Commission's
recommendations in that regard. We are of the view
that lasting peace and stability can be achieved only
through comprehensive and inclusive national dialogue,
with the participation of all ethnic groups.

We acknowledge Myanmar's establishment in
July of an independent commission of inquiry, and the
Secretary-General's appointment of a Special Envoy
on Myanmar. The commission is expected to submit a
report within six months. We hope that the commission
will bring us closer to ensuring accountability by
working in an independent, objective and transparent
way. We also note the Special Envoy's visit to Myanmar
this month and encourage the Government of Myanmar
to continue cooperating with both the commission and
the Special Envoy. At the same time, we reiterate our
call to Myanmar to fully cooperate in addressing the
situation in Rakhine state with all the relevant United
Nations and international bodies, including the Human
Rights Council's independent international fact-
finding mission.

Poland also emphasizes the importance of
establishing conditions conducive to the safe,
voluntary, dignified and sustainable return of displaced
persons to Rakhine state and their reintegration. We
urge the Government to immediately ease restrictions
on freedom of movement in order to facilitate access
for all communities to employment opportunities,
education, health care and other services. We also
look forward to the implementation of the arrangement
signed in November 2017 between Myanmar and
Bangladesh on the return of displaced persons from
Rakhine state, and the memorandum of understanding
signed in June by Myanmar, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the United Nations
Development Programme.

