Ms. Paiva (Portugal): At the outset, allow me to
thank the Secretary-General for his excellent report on
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and Assistant Secretary-General
Annabi for his comprehensive briefing.

We welcome the measures that were taken with
regard to reinforcing the capacity-building of the East
Timorese, namely through their participation in the
transitional Government. We also welcome and
commend the efforts carried out by the UNTAET
through the able leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio
Vieira de Mello, regarding the rehabilitation of the
infrastructures and the setting up of mechanisms and
systems in the fields of education, health and judicial
administration.

Despite all the efforts that were made by
UNTAET to find a solution to the refugee problem and
to secure the border, we must recognize that the
dialogue with Indonesian authorities has not yet
produced the expected results. It is with deep regret
that I express the serious concern of the Portuguese
Government over the killing of a New Zealand
peacekeeper by elements that had crossed the border
from West Timor to East Timor. Portugal deeply regrets
the situation and has already conveyed through
appropriate channels its condolences and solidarity to
the Government of New Zealand and the family of
Private Leonard William Manning.

These regrettable events overshadow the East
Timorese transition process towards independence.
Despite all efforts and public pronouncements of the
Indonesian Government, there still prevails a lack of
control over the activities carried out by some militia
elements along the border. Therefore, Portugal would
like to call on the Indonesian authorities, in particular
its military forces, to cooperate more closely with
UNTAET to completely disarm and disband the
militias in order to end cross-border incursions from
West Timor and to bring to justice those militia
members responsible for crimes.

Portugal regrets the difficulties experienced in,
and the slow pace of, the return of East Timorese
refugees remaining in West Timor. We also wish to
express our great concern at the continued militia
presence in the refugee camps and their intimidation of
the staff of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees.

The Portuguese authorities welcomed the
attention of the Security Council to the East Timorese
transition towards independence and hopes it will
continue to keep the issue under close consideration.
Portugal remains firmly committed to work together
with Indonesia and the United Nations for the
implementation of the New York agreements.

