Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Let me begin by extending
my thanks to today's briefers, Special Representative
Hanna Tetteh and Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, for
their very insightful briefings on cooperation between
the United Nations and the African Union (AU).

Let me now focus on some crucial elements that we
find particularly important.

Poland strongly supports the strategic partnership
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations in Africa. Therefore, we
welcome the progress made in the partnership between
the United Nations and the AU over the past year - the
period covered by the Secretary-General's report under
consideration (S/2019/759).

In recent years, the African Union has taken on
important responsibilities and its role in promoting
peace and security has only expanded. In particular, we
commend the results achieved in the Central African
Republic through close cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union Commission. We also
highly commend the African Union's mediation efforts
with respect to the structure of the Sudanese transitional
Government. There is no doubt that the principle of
African solutions to African problems remains relevant.
Earlier this year, we endorsed our commitment to
peace and security on the African continent with the
adoption of resolution 2457 (2019) concerning, inter
alia, the Silencing the Guns initiative. Poland believes
that this will be an additional step towards stabilizing
the situation on the continent through enhanced
international cooperation. Strong local, regional and
global partnerships are needed to manage the demands
in the region and bring about balance and growth.
Strategic cooperation between the African Union and
the United Nations should continue to be manifested in
multiple consultative mechanisms on peace and security
challenges in Africa, including on early warning and
conflict prevention and resolution.

The United Nations and the AU, as well as
the regional economic communities and regional
mechanisms, must carry on their cooperation at all
levels and on a wide range of issues, from capacity
development and policy design to crisis response
operations. Close cooperation does not mean,
however, shifting full responsibility onto regional and
subregional organizations. The United Nations should
address conflicts in a comprehensive way, using all
available instruments, from prevention through peace
settlement and peacekeeping to comprehensive post-
conf1ict restoration.

Poland believes that continued United Nations
support to the African Union in efforts to equip it with
the capacities, tools and means necessary for effective
action is critical. It is of utmost importance in enabling
both organizations to face new threats and address
complex sources ofinstability in Africa. Therefore, we
consider regular interactions between the Council and
the African Union Peace and Security Council to be an
essential instrument to deepen this partnership, as we
saw last week in Addis Ababa. In that regard, we also
stress the importance of the United Nations Office to
the African Union in providing support and ensuring
concerted action between the two Councils.

In conclusion, let me reiterate Poland's full support
to strengthening United Nations-African Union
cooperation and expressing our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continued efforts focused on
strengthening the partnership with the African Union,
as well as other regional partners in Africa.

Let me assure Council members that Poland
stands ready to work closely with African partners,
not only on African issues but also on ways to address
global challenges.
