Ms. Frankinet (Belgium) (spoke in French): I
thank you, Sir, for organizing this debate on a major
challenge of the twenty-first century. Belgium endorses
the statement given on behalf of the European Union
and wishes to add to it in order to complete its own
statement.

The Security Council has had several opportunities
to address the situations in Syria and in Iraq and the
countless victims ofconflicts in the Middle East, mostly
Muslims of various denominations. In the past century,
the proportion of Christians in the East, a faith that
once held a secular presence in the region, has fallen
from 30 per cent to 5 per cent of the total population.
The emergence of radical Islamist groups, of which
Daesh is the most reprehensible, has dramatically
accelerated that trend and has radicalized it to the
point of horror in their desire to eradicate, physically,
culturally and historically, anyone who is not like them.
Whether Christian, Yazidi or others, minorities pay an
enormously high toll.

That global ideology, both radical and dehumanized,
and the threat to the world that it creates, recall the
worst period of twentieth-century European history.
With an awareness of the horrors committed and that
global threat, Belgium decided in the summer of 2014
to actively participate in the political and military
coalition against Daesh. We cannot fall into the traps
set for us by those radical groups:

The first trap is to believe that we are facing a clash
of civilizations or a new religious war. That trap is the
primary objective of those radical groups. Based on it,
they draw their strength and increase their capacity to
mobilize. What we are dealing with is their exploitation
of religion to gain power. If we are to fight against and
escape that trap, we must make every effort necessary to
ensure that our citizens do not fall prey to such rhetoric.

The second trap is to believe that we must choose
between the brutality of repressive military regimes
and that of radical Islamic regimes. They are, however,
the best of enemies and feed off each other. Yet other
options, so often defended by the United Nations and
my country, are open to us. We must ensure that we
promote inclusive democracies, the rule of law and
equitable economic development. We must also ensure
that public authorities protect all their citizens, ensure
respect for human rights and ensure the freedoms of
expression, religion and belief. Those are the best
weapons at our disposal. We must strongly promote
all of them, given our political responsibility to our
peoples and to our international commitments. If we
are to tackle those threats, concrete actions must be
taken without delay. I should like to highlight three of
them.

First, we must bring to life our values within our
societies, especially among young people. Belgium,
serving as President of the Committee of Ministers of
the Council of Europe, will organize a conference on
8 May on the theme "Tolerance is stronger than hatred",
which will show how the diversity of our societies is
an asset rather than a liability. My country, which
also has its own share of foreign combatants, has been
developing a new strategy to prevent radicalization, and
we are committed to working at the national, regional
and international levels towards that goal. Cooperation
with the other countries concerned will be essential.
The second action is to tackle impunity. There
can be no lasting peace in the region if this condition
is not met. Daesh's actions are tantamount to crimes
against humanity, if not genocide. The international
community must pay special attention to the need to
bring to justice those responsible for crimes, regardless
of who they may be. To that end, we support the work of
the United Nations Commission of Inquiry and call on
all countries of the region, Iraq in particular, to accede
as soon as possible to the Rome Statute. The Security
Council can also play a key role by referring the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.

Thirdly and lastly, we must ensure that persecuted
minorities can eventually return to their homes. While at
present humanitarian assistance and the efforts of some
countries to host them are the only realistic responses,
their rightful place is in their own homes. Given the
seriousness of the conflicts and their duration, the road
ahead will no doubt be rough.

The countries oforigin, assisted by the international
community, will have to find creative means to rebuild
the bridges between the various components of their
societies. To that end, Belgium encourages the new
Iraqi Government to continue its efforts towards greater
inclusiveness . The new European Union strategy
on Syria and Iraq, which Belgium fully endorses, can
certainly help in this regard.

