Mr. Matulay (Slovakia): We thank the Congolese
presidency for initiating this important and timely
debate, and welcome the presence of the Secretary-
General.

Earlier this month, this Council authorized the
largest peacekeeping mission ever. We are in the midst
of preparations to launch a multidimensional
international presence in Chad and the Central African
Republic. The international community has been
struggling to accumulate the resources necessary for an
adequate reaction to the crisis in Somalia. Meanwhile,
there are a number of peacekeeping missions deployed
worldwide, costing billions of United States dollars
each year. Many of these costs could have been spared,
if there had been an effective conflict prevention
mechanism.

Nevertheless, all the expenses of the United
Nations are negligible compared to the loss of human
life, suffering and destruction that could have been
averted, at least partially, if there had been a working
system of conflict prevention. We therefore fully
support all the efforts aimed, as mentioned by the
Secretary-General, at moving from the culture of
reaction to the culture of prevention within the United
Nations system.

Resolution 1625 (2005) set up an ambitious
agenda that has seen partial implementation. We
therefore believe that conflict prevention should be
given further serious consideration during the current
reforms of the United Nations system in general and
the Secretariat in particular. This does not necessarily
imply establishing new institutions or introducing new
bureaucratic procedures. The United Nations system
should, however, pay much more attention in its
functioning to different aspects of conflict prevention.
The Council has recently shown leadership in that
regard by discussing various issues related to conflict
prevention, such as security sector reform, energy
security and climate change, and natural resources and
conflict.

For our part, we are glad to inform the Council
that the debate on security sector reform that took
place in February will have a follow-up in Africa later
this year. A regional seminar on security sector reform
in Africa, co-organized by South Africa and Slovakia,
will take place in Cape Town in November.

We believe that such thematic debates should
become an integral part of the deliberations of other
United Nations bodies as well. In addition, on a more
operational basis, further steps should be taken to
achieve more cohesion and cooperation between the
different parts of the United Nations in the fields of
risk assessment, best practices and policy planning. Mr.
Secretary-General, we believe we can rely on your
leadership in this regard in the context of the reform of
the Secretariat and efforts for system-wide coherence.

In addition, there is clearly a need to improve the
cooperation of the United Nations with regional and
subregional organizations, which can provide
invaluable input and early warning through their
expertise and knowledge of the actual situation on the
ground. On the other hand, the input of the regional
organizations will usually be indispensable in the
mediation efforts aimed at the prevention of conflicts.

Last but not least, all these efforts cannot
substitute for the leadership and work done by national
authorities, who hold the primary responsibility for
conflict prevention. The 2005 World Summit codified
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. This responsibility lies with each individual
State and entails the prevention of such crimes through
appropriate and necessary means.

Slovakia strongly believes that this responsibility
can be best fulfilled though the introduction and
implementation of policies that have proven effective
in this regard in many countries, including our own.
These policies imply strict adherence to and
implementation and enforcement of internationally
recognized human rights standards and democratic
principles, the rule of law and good governance,
including the sound management of national wealth,
and security sector reform. The implementation of
these principles has helped make our continent stable
and secure. We believe in the universal applicability of
these principles, and we are therefore convinced that
they will help Africa find the path to peace and
stability, just as they helped Europe.

Finally, the responsibility to protect also implies
that, when national capacities and the ability to face
extensive potential threats are inadequate, the
responsibility to identify possible risks and ask for the
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community lies primarily with the national authorities.

