Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): Your
personal presence, Madam President, at today's debate
on the prevention of conflicts in Africa shows the
importance that your country, Rwanda, attaches to the
security, stability and development of our continent. We
welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Togo and commend the strength
of the message that he transmitted to the Council
today on the topic of peace in Africa. My Minister for
Foreign Affairs, who had originally planned to join
the Council for today's debate, asked me to convey his
sincere regrets that he was not able to do so for urgent
reasons that required his presence in Rabat. We would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his contribution
to the debate, as well as our colleague, Mr. Tekeda
Alemu, Permanent Representative of Ethiopia, for the
perspective that he has brought to our debate on behalf
of our continent, Africa.

Today's debate takes place at a time when Africa
is preparing to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
the establishment of the African Union as a result of
the merger of the Casablanca and Monrovia groups
and the far-sighted and bold vision of the founding
fathers of African unity. It also occurs at a time
when major challenges to the security and stability of
several African States are emerging. Such challenges
have given rise to an unprecedented mobilization of
Africa, in particular at the subregional level, through
the mediation of the Economic Community of West
African States, the Economic Community of Central
African States and the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.

Africa has significantly won the day in terms of
economic and social development, good governance
and respect for the fundamental rights of its citizens.
However, almost half a century after its decolonization,
our continent still faces various crises that continue to
destabilize it. While a significant set of multilateral,
regional, subregional and national mechanisms, as well
as arrangements established in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, have be set
up to prevent and manage conflicts, to build peace and
to protect civilians and human rights, the fact remains
that the lives of millions of men, women and children
in Africa continue today to be threatened by cycles of
conflict and by the re-emergence of separatism at a high
human cost, jeopardizing all efforts for the sustainable
development and growth of the continent.

That can be explained less by the failure of
established mechanisms that have undoubtedly spared
millions of lives in Africa and elsewhere than by the
lack ofaction with regard to the root causes that give rise
to or fuel conflicts. Such underlying causes, referred
to in great detail this morning by Ambassador Gert
Rosenthal, have their roots internally in the difficulties
encountered by some States to strengthen their State
institutions, to manage democratic transitions and
to promote sustainable socioeconomic development.
Externally, the regional dimension of conflicts on
the continent is becoming ever more important, as is
the destabilizing effect of international criminal and
terrorist networks.

All conflict-prevention and -resolution policies
must incorporate the establishment of a national and
regional environment conducive to peace and stability,
addressing in an integrated and comprehensive manner
the underlying multidimensional causes of conflict.

At the national level, recent developments in
Africa have underscored the importance of putting
in place governance models and national institutions
that are efficient and credible through participatory
and inclusive processes that continuously seek to meet
the aspirations of populations, especially of women
and young people, who are the primary targets of
conflict, and aiming at the promotion of democracy,
good governance, the rule of law and socioeconomic
progress.

Considerable progress has been made on the
continent in terms of political participation and
socioeconomic development. That progress needs to
be sustained and taken further, with full respect for
the sovereignty of African countries, to establish an
environment conducive to social harmony.

Furthermore, it goes without saying that there can
be no peace without sustainable development. Poverty
eradication is an important and essential measure for
establishing lasting peace and stability on the continent.

Against the backdrop of the growing funds and
ever more accessible sophisticated technology at the
disposal of armed groups, separatist movements and
terrorist and criminal networks, the building of African
States' capacities to extend their authority throughout
their territories and improve border controls is of
crucial importance.

African States must be supported in establishing
modern security institutions capable of safeguarding
security across their territories and protecting their
citizens. In that context, we commend the efforts made
by the United Nations and Africa's bilateral partners
to strengthen African capacities, especially in security
sector reform and in disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

In the light of the ever more regional character of
conflicts, it is important for States to come together and
support each other more in the interests of common and
shared stability, overcoming bilateral differences, be
they real or artificial, that impede the establishment of
effective and inclusive cooperation. Such cooperation is
today a necessity for responding to the multidimensional
threats affecting all of the subregions of Africa. The
destabilizing activities of criminal and terrorist
networks have become a real and palpable threat to
the stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
African countries. They require the rapid development
of greater synergy at the bilateral, subregional and
international levels.

Strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and the affected countries of the region and the
subregion to support State institutions and the various
mechanisms established at the subregional level to
tackle the underlying causes of conflicts is more
essential than ever.

We welcome the ever more integrated approach
taken to peace and security, development and the
humanitarian situations by the Organization, as seen in
the Sahel region.

The vision set out in the 1992 document entitled
"An Agenda for Peace" (S/24lll) is highly relevant
for strengthening the preventative dimension of the
action of the United Nations. It is important for the
Organization to continue moving forward with that
vision while seeking the peaceful resolution of disputes,
especially through negotiation, promoting realistic,
pragmatic and lasting approaches and encouraging
parties to find compromises, free of any coercion.

I cannot conclude without paying tribute to the
tireless efforts and personal commitment of the
Secretary-General to preventing conflict in Africa
through his good offices and his personal envoys and
special representatives, as well as for the remarkable
work carried out by the various United Nations
entities on the ground in favour of peace, stability and
development in Africa. I would also like to pay tribute
to the important contribution made by Blue Helmets to
preserving peace, especially in Africa.

