The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Iraq, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al Bayati
(Iraq), took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2006/919, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Denmark, Japan,
Slovakia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw members' attention to
document 8/2006/888, which contains a letter dated
14 November 2006 from the representative of Iraq,
transmitting a letter from the Prime Minister of Iraq.

I should also like to draw members' attention to
document 5/2006/899, which contains a letter dated
17 November 2006 from the representative of the
United States, transmitting a letter from the Secretary
of State of the United States of America.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.
2

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1723 (2006).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


