At the outset, let me thank our briefers - Mr. Qu Dongyu, Mr. David Beasley and Mr. Jan Egeland. We are also very much honored by the intervention by Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Dominican Republic. Today's meeting tackles the critical issue of conflict-induced hunger. Its importance cannot be overstated. We appreciate the efforts of the Dominican presidency to coordinate the views of Council members and to reflect those views in a presidential statement. It is certainly not an easy task, and we still have a way to go in order to come to a sustainable consensus. Having said that, we have to repeat our fundamental position that the Security Council is not the right platform to sustainably embrace and address all the socioeconomic and other factors related to armed conflict. We have to be honest with each other and do our best to deal with issues of peace and security here. That is the well-known distribution of labour within the United Nations system - as defined in the Charter of the United Nations - that we all need to respect. Discussion or non-discussion of an issue in the Council should not be a gauge of its importance. We also believe that such a discussion - wherever it takes place - will not be successful if we ignore the root causes and try to pretend that the symptoms are more important than the disease itself. The food security problem of countries in armed conflict is indeed complex and multifaceted, but one of the key root causes that is often omitted by some of our colleagues is foreign interference in the internal affairs of States. Such interference provokes conflicts and poses risks to national food security. We can all see vivid evidence of it every day in the examples of Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen. All of them have become arenas for foreign interference, or even for settling scores between external players. That must be stopped if we do not want to see a further increase in humanitarian assistance requests, most of which are just to ensure the basic food requirements of civilians. The medical consequences of a lack of balanced food, especially at a young age, may irreversibly affect the health of those future grown-ups. The generation of children living through hunger wars is growing in plain view and that is extremely alarming. Yemen is the largest humanitarian catastrophe of our times, where two thirds of the population are in need of humanitarian assistance. Half of them are children. In Syria more than 11 million people are in need of humanitarian assistance. Despite having all the internal resources necessary to ensure the independent development of and a normal life for their citizens, this country is forced to rely on international humanitarian assistance, particularly for food. That humanitarian aid comes with discriminatory terms and preconditions, often regime change. The role of the cross-border mechanism is being artificially exaggerated at the expense of existing feasible alternatives offered by the Syrian Government. We have heard examples of that during this very meeting. Iraq and Libya are also ina very difficult situation, as they struggle to achieve normalcy after unlawful foreign interventions. We understand that climate change is very trendy now, and there is always a temptation to insert it into every discussion. But we need to be frank with ourselves and not to exaggerate its significance in every crisis. Otherwise, we risk never finding the right solution to the issues we face. The discussion of experts on the drafting of the presidential statement revealed that discrepancies on this issue will not bring us to sustainable remedies of the problems of hunger if we continue to ignore the abovementioned root causes. Important things that have to be integral part of solutions are very often are left outside of the scope of our discussions. Creating opportunities and capacities for local production, stabilizing global commodities markets, liberalizing trade and mitigating the consequences of natural disasters can reanimate economies ruined by armed conflict. One of the most important and obvious ways to address the root causes is to remove unilateral restrictive measures and lift unilateral sanctions. That is a laborious process, but until we do so, humanitarian needs will only grow. Using medical terminology, humanitarian assistance can only alleviate symptoms, not cure the disease. We urge our colleagues to embrace these vital ideas, which will help us make the text of the draft presidential statement acceptable to everybody. The Russian Federation pays great attention to the provision of food assistance to countries in situations of armed conflict. Our country regularly provides humanitarian assistance to such States through both bilateral channels and the World Food Programme (WFP). Every year, we spend more than $40 million dollars to those ends. The WFP's logistics delivery network allows us to be sure that assistance reaches the most vulnerable. Other specialized United Nations agencies and platforms continue to play a crucial role in addressing various socioeconomic issues, including the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the International Fund for Agricultural Development, where, as members of the governing boards, we work to ensure the most effective decision-making processes. We are also convinced that we have to explore the potential of holding discussions on these issues under the auspices of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council.
