Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Fall,
for his briefing on the activities of his Office and his
assessment of key trends with regard to developments
in the political and security situation of the Central
African region. We recognize the important work
carried out by the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) in utilizing good offices,
preventive diplomacy in mediation, as well as the
support it provides to the United Nations and regional
and subregional initiatives related to peace and security
in the region.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
of the Economic Community of Central African States,
Mr. Allam-Mi, for his briefing. We appreciate his work
and contribution.

As the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/521)
mentions, the situation in the Central African region
continues to be extremely worrying and therefore
requires our utmost attention. Terrorism remains a major
concern in the region and is exacerbated by prolonged
conflicts, a governance deficit and the weakening of
central authority and State institutions. Transnational
organized crime that is intimately intertwined with
terrorist and armed group activities, such as those of
Boko Haram and the Lord's Resistance Army, continue
to affect the stability of the region. At this juncture,
I would like to condemn in the strongest terms the
repeated attacks carried out against peacekeepers
who are working under difficult conditions and facing
enormous challenges in the region. We express our
sympathy in solidarity with the families of the victims
of those attacks and we hope that those who perpetrated
those heinous acts will be held to account.

The deteriorating political, security, socioeconomic
and humanitarian situation in the Central African
Republic, which also has an adverse impact on the
wider region, clearly attests to the fragile situation in
the country. It has the potential to reverse the limited
gains made recently and plunge the country into another
cycle of violence and conflict. While we recognize the
various steps taken by the Government to extend State
authority, undertaking institutional reforms and the
gradual operationalization of the defence and security
forces, there is an urgent need to reverse the spiral of
violence in various parts of the country by promoting
peace and reconciliation. Ensuring broader and more
inclusive dialogue, as well as reconciliation among
various communities, is important to addressing the
challenges faced by the country. We therefore believe
that the Government needs greater support to work
within the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation, which remains the only
framework for peace and dialogue in the Central
African Republic.

At the centre of the problem in the Central African
region is the threat posed by Boko Haram and the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). As the report of the
Secretary-General states, Boko Haram remains a
threat in the Lake Chad basin. Although severely
degraded, the Lord's Resistance Army remains active
in the Central African Republic and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. While we were all reminded
of the causes of the security vacuum created and the
setbacks in fighting the Lord's Resistance Army, we are
nonetheless appreciative of the Congolese contingent of
the Regional Task Force and its commitment to fighting
the LRA on its territory. We believe that enhanced
political, diplomatic and operational support is critical
for that operation. Similarly, the efforts of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic should be
commended. We call upon the Security Council to
strengthen its mandate to enable it to respond to the
evolving situation on the ground.

With regard to Boko Haram, despite its weakened
position, the security and humanitarian damage it
continues to inflict on the Lake Chad basin countries
has continued. Enhancing political support and
mobilizing resources for the Multinational Joint Task
Force against Boko Haram is therefore very critical
in order to considerably weaken the capability of the
terrorist group and continue to successfully dislodge it
from its strongholds. All of that makes it very critical
that the peace and security of the Central African
region be followed up closely, perhaps more than has
been the case so far. It is important that the stability of
the countries of the region that have maintained peace
for a long period of time be upheld. We believe that
UNOCA has a major responsibility in this regard, but,
of course, it also needs the support of the international
community to be able to discharge its responsibilities.

At the same time, we continue to call on all
stakeholders to exercise restraint in their activities
and to refrain from further acts that could undermine
the possibilities for mutual cooperation. Nor should
we overlook the recent developments to which the
representative of Equatorial Guinea referred, to the
effect that the activities of mercenaries have not ceased
to be a problem, including in this region.

We believe that the efforts made by the
Government and the people of Cameroon towards a
peaceful settlement of the challenges they face through
an inclusive and meaningful dialogue and national
reconciliation should receive the necessary support.
Similarly, the international community should give
primacy to quiet diplomacy, carefully handling issues
such as this one, and we recommend also the use of
the good offices of the Secretary-General in that regard
and appreciate the initiative that he has already taken.
We seriously believe that while preventive measures
should always be given primacy, it is equally critical to
refrain from dramatizing situations, which might end
up aggravating problems. That is why quiet diplomacy
is always more productive.
Finally, we wish to reiterate that it is our firm
conviction that UNOCA plays a critical role in
supporting the various efforts made by the countries of
the subregion to reduce tensions in a peaceful manner,
through inclusive and authentic dialogue processes. To
that end, we strongly support the renewal of UNOCA's
mandate. In the light of the many challenges that the
Central African region is facing, it appears only logical
and proper for the international community to do more
to help UNOCA and help address this challenge. We are
asking UNOCA to do more; while doing so we should
also take the steps necessary to enhance its capacity.

