Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
meeting of the First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia
and share the very serious concerns he has expressed
with regard to the state of affairs in Kosovo. We thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Zahir Tanin, and his team for their work, and we
thank him for his briefing on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), which
demonstrates that there are ongoing serious issues in
the province.

We must note that the situation in Kosovo remains
extremely unstable. There are a growing number of new
cases of violence against Serbians. In order to resolve
such cases, they must not be swept under the rug, but
rather addressed directly.

In the report ofthe Secretary-General (S/2016/901),
references are made to the serious incident in the town
of Musutiste on 28 August, in which Serbian pilgrims
were subject to attack by nationalists. The rise in
animosity against minorities bears witness to ongoing
threats. Such threats are also posed to the physical safety
of Kosovar Serbs. First and foremost, it is absolutely
clear that that is the reason for the lack of significant
progress in the return of refugees to Kosovo. Where
are the security and prosperity we were promised
when Kosovo was unilaterally declared independent?
Regrettably, no response to that question exists.

The utmost attention must be paid to the matter
of the protection of Serbian religious and cultural
heritage. There are ongoing cases of interference
by local authorities in the matter of the property
of the Serbian Orthodox Church and of attempts to
expropriate its property or complicate the use of sites
belonging to it. The Church of Christ the Saviour
in Pristina is systematically subject to vandalism.
Obstacles are levied when addressing the consequences
of such desecration and the rebuilding process. We
are extremely concerned about the campaign to seize
economic assets belonging to Serbian State companies
and bodies.

A striking example is the recently adopted law on
the nationalization of the mining complex, Trepca. The
very sustenance of a significant portion of Serbians,
those living in the north of the province, depends on
that mining company. Such decisions do not help to
resolve the situation. Indeed, in adopting that law, the
leading Kosovar party did not bother to consult with
its nominal partners in the coalition of the Assembly
of Kosovo, the Serbian List. As a sign of protest, the
Serbian List boycotted the activities of that body.
Again, such methods do not contribute to national
reconciliation. As Mr. Dacic' rightly said, the attack was
not on the complex, but rather on Serbians.

It is time for serious work with Pristina. Despite
every effort, the mediators in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina have failed to break the stalemate.
There is an increasing number of issues surrounding
the dialogue. For the fourth year in a row, practically
nothing has been done to implement the key agreement
on the creation of the association/community of Serb
municipalities in Kosovo. Attempts are made to divert
attention from the true cause of the state of affairs - the
sabotaging of the agreement by Pristina by fomenting
inter-Kosovar disputes on the legality of the delineation
of the border with Montenegro, which supposedly is
hampering the so-called Kosovo Government in its
actions. We think that matters concerning the property
of the Serbian State bodies, companies and private
individuals in the province account for a large part
of the problem and require greater attention from the
Mission. The Mission should manage that matter more
actively.

The Kosovar authorities have had a symptomatic
and almost allergic reaction to the recent court ruling
with respect to former members of the Kosovar
Liberation Army (KLA). Attempts to invalidate
the verdicts, including through the use of threats,
demonstrate the context in which the work of the
Specialist Chambers and the Specialist Prosecutor's
Office for the investigation into war crimes by the
KLA is being conducted. Regrettably, preparation for
the beginning of the court's work is marked by a lack
of transparency. International bodies and countries
participating in the drafting and implementation of
that project are accountable to the Security Council in
providing full, timely updates on the implementation
of the project. The priority is to ensure the thorough
investigation of crimes by the KLA and the punishment
of perpetrators.

With regard to the work presently being undertaken
to launch the Specialist Chambers and the Specialist
Prosecutor's Office to investigate war crimes by the
KLA, we have questions about the status of the regular
reporting of the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) regarding the formation and
functioning of the Specialist Chambers and its bodies,
including the Office of the Specialist Prosecutor. Let us
not forget that EULEX was approved by the Security
Council in this very Chamber. I hope that my colleagues
in the European Union will take this opportunity to talk
to us about current developments.

Furthermore, we know that the prosecution of
the Kosovars guilty of crimes has been entrusted
to a most dubious body, the Specialist Court, which
is being created by the unrecognized authorities of
Kosovo, whose legal system can hardly be considered
mature enough for the conduct of such serious legal
proceedings. The system of appointing judges and the
role of EULEX in it is far from transparent. For that
matter, we ask to be informed about developments. We
welcome the inclusion in the report of information,
which we had called for time and again, regarding
the investigation of the tragic cases in Kumanovo,
Macedonia, in May 2015. We think that the matter
should continue to be monitored until those responsible
for that criminal terrorist act are identified and brought
to justice.

I would also like to touch on the issue of the
Kosovo Force (KFOR). We regret that there has been
an attempt by KFOR, with thought of pretext to avoid
contact with Russian representatives. It seems that our
partners do not wish to discuss those issues, which does
not serve to resolve them. We hope that today's meeting
will send a message. We see violations of resolution
1244 (1999), as well as of the United Nations mandate,
when attempts are made to transform KFOR into a full-
fledged armed forced.

We take note of information with regard to an
agreement reached on telecommunications between
Belgrade and Pristina. Its implementation will be of key
importance. That is the very weak link in the dialogue.
No tangible progress has been made in carrying out
key agreements on the creation of the association/
community of Serb municipalities in Kosovo, since
April 2013, but that is the key to guaranteeing the rights
and freedoms of Serbians. We think that further delays
in the process with invented pretexts can only further
degrade the situation in Kosovo and around it.

In the current circumstances, keeping a watchful
international eye on processes in Kosovo is of particular
importance. In that connection, it is important to ensure
stable staffing and budget parameters for UNMIK.
We see no reason to review the practice of quarterly
reporting on the Mission's activities. For now, the
situation in Kosovo does not require that. In particular,
we would like to underscore the fact that no one has the
right to call into question, much less revoke, resolutions
and make irresponsible statements in the Chamber.
Resolution 1244 (1999) remains fully applicable and
is still the obligatory international legal basis for the
settlement of the situation in Kosovo.

