Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by extending France's deepest sympathy
to China following the incident that occurred in the east
of the country earlier today.

I thank Ethiopia, Senegal and Egypt for convening
today's important debate. I also thank Ms. Maria Luiza
Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet to the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Smail Chergui, Commissioner for
Peace and Security of the African Union, for their very
insightful briefings.

I would also like to warmly congratulate Secretary-
General Guterres, Mr. Donald Kaberuka and their
teams who worked on the report (S/2017/454) submitted
pursuant to resolution 2320 (2016).

Resolution 2320 (2016) launched a process to
achieve two complementary goals: first, to deepen the
strategic partnership between the United Nations and
the African Union on matters of peace and security;
and secondly, to increase funding for African Union
peace operations when they are mandated by the
Security Council. The Secretary-General identifies
the specific modalities that would ensure an ongoing
and improved partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. We welcome and encourage
the resolute commitment on the part of the Secretary-
General to strengthen relations with the African Union,
which he clearly demonstrated when he participated in
the Summit of Heads of State held in January.

Mr. Kaberuka and his team submitted an excellent
analysis of the status of African peace operations and
put forward a programme of work to improve their
existing framework and the way they are planned,
conducted and financed. That analysis has already been
deemed to be successful because it has brought together
all of the member States of the African Union to work
on project that would improve the continent's future.

France welcomes the momentum created by
resolution 2320 (2016). The efforts underpinning that
momentum must continue. Current developments
illustrate how such efforts respond to the situation
on the ground and meet a need. It is true that our
African partners make increasing and more effective
contributions to efforts to ensure peace and security in
Africa. African peace operations offer an undeniable
comparative advantage to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There is an increasing number of situations
in which the partnership is already operational or will
be required. We now have a historic opportunity to
build a stronger, closer and more coherent partnership
framework between the United Nations and the African
Union, which can be activated and adapted to each
situation as required.

I will keep my remarks brief because we will
have a more in-depth discussion during the interactive
dialogue to be held after this meeting. The message we
would like to convey here today is that France welcomes
the efforts under way and the momentum created. We
therefore intend to play an active role in the Security
Council and with the African Union and its member
States in order to establish a new and innovative
cooperation mechanism for peace and security.

