Mr. Rutte (Netherlands): There have been several

occasions this year when weapons of mass destruction
have endangered our security, undermined international
stability and caused terrible suffering. The year
2018 has made the importance of non-proliferation
abundantly clear. I agree with you, Mr. President, that,
as politicians, we are first and foremost responsible
for keeping our own citizens safe, and I believe that
multilateral institutions play a major role where the
issue is concerned.

As I will say in my address to the General Assembly
later today, the Kingdom of the Netherlands has always
championed and will continue to champion the rules-
based international order and multilateral cooperation,
especially homeland security matters and other issues
of shared concern. Multilateral cooperation requires
active support from all of us, including and even
especially on the issue of weapons of mass destruction.
We should acknowledge the significant achievements
that have been made in controlling those weapons.

For 50 years, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons has kept the number of nuclear
weapon possessors under 10. We can only imagine
how much conflict, instability and violence that has
prevented. I am encouraged that United States, Russian
and British Foreign Ministers have underlined their
continuing support for, and commitment to, the NPT
on the occasion of its fiftieth anniversary.

Wehaveseensomepositivestepsonnon-proliferation
this year in relation to North Korea. The ultimate
goal of our joint efforts is to ensure that North Korea
abandons its nuclear ballistic missile capabilities and its
programmes on weapons of mass destruction. It should
do that in a comprehensive, verifiable and irreversible
manner. We welcome the efforts you, Mr. President, are
personally making to achieve a nuclear-weapon-free
Korean peninsula. For we know that the problem can
only be resolved peacefully. As Chair of the sanctions
committee, the Netherlands is doing everything it can
to ensure that all nations fully implement the sanctions
so as to keep up the pressure on North Korea to comply
with its international obligations.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, endorsed by
Security Council resolution 2231 (2015), remains a
good example of how the Council and the international
community can work hand in hand for non-proliferation.
The International Atomic Energy Agency has
concluded, in 12 consecutive reports, that Iran is abiding
by its commitments under the deal. As long as that
continues, we will also uphold our commitment to the
deal. At the same time, we are concerned about Iran's
role in the region - its ballistic missile programme and

human rights record. In particular, Iran's support for
Hizbullah, the role Iran plays in Syria and Iraq and in
the development of missiles by the Houthis in Yemen
remain serious concerns for the Netherlands that need
to be addressed.

The repeated use of chemical weapons is deeply
alarming. It causes terrible human suffering and erodes
the established international norm. There should be no
impunity for any use of chemical weapons - not for
the large-scale attacks in Syria or for the individual
attacks in Malaysia and the United Kingdom. The same
goes for the possible use of chemical weapons by the
Syrian regime in Idlib.

All of us, both within and outside the Council, bear
a responsibility, because of the stalemate in this organ,
we have tasked the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to investigate and identify
those responsible for the use of those weapons. We
cannot sit back, we have to speak up, take action and
firmly support the OPCW so that the perpetrators can
be brought to justice, and we need to do it together.
Indecisiveness by countries that claim to support
the principles of disarmament and non-proliferation
could ultimately have disastrous consequences. And
with regard to the Salisbury attack, we reaffirm our
confidence in the United Kingdom's investigations. We
welcome it bringing criminal charges as an important
step towards justice, which bolsters our earlier
conclusion that it is essential to hold those responsible
to account.

In conclusion, the devastating consequences of the
use of weapons of mass destruction serve to underline
the urgent need to take action. The use of those weapons
must never become the new normal. We must prevent
impunity at all costs. A legal norm can be effective
only if we collectively uphold it together as part of a
multilateral effort.

