Mr. Wolff (United States of America): The
United States welcomes this opportunity to have an
exchange of views with other United Nations Member
States on the implementation of the measures set out in
the annex to the note by the President of the Security
Council (S/2006/507), issued in July 2006. The

Council takes seriously the Charter mandate in
Article 30, that it shall adopt its rules of procedure, and
takes equally seriously the importance of making sure
that other United Nations Members, our partners in the
maintenance of international peace and security, are
informed and appropriately involved in the Council's
work.

For over a decade there has been an ongoing
dynamic effort in the Security Council to ensure that
information concerning the Council's work is readily
available to all United Nations Member States.
Increased use of Internet websites has facilitated this
process.

The elected members of the Council have made
significant contributions to this effort, particularly
through their active participation in the Security
Council's Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions. All members of the
Council have supported the effort to enhance the
efficiency and transparency of the Council's work. In
July 2006, they expressed their commitment to
implementing the measures devised for that purpose.

The Security Council has issued a steady stream
of notes by its President aimed at demystifying Council
practice and procedures. The notes have been
published as official United Nations documents and are
listed in the Security Council's report for the year in
which they were adopted. Most also appear in a topical
index published in February 2006. They cover a broad
range of relevant subjects, including the agenda, the
annual report, briefings, documentation, meetings and
formats. Highlights of these notes are presented in a
concise and user-friendly list in the annex to document
S/2006/507.

Today's debate offers an opportunity for the
Council to meet with the beneficiaries of that list to
hear first-hand whether the practical application of the
innovations listed in the annex to document
S/2006/507 have helped them to follow the Council's
work. It is a consumer survey which gives Member
States an opportunity to voice their views on
implementation.

At the same time, receptivity to the measures
taken by the Council remains disappointing. We had
hoped that the briefings by the Council's President
would provide first-hand information to Member
States, but attendance at those briefings has been
sparse. Similarly, despite the Council's efforts to have
greater recourse to public meetings, the Chamber is
often half-empty. Nor has identification of the formats
used in Council meetings - designed to assist other
Member States in understanding the nature and purpose
of the scheduled exchanges of Views - stimulated
participation. In May, when the Chairmen of the
Council's Committees briefed on counter-terrorism
activities, a topic of concern certainly to all Member
States, less than 10 non-members of the Council joined
the debate.

We hope the wider membership will take better
advantage of the improvements already made to
Council working methods, and we intend to listen
carefully to constructive comments in order to assess
the effectiveness of practices and measures taken by
the Council to enhance efficiency and transparency.
That information will inform the future efforts of the
Council's Working Group on documentation and
procedure.

