Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Chambas for his briefing. Recently the situation in
West Africa and the Sahel has been largely stable, and
a number of countries in the region have registered
positive progress with their political processes. At the
same time, the countries of the region are still dealing
with threats such as the activities of Violent extremist
and terrorist groups, cross-border organized crime and
natural disasters. China hopes that the international
community will strengthen its cooperation and respond
jointly to the region's security challenges. I would like
to make the following four points.

First, the international community should provide
strong support to the countries of the region in fighting
cross-border organized crime and the activities of
terrorist organizations. The Multinational Joint Task
Force formed by countries in the Lake Chad basin, and
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), represent the region's independent responses
to those challenges and its joint efforts to maintain
collective security, and an important contribution by
African States to peace and security in the region.
China supports the provision of the necessary financial
support by the United Nations to the G-5 Sahel for
operationalizing the Joint Force.

Secondly, the international community should
support the efforts of regional and subregional
organizations to play their unique roles. Countries in
West Africa and the Sahel are dealing with difficulties
such as cross-border security challenges and
humanitarian needs that require ajoint response on the
part of the countries in the region. The international
community should respect African aspirations, respond
to African needs and support the efforts of the African
Union, the Economic Community of West African
States and the Lake Chad Basin Commission to properly
handle and resolve regional and subregional problems.

Thirdly, the international community should
address the root causes of conflicts when assisting the
countries of the region in handling hotspot issues. The
international community should focus on building the
capacities of the countries of the region, support the
countries concerned in implementing the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development and the African Union
Agenda 2063, and assist the countries of the region
in eliminating, as soon as possible, the root causes of
conflict so as to achieve sustainable development.

Fourthly, the various United Nations agencies
should enhance their coordination and create synergies.
UNOWAS should continue to work in accordance with
its mandate, enhance collaboration with all actors
concerned and promote regional peace and stability. The
United Nations country team and the United Nations
Development Programme, as well as other agencies,
should fully leverage their respective advantages,
enhance coordination and cooperation with UNOWAS
and play a constructive role for regional peace, stability
and development. China will continue to support the
work of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Chambas and UNOWAS going forward.

Strengthening cooperation with African countries
as well as other developing States has always been
a priority of Chinese diplomacy. Last September,
during the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation, peace, security and economic
development, inter alia, were identified as the priority
areas of China-Africa cooperation going forward. The
China-Africa Peace and Security Fund and the China-
Africa Security Forum, which were created by the
Forum on Africa-China Cooperation, have provided
active support to the efforts of the countries of West
Africa and the Sahel in maintaining regional security
and combating terrorism, and they serve as important
platforms for the enhanced exchanges between China
and Africa in the area of peace and security.

Since its inception, the China-United Nations
Peace and Development Fund has provided financial
support to a number of African projects for building
peacekeeping and counter-terrorism capacities. The
successful visit by China's State Councilor and Minister
for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Wang Yi, earlier this month
served to further consolidate the friendly relations
between China and Africa and deepen the results-
oriented cooperation between the two sides. China
will work together with the international community
in providing continued support to Africa to facilitate
capacity-building for peace and security as well as
socioeconomic development, with a View to achieving
peace, stability and prosperity in the region at an
early date.

