Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): At the outset, Sir, I
should like to welcome the accession of your country,
New Zealand, to the presidency of the Security Council
and to congratulate you personally on the very able
way in which you have conducted the discussions and
the work of the Council since the beginning of the
month. Allow me also to express the appreciation of
my delegation to Mr. Ramlan Bin Ibrahim, Permanent
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations, for
the way in which he presided over the deliberations
of the Security Council in June. Finally, I would like
to pay due tribute to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his ongoing and unfailing concern for my country,
as well as his personal involvement in strengthening
peace in my country.

Today's meeting is an important and timely
opportunity to take stock of the progress achieved in
the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo since
the Security Council adopted resolution 2211 (2015)
on 26 March. We have taken note of the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2015/486) on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO).

We have taken careful note of the briefing provided
by Mr. Martin Kobler, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, whose presence among us today I welcome.
We have also taken note of the statement made by the
Permanent Representative of Jordan in her capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

My delegation requests the Council's understanding
in revisiting a number of the points highlighted in the
report that is the subject of our debate, particularly
with regard to the implementation of the commitments
made by my country under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Region, signed in Addis Ababa,
relations with MONUSCO, the progress of the electoral
process, and the security situation in the eastern part of
my country.

As Council members are aware, my country's
commitments under the Framework Agreement can
be summarized by the following general points: the
pursuit of security sector reform with regard to the
army and the police, the consolidation of State authority
in the east of my country, and the fight against armed
groups. My country is also responsible for promoting
the structural reform of State institutions, including
finance reform, and for promoting the objectives of
national reconciliation, tolerance and democracy. Three
years after the signing of the Agreement, there is reason
to claim that the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
met most of its commitments. Since the Government
put in place a legal and regulatory framework for the
reforms to be undertaken in the implementation of the
Framework Agreement, significant progress has been
made, as acknowledged in the report of the Secretary-
General.

In terms of relations with MONUSCO, the dialogue
launched with the United Nations in the context of the
strategic review continues. We are convinced that my
Government will reach common ground with the United
Nations and that an agreement will surely be reached
on the issues that are the subject of the discussion.

Regarding the elections, I can confirm that the
establishment of democracy in my country became
a reality with the organization of the first truly free
and democratic elections in our history in 2006; the
organization of legislative and presidential elections,
with a term expiring in 2011; effective decentralization;
and the planned holding of local, municipal, urban,
provincial, senatorial, parliamentary and presidential
elections in 2015 and 2016. My delegation wishes to
reassure the Council and to affirm the resolve of my
Government to anchor itself more than ever in the
democratic culture. Thus, after an open and lively
debate, the National Independent Electoral Commission
published a comprehensive calendar of upcoming
elections and set the budget for the organization of
the entire electoral cycle. This reflects our desire to
organize transparent and credible elections.

But as recalled by His Excellency Mr. Joseph
Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic and Head
of State, in his address to the nation on the occasion of
the commemoration of the fifty-fifth anniversary of the
accession of our country to international sovereignty,
the road leading to the third cycle of elections in our
country is littered with a number of obstacles that must
be removed so as to enable the conduct of elections in a
peaceful climate.

Those obstacles are related to the comprehensive
electoral calendar that was vociferously demanded by
the opposition, yet immediately challenged after its
publication, and to the financing of the electoral process
which was assessed well after the adoption of the 2015
budget. The total requirement for the organization of the
elections amounted to over $1 billion, while the actual
budget for all Government requirements was limited to
$9 billion. Another obstacle was the participation in the
2015 election of minors who came of age during the
electoral cycle and were excluded by the electoral law.
The law provides, in effect, that this important segment
of the Congolese population can take part only in the
upcoming elections after the renewal of the electoral
register.

One last obstacle was the imperative of securing
the electoral process. We had regrettable experience
of political intolerance and rejection of the election
results by the losers leading to deadly violence during
and after the 2006 and 2011 elections. To address that
situation, the President of the Republic has engaged
the nation in consultations and dialogue with a view
to uniting the majority, the opposition and civil society
in an agreement on ways and means to overcome these
obstacles. It is important to note here that the appeal
for political dialogue on the part of the Head of State,
is a matter for the Congolese, who must learn to talk
to each other without foreign interference, as occurs
everywhere else.

With regard to our partners and friends, we are
confident that they will peacefully accompany the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in this learning
exercise and strengthening of democracy by avoiding
inappropriate interference, as I have already noted.

My Government has undertaken considerable
efforts in security sector reform; these are well known
to the Council and I shall therefore not dwell on
them. With respect to the security situation, it is true
that some parts of our country remain the subject of
security concerns. That is particularly true regarding a
few pockets of insecurity controlled by foreign armed
groups in the provinces of North and South Kivu. The
Forces armees de la Republique de'mocratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, are doing
their best to secure Beni and its surrounding area, which
remain under the threat of the Ugandan terrorists of
the Allied Democratic Forces. In the same context, the
FARDC continues to fight alone against the Rwandan
rebels of the Forces de'mocratiques de libe'ration du
Rwanda. and its results have been encouraging.

Furthermore, the Government is determinedto close
the file on the former rebellion of the Mouvement du 23
mars (M-23), in the context of which the Government
granted amnesty to many of its members for acts of
war. As to their repatriation, the ninth Extraordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
the International Conference on the Great Lakes
Region, held in Luanda on 18 May, recommended
that the implementation of the Nairobi declarations be
completed within three months and signed between the
Congolese Government and the former rebels of M-23,
particularly with regard to the repatriation of the former
rebels cantonned in Rwanda and Uganda.

To that end, a Nairobi declarations assessment
meeting was held on 7 July in Kinshasa to accelerate
the repatriation of the former M-23 combatants. The
coordinator of the national monitoring mechanisms
observed that the Democratic Republic of the Congo
should put all issues on the table with a view to finally
closing the file, as indicated in the Nairobi report, by
August, at the latest. A Congolese delegation, led by
the Vice-Minister of National Defence, visited Kigali
in early February, where he signed a statement with the
Rwandan authorities on the repatriation of former M-23
rebels. A total of453 former M-23 combatants, who had
crossed the Rwandan border after their defeat by the
FARDC in November 2013, were identified. It is our
belief that the cases registered in Rwanda have been
closed.

In Uganda, on the other hand, the Embassy of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in Kampala
had received 1,763 individual commitments, while
the amnesty committee received 1,678. The gap of 85
commitments represents the category of persons who
had subscribed by mail and who, for the most part, were
already on Congolese soil. To date, 1,670 files have
been dealt with.

In the context of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of the former M-23 combatants,
Mr. Gressly, Deputy Special Representative of
Secretary-General, has disbursed the first tranche as
follows: $1.5 million on the part of the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, $15 million on
the part of the World Bank, $7 million on the part of
Sweden and $6 million on the part of MONUSCO. The
latter will provide an additional $7 million on 1 August.
It should be pointed out that 2,985 ex-combatants
entered training programmes with a viewed towards
their socioeconomic reintegration. Some 1,692 ex-
combatants were trained at the Kamina military base
and 1,293 were trained at the Kitona base; all of them
received a demobilization card. In contrast, the 819
ex-combatants who were trained at Kotakoli were all
transferred to Kamina.

My Government takes careful note of the
Secretary-General's comments and is determined to
move forward in fulfilling its commitments under
the Framework Agreement. It appreciates the true
value of the assistance provided by the United Nations
and hopes for, as stressed by the Secretary-General,
greater and more active mobilization by the signatory
States and guarantors of the Framework Agreement
in implementing the commitments they have also
undertaken so that the Great Lakes region may be a
haven of peace, which is imperative if there is to be
cooperation and development.

I would conclude by saying a word about the
briefing made by the Chair ofthe Sanctions Committee.
Our position on this issue is well known. The ongoing
transfer of weapons to armed groups, or between armed
groups, in violation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions justifies the need for continued close
monitoring of the implementation of the arms embargo
and other measures imposed by the resolutions related
to the Democratic Republic of Congo. But we should be
wary of confusion: the Government, which is subject
to the demands of reforming its armed forces and its
security and police services, should not be put on the
same footing as illegal armed groups, which freely
obtain weapons to maintain insecurity. Basically, it
must be clear that the arms embargo applies only to The President: There are no more names inscribed
armed groups. on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on

Finally, my delegation Wishes to express to all the subject.

members of the Council the gratitude of the people
and the Government ofthe Democratic Republic of the The meeting rose at 11.15 am.
Congo for their dedication to the cause of their country.
