Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation welcomes the convening of
this emergency meeting of the Security Council at the
request of the League of Arab States. I also wish to
thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe for his
briefing.

We regret to see that, just as Palestine and Israel
are beginning to negotiate on the core issue of final
status, the security and humanitarian situation in
Palestine, particularly in the Gaza Strip, has continued
to deteriorate. The confrontation and conflict between
the Israeli army and armed Palestinian elements have
caused large numbers of casualties on both sides,
including many innocent civilians. The total blockade
of Gaza carried out by Israel since last Friday has
created shortages of food, drinking water, fuel,
electricity and other daily necessities, making the
humanitarian situation in Gaza even more serious.

China is deeply concerned about this situation.
The current plight of Gaza's 1.5 million residents is
unacceptable. The international community must take
immediate action to prevent a further deterioration of
the situation. As a first step to ease the humanitarian
crisis, we call upon Israel to put an immediate end to
all of its military operations in Gaza, to lift its
blockade and to open all crossing points so as to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian supplies to Gaza.
In addition, the international community should
provide new humanitarian assistance to Palestine.

Ensuring that all Palestinians' basic humanitarian
needs are met so that they can live free from fear and
deprivation and with dignity is both the ultimate
purpose of peace and the fundamental means of
achieving it. While the international community has
high expectations of the process begun at the
Annapolis Conference, the Palestinians in Gaza are
seeing further suffering in their daily lives, rather than
the dividends of peace. How can we expect them to
have confidence in and support the peace process?

We understand Israel's security concerns and are
opposed to any attacks that target innocent Israeli
civilians. However, history has proved once again that
answering violence with violence and imposing

collective punishment will neither provide security for
anyone nor contribute to the resolution of issues; they
can only aggravate the confrontation and mistrust
between the two parties, which in turn will bring
further suffering to both peoples. If the armed conflict
between the two parties should continue, the prospects
of Israel and Palestine as two independent States living
in peace will become more remote.

At this juncture, the effort to achieve peace in the
Middle East faces both new opportunities and complex
challenges. If we are to ensure that 2008 becomes a
year of hope for both the Palestinian and Israeli
peoples, the efforts of all parties are needed to
overcome the difficulties and obstacles on the path
towards peace. The current crisis in Gaza has become a
real challenge; whether it can be properly managed and
resolved will have a significant impact on the prospects
of the peace talks between Palestine and Israel.

To that end, the international community should
step up its diplomatic efforts and ensure that the
provisions of international humanitarian law, including
the Geneva Conventions of 1949, are implemented in
the Middle East. Both Palestine and Israel should be
urged to exercise restraint and to refrain from any
action that could lead to a worsening of the situation.
Meanwhile, parallel actions should be taken to
establish stability in the Gaza Strip and to find a long-
term solution that will improve the humanitarian
situation on the ground.

Once again, we call on the parties concerned to
act in the overall interests of the peace process in the
Middle East and to take measures to resolve the crisis.
We also call on them to reject any interference, to
reach internal consensus and to push the negotiation
process forward. The international community,
including the Security Council, should stand ready at
all times to provide any help that is useful.

