Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to begin by congratulating you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I would also like to thank you for
having convened today's open debate on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

I would like to commend your friendly country on
its call to ease the suffering of the Palestinian people
and empower them to enjoy their rights and establish
the sovereign State of Palestine based on 1967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. I also thank you for
the support that you personally represent in that regard.

The past few days have seen the opening of a new
chapter of violence in Jerusalem and the occupied
Palestinian territories. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
firmly condemns all the illegal steps taken by the Israeli
occupying authorities in Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. Jerusalem endured for more than 1,000 years
under Arab Muslim rule, during which the sanctuaries
of Judaism, Christianity and Islam were respected
and protected, as were the worshippers in holy areas.
During the half-century of the Israeli occupation, the
Al-Aqsa Mosque was deliberately set on fire in 1969,
and worshippers in the Abrahamic sanctuary were
massacred by the terrorist settler Baruch Goldstein,
who was glorified by the people and Government of
Israel after his death.

The terrorist settlers have not stopped plotting,
devising provocations and calling publicly for the
demolition ofAl-Haram Al-Sharifand the exclusion and
expulsion of Muslims from Jerusalem, in coordination
and cooperation with the Israeli occupation authorities.
Today we continue to watch in pain as the Israeli
occupying authorities have besieged Jerusalem and
the Al-Aqsa Mosque, prevented worshippers from
performing their religious rites and reacted with
barbarity to peaceful protests. One such scene has been
documented, in which we saw an Israeli soldier on our
television screens kicking a Muslim worshipper as he
prayed. Has anyone here seen a worse demonstration of
disregard and contempt for a religion and the practice of
its rites? An act of such shamelessness is an expression
of the doctrine of the Israeli occupation, its oppression
of the unarmed Palestinian people and its deliberate

policy of insulting, humiliating and terrorizing them.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia firmly condemns
all terrorist acts, regardless of the identities of the
perpetrators or their victims. We condemn all States,
organizations and individuals who practice, ignore or
help to finance or incite terrorism. We believe there can
be no justification or excuse for terrorist acts.

It is disturbing that the Security Council has not
taken measures to express anger at the acts of the
Israeli occupying Power, and we urge it to uphold its
responsibilities and to put a stop to Israel's continued
anti-Palestinian practices. We reiterate our firm position
of support to the Palestinian people and rejection of
any attempts to impose control and unilateral measures
designed to show contempt for Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. We also want to warn the world about the
danger of the situation's exacerbation and escalation,
which would have an impact on the entire region and
beyond. My delegation has warned the Council several
times that the most dangerous aspects of the conflict
in Palestine are Israel's provocations and plans aimed
at changing Jerusalem's historical status, Judaizing
the city, altering its demographics, distorting its Arab
Muslim identity and disrespecting all its holy Muslim
and Christian sites. Saudi Arabia rejects any attempt
to harm Jerusalem's status and calls on all States to
commit to the relevant international resolutions in
that regard.

My delegation affirms that the only path to peace is
through a return to the Arab Peace Initiative and to the
development of an effective mechanism guaranteeing
the Palestinian people's enjoyment of their inalienable
rights. The occupation must be ended in accordance
with a specific timeline, establishing an independent
State with Jerusalem as its capital within the June
1967 borders; ensuring Israel's withdrawal from all
the occupied Arab territories, including the Syrian
Golan and the Lebanese Sheba'a farms; ending the
construction of illegal settlements on Palestinian lands
and removing existing ones; and reversing all the
unilateral measures that have been undertaken by the
occupying Power in Jerusalem.

With regard to Syria, Saudi Arabia welcomes the
agreement reached between the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, the United States of America and the Russian
Federation on a ceasefire in south-western Syria. We
hope that no-fly zones will be established in Syria
in order to guarantee civilians' safety and protection
from the barbarities of the Syrian regime and its
allies, particularly in view of the fact that we continue
to witness the Syrian regime violating every truce
agreement and massacring, murdering, terrorizing
and displacing its people with the assistance of Iran's
Revolutionary Guard and terrorist sectarian militias led
by Hizbullah.

We should emphasize that a lack of accountability is
one ofthe most important reasons behind the continuing
criminal acts of the Syrian authorities and their allies.
We therefore reiterate that the international community
should continue to take a firm stand against all acts
of killing, siege, deliberate starvation, displacement
and ethnic cleansing, which have provided a golden
opportunity for Da'esh, the Al-Nusra Front and others
to expand in the absence of an authority. Saudi Arabia
once again affirms its willingness to participate in any
joint international effort to eradicate such terrorist
organizations, wherever they may be found.

We believe that the Syrian people's struggle and
aspirations for freedom and dignity are destined to
be victorious, even if that may be somewhere down
the road. Peace and justice are two sides of the same
coin, and the security and stability of our region and
indeed the entire world require that they go hand in
hand. We therefore call for the immediate and essential
implementation of the first Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex), including the formation of a
transitional authority with the executive power to
establish a future Syria big enough for all its citizens, a
Syria that denounces terrorism and violence and stands
above discrimination and extremism.

