Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I would like to express
my appreciation to the Indonesian presidency for
holding this important open debate. I would also like to
thank the Secretary-General for presenting his report
(S/2019/373) on the issue before us.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later by the observer of the European Union.

Unfortunately, little has changed since the first
Security Council open debate on the protection
of civilians in armed conflict, 20 years ago (see S/PV.4046). We have 14 reports of the Secretary-
General, with more than 200 recommendations on the
issue, but we still cannot ensure the protection of the
most vulnerable strata of the population.

The development ofnew technologies in recent years
should have improved the ability of the international
community to protect humankind from the devastating
consequences of war. Yet those technologies are
building a world that pays little heed to the demands
of reality. And the reality is that global and human
security have deteriorated markedly in the past decade.
Peace and security indicators continue to regress,
bringing to new heights the number of deliberate acts
of violence against those protected under international
humanitarian law.

It is therefore imperative that the cornerstones
of international humanitarian law adopted and
recognized by the international community be fully
respected and protected from any attempts to demolish
them. Accountability for war crimes, Violations of
international humanitarian law and violations and
abuses of human rights should become the new normal.

Regrettably, Ukraine has become an example of the
consequences of a Violation by one of the permanent
members of the Security Council of the norms and
principles of international law, including international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we value the fact that
the report of the Secretary-General on the protection
of civilians reflects the dire situation of the civilians
affected by the Russian military aggression in Donbas
in Ukraine. We are also grateful to the Polish delegation
for raising that issue so eloquently in its statement
earlier.

The Russian-led war in Donbas has plunged
the lives of the civilian population into a vortex of
destruction and death. As of now, according to the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the civilian death toll stands at more
than 3,300. Every third civilian killed is a woman or
child. Just in February, a bus carrying civilians was
blown up near the village of Olenivka, in the Donetsk
region. Two civilians died on the spot as the result of an
anti-tank mine explosion.

The hostilities also threaten the population with
unprecedented environmental catastrophe, not only for
Ukraine but the whole of Europe. In the Donbas region,
an ever-present risk from groundwater pollution and
subsidence, due to improper closures and subsequent
flooding of coal mines, highlight the need to take
the necessary measures to prevent an environmental
disaster. The decision by the Russian occupation
authorities to cease groundwater pumping at the
Yunkom mine, used in Soviet times for nuclear testing,
endangers groundwater, rivers and, ultimately, the Sea
of Azov with radioactive contamination.

Moreover, the Donetsk filtration station, a facility
that holds huge stocks of chlorine, remains under
constant shelling by the Russian occupation forces.
An accident at that station could be of a scale like
the Chernobyl disaster. They also continue to plant
landmines. The unexploded remnants of war continue
multiplying in the temporarily occupied territories of
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions, especially in densely
populated areas. That has already made Ukraine one
of the most landmine-contaminated countries in the
world, with almost half of civilian deaths being caused
by landmines.

As a party to the Fourth Geneva Convention relative
to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War
and its Protocols Additional, Ukraine attaches great
importance to enhancing the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The recently adopted mine-action law
establishes the framework for humanitarian demining
in Ukraine, which enables the minimization of risks for
people living in mine-contaminated areas.

Ukraine and many members of the Council recently
expressed their deep concern about the provocative
and unlawful decision to issue Russian passports
to Ukrainian citizens in the temporarily occupied
territories of Ukraine. That step could further curtail
the human rights of the local civilian population and
provoke a dangerous escalation of the situation. We
must recall that imposing citizenship on the residents
of an occupied territory can be equated to compelling
them to swear allegiance to a Power that they may
consider hostile, which is forbidden under the Fourth
Geneva Convention. In view of what I have stated here,
this dangerous development must be duly reflected
on and assessed in the next report of the Secretary-
General. Time and again, we continue to urge Russia to
uphold all its obligations under applicable international
law as an occupying Power.
In conclusion, I would like to underline Ukraine's
strong commitment to the protection of civilians
and ensuring accountability for all violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law
on its territory.

