The Secretary-General: Before I begin, I would
like to express my felicitations to you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of March. I would also like to express
my appreciation to Ambassador Arias of Panama for
his able conduct of the work of the Council during the
month of February.

Since last Wednesday, there has been a deeply
alarming escalation of violence in Gaza and southern
Israel, and a terrible civilian death toll. The scenes
from Gaza today have been particularly disturbing.
Some 117 rockets have been fired from Gaza at
southern Israel, including 26 rockets today. Those
rockets have been fired at several civilian centres and
have extended as far north as the Israeli city of
Ashkelon. According to press reports and Israeli
Government sources, the rockets fired at Ashkelon are
08-25715
not home-made Qassams, but rather rockets of
advanced Katyusha-like design, allegedly smuggled
into Gaza when the border with Egypt was breached.
One Israeli civilian has been killed in Sderot and five
civilians were reported injured in Ashkelon today,
including women and children.

During this same period, the Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) have undertaken attacks from the air and
by land on targets in the Gaza Strip. An estimated 90
Palestinians have been killed, among them many
civilians, and injuries are in the hundreds. According to
United Nations estimates, 59 Palestinians were killed
today, including 39 civilians, among them three women
and five minors, including an infant. Let me stress that
there are many conflicting reports on the numbers of
casualties, and those figures are not confirmed.
Additionally, there has been heavy property damage.

Israeli land incursions are taking place near
Jabaliya and the northern Gaza Strip. Two Israeli
soldiers are reported to have been killed in the fighting.
The IDF reports that it destroyed a truck carrying 160
rockets. United Nations sources report at least four
incidents of Israeli fire against ambulances and medical
personnel. The Palestinian Ministry of Health has
issued a call for diesel in order to operate its
ambulances. All schools of the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) have been closed, and many families
are trapped inside their houses by the violence, unable
to obtain medical aid or reach safety. I call on Israel to
facilitate full access to hospitals and medical centres
for the injured.

At the outset of this escalation, I publicly made
clear my deep concern, and I have been diplomatically
engaged to press for a calming of the violence. I have
spoken today to Palestinian President Abbas, Israeli
Foreign Minister Livni and League of Arab States
Secretary-General Amr Moussa. United Nations
agencies on the ground, especially UNRWA, are
continuing their efforts to assist people in grave
distress.

In the light of those deeply disturbing
developments, I would like to make the following
clear.

I condemn Palestinian rocket attacks and call for
the immediate cessation of such acts of terrorism,
which serve no purpose, endanger Israeli civilians and
08-25715
bring misery to the Palestinian people. I call for an end
to these attacks.

While recognizing Israel's right to defend itself, I
condemn the disproportionate and excessive use of
force that has killed and injured so many civilians,
including children. I call on Israel to cease such
attacks. Israel must fully comply with international
humanitarian law and exercise the utmost restraint.
Incidents in which civilians have been killed or injured
must be investigated and accountability must be
ensured.

I am deeply concerned at the possibility of the
violence escalating, and have offered our strong
support for all efforts to bring about an end to the
violence and a period of calm. I call on all parties to
step back from the brink of even deeper and more
deadly clashes.

I am also extremely concerned at the impact of
these developments on the negotiation process. I call
on all members of the international community,
important stakeholders and Security Council members
to exercise their influence on the parties to stop the
violence and to allow humanitarian relief. All parties
should rededicate their commitment to the peace
process.

