The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea and the Republic of Korea, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Pak Gil Yon
(Democratic People's Republic of Korea) and
Mr. Choi Young-jin (Republic ofKorea) took seats
at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to the
request contained in a letter dated 4 July 2006 from the
Permanent Representative of Japan addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2006/481.

Members of the Council have before them
document 5/2006/488, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of the members to
document S/2006/482, containing a letter from the
Permanent Representative of the United States, and
document S/2006/493, containing a letter from the
Permanent Representative of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Argentina, China, Congo, Denmark, France,
Ghana, Greece, Japan, Peru, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Slovakia, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1695 (2006).

On behalf of the members of the Security
Council, I warmly welcome Mr. Shintaro Ito, Vice-
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Japan.

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


