Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): First and foremost, on
behalf of my country I would like to express our deepest
condolences to the people and the Government of
Pakistan for the barbaric terrorist attack that occurred
today.

I would like to thank His Excellency Mr. Moussa
Faki Mahamat, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
African Integration of Chad and President of the
Security Council, for organizing this important debate
to further the efforts of the United Nations and the
African Union (AU) to forge stronger ties as partners
in peacekeeping. Your presence here today, Sir,
demonstrates the importance that Chad attaches to the
furtherance of partnership between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. Such
partnership builds the possibilities for a prosperous
and peaceful tomorrow, particularly on the African
continent. I also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his statement and for his concrete action over the
years to promote United Nations-AU partnerships in
peace operations, and President Pierre Buyoya, the AU
High Representative for Mali and the Sahel, for his
briefing.
As Rwanda's tenure on the Council comes to an
end, we are happy to contribute once again to this issue
of great importance to us. Just this past July, during
Rwanda's presidency, the Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2167 (2014), which calls for strengthening
regional partnerships in peacekeeping and stresses the
need to enhance the predictability, sustainability and
flexibility of financing for regional organizations when
they undertake peacekeeping under a Security Council
mandate. It also requested the Secretary-General to
initiate, in cooperation with the AU, a lessons learned
exercise on the transition from AU to United Nations
peacekeeping operations in Mali and the Central African
Republic and to present specific recommendations for
future transitional arrangements by the end of the year.

The presidential statement adopted today
(S/PRST/2014/27) at the initiative of Chad serves to
reinforce resolution 2167 (2014) and other previous
actions by the Security Council. It is an articulate
expression of the Council's resolve to strengthen
coordination and capitalize on the comparative
advantages of two great organizations. The challenge
we face today is to instil a positive will for partnerships
of this kind so that they move from ad hoc status to a
more structured framework.

Over the past decade, African countries, with
the support of international partners, have engaged
in a collective effort to develop regional capacities
for peace support operations, as per the creation of
the AU Peace and Security Council and the African
Standby Force (ASF). As a result of those efforts and
of bilateral support to Member States, there has been a
steady improvement in African capacities to respond to
crisis situations through the deployment of increasingly
larger and complex peace support operations. In that
regard, Rwanda welcomes the establishment of the
first regional brigade of the African Standby Force,
composed of 10 member States with a strength of 5,200
troops ready to be deployed.

Nevertheless, while much has been achieved
through those and other partnerships, there is still room
for improvement. The fact remains that the AU has
often struggled when it comes to operational capacity,
which highlights the importance of matching resources
to mandates. Mandated missions must have adequate
funds and other necessary resources, including troops
that are appropriately prepared. We have learned the
hard way that rapid regional engagement and response
mechanisms are essential in a world where political
will and defence budgets are both declining. There is
an obvious need for rapid responses to violent conflicts,
which are often unpredictable, and partnerships with
regional organizations in Africa and elsewhere are
fundamental in that regard. In accordance with resolution
2167 (2014), we commend the ongoing lessons learned
exercise that is being conducted by the Secretariat and
look forward to concrete recommendations.

Financing is another very important issue, and we
hope to see substantial recommendations on predictable
financing ofAU operations from the High-level Review
Panel. Furthermore, as outlined in the presidential
statement just adopted, Rwanda supports the initiative
to secure more financial resources from within the
African continent.

I will conclude by noting that today is another
day and another step towards a better future through
better structuring and better elaborating on the needs
of African States and sharing the needs among those
States, regional and subregional organizations and
partners, including the AU, the European Union and
the United Nations. Today's presidential statement and
our constructive debate demonstrate the resolve of the
international community to establish more-predictable
frameworks and working relationships when it comes
to integrated peacekeeping operations.

