The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Portugal.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for a very comprehensive briefing on the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) and the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), and also
Mr. Sylvain-Goma, Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States, and Ambassador
Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations, for their important
statements to the Council. I also welcome the presence
of the Permanent Representatives of the Central
African Republic and South Sudan.

The Lord's Resistance Army has committed
atrocities across Central Africa for too long. Portugal
strongly condemns the continued violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law by the
LRA, including the use of brutal tactics that include the
deliberate recruitment and use of children, killing,
maiming, rape, sexual violence and abductions. We
firmly urge the LRA to put an end to those practices
and to release all abductees.
Over the years, the Governments of the region,
with the assistance of the international community,
have taken steps aimed at ending the threat posed by
the group. As a result, the LRA has seen its numbers
reduced significantly. However, regardless of its
current small number, the LRA remains capable of
having a terrible impact on the civilian population, thus
threatening regional stability. It is therefore crucial that
all actors - the Governments of LRA-affected
countries, the African Union (AU), the United Nations
and other international, regional and bilateral
partners - continue to engage until the threat is
removed. We are very much encouraged by the
renewed attention that the AU and the United Nations,
including the Council, are giving to the issue, which
now needs to be sustained and translated into further
action.

We commend the important efforts undertaken by
the armed forces of the four LRA-affected countries to
counter the threat posed by that group, as well as other
initiatives by the international community, in
coordination with the United Nations and the AU, to
work with the military of those countries. However,
there is room for further improving the effectiveness of
those efforts, particularly through enhancing
coordination, cooperation and information-sharing
among the different actors, including both the States in
the region and the United Nations missions. We believe
that the United Nations is well positioned to lead the
in-depth process, in coordination with the AU.

The African Union's efforts to implement the
regional cooperation initiative on the LRA must, on the
other hand, be supported by the international
community. In that regard, we highlight the importance
of the rapid appointment of a special envoy. At the
same time, we must bear in mind that, in order to
effectively counter the LRA threat, we must increase
international and regional efforts, under United Nations
leadership, in coordination with the AU, to support the
affected countries in protecting their civilian
populations. That means increasing not only initiatives
that support capacity-building, good governance and
the rule of law, but also very concrete improvements
regarding relevant communications infrastructures,
which will have a considerable impact on the safety of
local communities.

In parallel, the international community, the
United Nations and the AU need to reassess ways to
improve the provision of humanitarian and
development assistance to the populations of LRA-
affected areas. Humanitarian organizations can play a
very important role in that context and must be
encouraged to strengthen their presence in those areas.
At the same time, their presence has an important
deterrent effect on LRA attacks, and therefore again
contributes to the safety of local communities.

Another important action to counter LRA
activities is to intensify messages urging LRA fighters
to defect and promoting disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and resettlement or repatriation
programmes. Consistent messaging reaching all LRA-
operating areas must be expanded. The United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has made progress in that
regard, but similar programmes should be developed in
South Sudan and the Central African Republic.

I will conclude on the LRA by underlining once
again the importance of sustaining the engagement of
the Security Council on the issue. The recent
developments to combat LRA activity are encouraging
and should continue. The draft presidential statement
to be adopted today, the first since that of 2006 (see S/PRST/2006/29), is another step. It sends a strong
signal to LRA leaders, on the one hand, and to the
civilians living in LRA-affected areas, on the other. It
ensures that the Council will continue to follow the
issue closely. Portugal will spare no efforts in
continuing to mobilize the international community
and to improve the United Nations response to that
scourge.

Turning now to UNOCA, whose work so far
seems very encouraging, as stated in the recent report
of the Secretary-General (S/2011/704), particularly
considering that the Office was only established in
January. With regard to the LRA, which is the main
issue linking the two comprehensive briefings that we
had the opportunity to hear today, UNOCA can play a
very important role in facilitating cooperation among
the various United Nations entities present in the
region, the AU and the LRA-affected countries in order
to counter the LRA threat.

Furthermore, we believe that UNOCA's work will
contribute significantly to enhancing United Nations
engagement towards the achievement of peace and
security in Central Africa, namely, through providing a
focal point for United Nations engagement, helping to
build the institutional capacity of countries in the
region, and supporting regional efforts to address
cross-cutting issues of concern. The importance of
UNOCA continuing to develop its activities, in close
coordination with the Economic Community of Central
African States, must be highlighted. In that regard, the
participation of the Secretary-General of that regional
organization in today's meeting is a very positive and
encouraging sign.

We must commend the ongoing efforts
undertaken by UNOCA, in coordination with the
United Nations Office to the African Union (UNOAU)
and regional and international partners, regarding the
relevant security challenges with great impact not only
on the West and Central Africa subregions, but also on
the entire international community, such as piracy in
the Gulf of Guinea and illicit flows of arms and
fighters. The joint UNOCA-UNOAU initiative to
promote an integrated United Nations response to the
negative consequences of the recent conflict in Libya
in West and Central Africa is another project that
should be developed and encouraged.

I conclude by reiterating strong support for the
innovative efforts of UNOCA addressed at helping to
prevent the emergence of new conflicts, resolving
existing ones by peaceful means and promoting
democratic and accountable governance in the
subregion of the Central Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Central African Republic.

