Twenty years ago resolution 1325 (2000) was a small revolution. For the first time, a united Security Council made it crystal clear that women's full, equal and meaningful participation is required to maintain world peace and security; gender equality is not only about fairness and human rights but also about security and conflict prevention; and sexual and gender-based violence is not an inevitable by- product of war but a crime that must be punished and abolished. The adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) was the result of an exceptional wave of civil society engagement. Hopes were high. And the pledge was clear: women's voices were to be heard, and their seat at the peace table was no longer rejected. It is clear who is accountable to these expectations: us, the States Members of the United Nations. Twenty years and nine hard-won Security Council resolutions later, the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda continues to be too weak. Women are still excluded from peace processes. Their rights and interests continue to be ignored in building post-conflict societies. So let me be frank, as a global community we have not lived up to our commitment. Too often, conflict- related sexual and gender-based violence remains unpunished. Even worse, in the past years we have seen a global pushback on women's rights. Principles and rights that we agreed upon decades ago are once again questioned. Let us pause for a second and think about this. Twenty years ago all members of the Security Council agreed to the principles that are enshrined in the agenda. I doubt that today we would still be able to achieve such a milestone. Germany is determined to advance the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000). Over the past two years as a Security Council member, we have made women and peace and security a key priority of our work. We initiated resolution 2467 (2019) to strengthen the rights of all survivors of sexual violence and to hold perpetrators accountable. Survivors' human rights, including sexual and reproductive health and rights, must be guaranteed. We are convinced that including civil society in our debates is vital. Many of them, such as Ilwad Elman, who just won the Africa Prize in Berlin, were quoted today. Civil society plays an essential role in filling the women and peace and security agenda with life. We gave them a voice in the Security Council during our Council presidencies. In April 2019 and July 2020 alone, 26 civil society speakers addressed the Council. Now the Council must follow up on their recommendations. And we pushed hard to include the women and peace and security agenda in all Council products. Our aim is to make the women and peace and security mainstreaming approach the norm. That also means that mandate renewals and sanction regimes need to be gender responsive. Let me be clear: we have a joint responsibility to implement what we have agreed upon. And that is without watering down any of the commitments that we have signed up for. We have all the necessary instruments at hand. What is needed is the full implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and all subsequent resolutions on women and peace and security. Last year, Foreign Minister Heiko Maas called for specific commitments to implement the agenda before the twentieth anniversary. Seventy-five Members States and United Nations entities came forward with concrete proposals, the majority of which have been implemented. Let me emphasize our deep respect to all the activists outside, the women peacebuilders. They do a fantastic job on the ground. We can and should support these women. Support, funding and protection are the three keywords here. We will continue to support civil society and protect women peacebuilders and women's human rights' defenders inside and outside of the Security Council. As board members of the Women's Peace and Humanitarian Fund, we are planning to further step up our support in addition to the €4 million that we have already contributed in the past two years.
