Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
As you come to the end of your term as President of the
Security Council, I congratulate you, Madam, on your

 

talent, wisdom, sense of humour and determined exercise
of authority - but above all on your refined practice of
providing cookies in your office.

I welcome the representative of Haiti to the Security
Council. I salute the clarity of his statement and I am
particularly grateful to him for having kindly made mention
of me personally.
I thank the Secretary-General for his positive report on
the United Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH). My
delegation congratulates all the members of the team that
worked on it. We sincerely echo the words of praise in the
final two paragraphs of the report for all those who
participated in and contributed to the success of the
Mission.

As other representatives have said, for the first time in
the history of Haiti there has been a change of Government
and of President through a democratic electoral process
declared by international observers to have been clean,
impartial and peaceful. This unprecedented event was made
possible by the firm support of the international community
for the efforts of the people of Haiti and of the legitimate
authorities of that country. The crucial role of the United
Nations has been unanimously recognized, as has the fact
that this has been among the most successful operations
carried out by this Organization.

The new extension of the mandate of UNMIH, which
Chile supported, is a clear indication of the Security
Council's interest in the great political advances achieved
in Haiti and of its determination to continue to support and
consolidate the ongoing peace process.

Haiti has become, along with Costa Rica, one of the
two countries in our region to depend solely on internal
forces and police for its security and public order. It is
therefore necessary to strengthen, train and professionalize
the police and to instill in it a culture of democracy.

In this second phase of the work of UNMIH we
should lay the groundwork for a fitting transition to and
consolidation of a climate conducive to investment and
development. We in the Latin American and Caribbean
region have made enormous efforts to support Haiti; the
report of the Secretary-General makes special mention of
this. Regional institutions such as the Inter-American
Development Bank and the Organization of American
States have also made considerable and sustained
contributions. We in the region renew our hope that we will
be able to continue our intensive cooperation, with a view
especially to building Haiti's ability to make good use of
the resources that the international community has made
available to Haiti for its reconstruction. We agree with the
report of the Secretary-General that special attention must
be given to poverty alleviation and to restoring
macroeconomic equilibrium.

Let me take note of one important element of the
resolution we have just adopted. As members will recall,
from the time of the January 1992 meeting of the Security
Council at the level of Heads of State or Government, the
Council's official concept of peace was no longer the
mere absence of armed conflict, but became an integral
concept of peace that indissolubly linked its two
constituent parts: security and development. In adopting
the present resolution, the Council has reaffirmed that
concept by

"Recognizing the link between peace and
development and that a sustained commitment by the
international community to assist and support the
economic, social and institutional development of
Haiti is indispensable for long-term peace and
stability in the country". (S/1996/I36, ninth preambular para.)

Another reason for great satisfaction is the fact that
the Council's support for Haiti is aimed at restoring
democracy in Latin America and the Caribbean - a
primary objective for the countries of our region.
International support, in particular from the United
Nations system, is critical to the task of consolidating the
values and the culture of democracy. To achieve this goal,
it is in the economic and social field that the greatest
efforts must be made. It will be difficult for those who
must daily face a lack of the basic necessities of life to
commit themselves to a democratic system unless it
brings about a genuine improvement in their low standard
of living.

That is why the United Nations cannot consider its
mission to be accomplished if there is merely an apparent
climate of calm. The Security Council must ensure the
continuation of the operations of the system, so that other
bodies can undertake economic reconstruction and
rehabilitation in an ongoing consolidation of the peace
that has been achieved through the transition to
democracy in which the country is now engaged.

I want to take particular note of Canada's offer of a
significant contingent, which will enable UNMIH to fulfil
its mandate. As the representative of Canada has made

 

known to us informally, that contingent will be completely
financed by his country, in line with the request in
paragraph 11 of today's resolution. Even though Canada
has not yet formally advised the Council of this, I want to
note that this is the kind of commitment and decision that
engenders true belief in what the United Nations stands for.
I thank the representative of Canada for what his country
has done.

The non-aligned members of the Security Council and
all the States of Latin America and the Caribbean expressed
in timely fashion the high political priority they attach to a
renewed mandate for UNMIH. I therefore wish to thank all
the members of the Council that showed the necessary
flexibility in order to arrive at this agreement. It was a
complex and sometimes intensive process, but I never lost
hope that in the end, the collective responsibility of all the
members of the Council to respond with vision and with
foresight to the needs of the Haitian people would prevail.
This is a sign of trust in Haiti; it is a gesture of solidarity
with the people of Haiti and a responsible exercise of the
authority of the Council and of its individual members.
Chile welcomes this decision.

