Mr. Fathalla (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the
outset to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Nigeria's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
this month. I also thank Mr. Serry for his briefing this
morning.

Since its inception, the League of Arab States has
played its role with respect to the question of Palestine,
given that it is a cause crucial to the Arab nation. In that
context, we have worked at creating a real vision of the
nature of the Arab-Israeli conflict. We have worked to
try to find a just solution to the issue, and for almost
70 years the Arab League mechanisms have been based
on that objective. In that regard, I would like to recall
the Arab Peace Initiative adopted at the Beirut summit
in 2002, which was welcomed by the international
community as a true vision that could complement the
resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council, which is, in fact, the guarantor of peace and
security.

Based on our conviction as a regional organization
of the importance of the Security Council, successive
Arab summits have stressed the need to address and
remain in contact with the Council, so that peace in
the Arab region may be realized, through the complete
withdrawal of the Arab territories occupied in 1967, in
particular the occupied Syrian Golan and Lebanon, and
through the respect by Israel, the Occupying Power, of
international law, resolutions of the Security Council,
resolutions that Israel has arrogantly ignored for years.

It is therefore necessary for the Security Council
to address Israel's attempts to undermine the peace
process through a two-pronged strategy. First, it agrees
in principle to negotiations and begins them, but then
imposes a status quo that subverts their purpose on the
ground. The best example in that regard is the Israeli
authorities' approval of a settlement project at the very
moment when the negotiation under the auspices of the
United States of America were beginning. Secondly,
it seeks pretexts for stopping negotiations with the
Palestinians. We see that in the Israeli reaction to the
Palestinian reconciliation.

That reconciliation will lead to the unity of the
Palestinians, of the people and the Government. It
is an essential part of the peace process because it
affirms the unity and the contiguity of the Palestinian
territories between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. It
is one of the bases for a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace that enjoys international support. It is also one
of the bases for the establishment and construction of a
Palestinian State on the territories occupied in 1967, in
accordance with the principle of two States.

The success of the national reconciliation, which
will lead to the formation of a national unity Government
that will represent the Palestinian people, is the sole
guarantee of achieving the unity and contiguity of the
Palestinian territories. It is therefore necessary for the
international community and the Security Council to
welcome that as positive step, instead allowing Israel to
use it as an excuse for stopping negotiations.

Developments over the last 60 years have shown that
the peace process in the region will not be successful
unless Israel makes a complete withdrawal from the
Palestinian and Arab territories occupied since 1967,
in particular the Syrian Arab Golan and the south of
Lebanon. In that regard, the Arab League reaffirms that
Israel's position, which is in violation of international,
Security Council resolutions and what peace requires,
could force the Arab League to revisit the way the
international community and its mechanisms deal
with the question of Palestine and the Arab-Israeli
conflict. It is now necessary to change methodologies
and find new mechanisms for Arab action on the basis
of international resolutions aimed at ending the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian and Arab territories.

The League of Arab States has many questions
about the possibility ofbringing about a comprehensive
and just peace. With respect to the issue, the Arab
League has made appeals in the past and continues
today to make appeals at the ministerial level and at its
summits for the world to recognize the serious nature
of the Israeli violations of international humanitarian
law on the ground and the way that the State of Israel
deals with the issues of the settlements, prisoners,
the separation wall and the unjust blockade imposed
on Gaza, despite the numerous calls to the Security
Council to live up to its mission.

The limited nature of the Security Council's
response has very frequently disappointed us. Indeed, it
caused us at our last summit, held in Kuwait on 25 and
26 March, to present numerous demands, inter alia, that
the international community undertake efforts to bring
an end to Israel's occupation actions in the Palestinian
territories and the implementation of the relevant
resolutions, in particular resolutions 465 (1980) and
497 (1981), which reaffirm the illegality of Israel's
settlement policy and the necessity of dismantling the
settlements as violations of international law.

Secondly, we appeal to the Security Council to
adopt a resolution restricting and condemning Israel's
expansionist projects and putting an end to the Israeli
settlement policy.

Thirdly, we have reaffirmed the need for the
international community to implement the advisory
opinion of the International Criminal Court of
9 July 2004 (see A/ES-10/273) and General Assembly
resolution ES-10/15, on the illegality of the racial
separation wall, adopted on 20 July 2004, which called
upon the Secretary-General to establish a register of
damages related to the construction of the wall.

Fourthly, we strongly condemn the Israeli
declaration that the Al-Aqsa Mosque is an integral
part of the territory of Israel, as well as the attempts
by Israeli law to dismantle the Mosque by splitting it
between Jews and Muslims. That is a serious escalation
in its ongoing attacks against the sanctity of the Mosque
and the holy sites of Islam and Christianity. UNESCO
must live up to its responsibilities in that respect.

With regard to the Syrian Arab Golan, it is

necessary to reaffirm that the continued occupation of
the Syrian Arab Golan since 1967 is a constant threat
to peace and security in the region and in the world.
Secondly, t is also necessary to condemn Israel for its
practices in the occupied Syrian Arab Golan based on
illegal seizure ofland and resources. It is also necessary
to condemn the construction of settlements and other
forms of expansion, as well as the exploitation ofnatural
resources. We must call on the international community
to respect international law in that sphere. Thirdly, we
demand that the United Nations, the Security Council
and the Human Rights Council require Israel to respect
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and to protect
the freedom of movement of the inhabitants of the
Syrian Arab Golan so that they can visit their relatives
in Syria. The international community must live up to
its responsibilities in that respect.

With regard to the Syrian crisis in general, despite
the appeals ofthe Arab League to the Security Council,
in the light of the current situation and the impasse
in negotiations in Geneva between the delegations
of the opposition and the Syrian Government, the
Kuwait summit welcomed the adoption of resolution
2139 (2014), on the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, and called for its implementation.
We have also appealed for the adoption of a political
solution, as stipulated by the declaration issued at the
first Geneva Conference and the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative.

In regard to the situation in Lebanon, the Arab
Summit expressed solidarity with Lebanon and support
for the political and economic efforts of the Government
of Lebanon to guarantee the unity and stability of the
country. In particular, we called for the implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions so as to halt
Israeli violations of Lebanese territory, airspace,
maritime borders and civilian areas.

In conclusion, inasmuch as international relations
are intensely intertwined and complex, we feel that
the conflict in the Middle East is not limited to its
regional dimension. It is a multifaceted conflict that
is a threat to international peace and security and
has deteriorated in various areas of the region. The
situation speaks to the inability of the Security Council
to assume its responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. I would like to recall
the first paragraph of the Charter of the United Nations,
which calls for preserving future generations from the
scourge of war.

