Mr. Ali (Malaysia): Let me first of all
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August 2008 and thank you for convening this open
debate on the situation in Timor-Leste. We also
congratulate Ambassador Le Luong Minh, Permanent
Representative of Viet Nam, on his successful
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July 2008. My delegation joins others in welcoming
His Excellency Mr. Zacarias Albano da Costa, Foreign
Minister of Timor-Leste. We wish to express our
appreciation to Mr. Da Costa for being present at this
open debate and for providing us with valuable insight
into the developments in Timor-Leste.

My delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his report on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) (S/2008/501) and
Mr. Atul Khare, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Timor-Leste, for his briefing on
the situation in that country.

The events of 11 February 2008 that saw the
attacks on President Jose Ramos-Horta and Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao rattled not only the people of
Timor-Leste but also the international community at
large, in particular neighbouring countries such as
Malaysia. Many were concerned that this could undo
the many positive developments that have been
achieved in Timor-Leste as it begins to move out of a
post-conflict situation. The quick reaction by the
Government of Timor-Leste, in close cooperation with
UNMIT, in handling the situation and preventing the
incident from veering onto the path of further violence
and uncertainty, is commendable and proves that the
people of Timor-Leste desire peace and stability in
their country. The international community must
respect and support that desire and in this regard
should continue to work together towards making
peace, stability and development in Timor-Leste a
permanent reality.

We are pleased to note from the report and the
briefing by the Special Representative that significant
progress has been made in many areas, including
security sector reform, rule of law and governance,
political reconciliation and social and economic
development. But there is still much to be done to
strengthen those areas in order to avoid backsliding to
a situation of instability. We are encouraged by the
steps taken by UNMIT, the United Nations system in
general and international partners in implementing
long-term solutions to the challenges faced by Timor-
Leste.

We note that UNMIT has been effective in
discharging its mandate. We commend the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the hard
work he has undertaken, together with the Government
and the people of Timor-Leste, in ensuring that peace
and stability prevails; to our mind, that is essential for
the development of the country. We remain supportive
of UNMIT. We agree with the Secretary-General's
observation related to avoiding a precipitate adjustment
of the mandate and strength of UNMIT at the moment.
We concur also with the view stated by the Secretary-
General in his report and the findings of the expert
mission to Timor-Leste on policing (see S/2008/329)
that long term efforts are needed to give proper traction
to the reform of the security sector, especially with
regard to reconstituting the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste (PNTL), properly integrating the rule of
law, implementing economic and social development
and building effective and sustainable democratic
institutions and governance.

At the same time, the national institutions of
Timor-Leste should continue to be engaged and should
be given sufficient time, under the guidance of
UNMIT, to enable those institutions to nationally own
all the reforms and programs undertaken by UNMIT.
That will ensure that initiated reforms and projects will
have a better chance of enduring beyond the conclusion
of UNMIT's mandate.

My delegation firmly believes that a successful
transformation of Timor-Leste towards peace and
stability will require continuing commitment and
assistance by the international community. In that
regard, I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate
Malaysia's continuing support for and cooperation with
Timor-Leste, both bilaterally and multilaterally. The
Malaysian police was one of the first police
contingents to be deployed to Timor-Leste under
UNMIT following the disturbances in 2006 and
continues to remain the second largest police
contingent under UNMIT. Malaysia continues to
provide assistance in human resource development for
officials from the Timor-Leste Government through our
technical cooperation programme.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's appreciation to Mr. Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, and to Ambassador Dumisani Kumalo,
Permanent Representative of South Africa and
Chairman of the contact group on Timor-Leste, for
providing leadership to UNMIT and the contact group,
respectively, and to congratulate them on their efforts
in working closely with the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste and the international community in
ensuring more progress on achieving peace, stability
and development in Timor-Leste.

