Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I congratulate you, Ambassador Wronecka, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I wish you and the
delegation of friendly Poland every success.

I would also like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and
Ms. Ursula Mueller, Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, for their briefings.
Current developments in Yemen complicate
international efforts and the efforts of the Council to
achieve a political settlement to the conflict in Yemen.
The solution would be based on the agreed terms of
reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcome of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 2216 (2015). The current developments
also prolong the conflict and hamper efforts to end
the coup d'e'tat staged by the rebellious Houthi armed
militias supported by Iran. The coup led to a large-scale
humanitarian disaster, while a settlement would lead to
the recovery of the hijacked State institutions and meet
the aspirations of the Yemeni people to build a new
federal Yemen based on justice, equality, the rule of
law, peace, security and development.

A few days ago, the temporary capital of Aden
and the State institutions were subjected to an armed
rebellion against the legitimate Government by the so-
called Southern Transitional Council and its Security
Belt Forces, which receive financial, logistical and
media support from the United Arab Emirates. The
Yemeni Government reiterates its position as set out
in its Foreign Ministry communique of 10 August,
which described the events in Aden as an armed
rebellion that undermines Yemen's stability, security
and unity and is at variance with the main aim of the
coalition that supports legitimacy in Yemen - ending
the coup d'etat and Iran's interference in Yemen and
the region. I would like to explicitly underscore that,
without the full support provided by the United Arab
Emirates to plan, stage and finance the rebellion, it
would not have happened. The disintegration plan is
full swing despite all the calls for calm from the sisterly
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Yesterday's attack in Abyan
governorate continues today against the military police
headquarters, a special security forces encampment
and other State institutions.

The Yemeni Government holds the Southern
Transitional Council and its supporter responsible for the
military rebellion. The Government further calls on the
United Arab Emirates to immediately cease providing
support to those rebellious militias, to conform with
the aims of the Coalition and to stop supporting plans
that would undermine the unity, security and stability
of Yemen as well as the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, which leads the Coalition against the Iranian
plan in Yemen and the region.

The Yemeni Government values the distinct and
sincere position of the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia expressed by the Custodian of the Two Holy
Mosques, King Salman Bin Abdulaziz A1 Saud, and
Crown Prince Mohammad Bin Salman Bin Abdulaziz
A1 Saud, as well as the communiques of the Arab
Coalition for supporting the legitimate Government
led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, in particular
the communique dated 10 August, which calls on the
rebellious militias to withdraw from all civilian and
military facilities; allow for the return of legitimate
forces to such facilities; hand over weapons pillaged
from military bases; stop interfering in the functions
and works of State institutions; stop all violations
against innocent citizens and military, security and
civilian authorities throughout the regions controlled by
the Southern Transitional Council; and stop subjecting
the city of Aden and its peaceful population to further
chaos and fighting.

The Yemeni Government welcomed the call of the
Ministry for Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia addressed to the Yemeni Government and all
parties to meet in Jeddah in order to maintain the
constant Yemeni national interests. We dealt with it
positively and with high degree of flexibility knowing
the Kingdom's good faith and sincere intentions.
Despite that call, forces of the Southern Transitional
Council supported by the United Arab Emirates have
continued at all levels the military escalation on the
ground. Accordingly, we renew our rejection and
condemnation for the continued financial and military
support provided by the United Arab Emirates to the
southern transitional forces, which is unlawful, and we
call to cease such support immediately.

The Yemeni Government underscores once again
the need to implement the Stockholm Agreement, in
particular the Al-Hudaydah Agreement, as a necessary
step for building trust, establishing lasting peace in
Yemen based on the agreed terms of reference and
alleviating the suffering of our Yemeni people. We call
for the launching of redeployment operations, pursuant
to the agreed operations plan, and the implementation
of the tripartite verification mechanism that covers all
those operations.

The situation relating to the floating oil tanker
FSO SAFER, in the port of Ras Isa, which is carrying
1,140,000 barrels of crude oil, is particularly alarming.
The Yemeni Government contacted the United Nations
and its agencies on that situation in March. We call
on the Secretary-General and the Security Council
to urgently take the necessary measures in order to
put pressure on the Houthi militias so that they allow
a technical team to assess the situation and start
emptying and maintaining the tank as soon as possible.
Regrettably, more than two months after that call, the
technical team did not accomplish its mission because
the Houthi militias did not allow it to reach the tanker,
turning a blind eye to the natural catastrophe that could
be unleashed, which would harm all the coastal States
surrounding the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, not to
mention international transport passages in the region
and the economic as well as environmental damages
that will affect the livelihoods of all coastal populations
dependent on fishing.

Armed Houthi militias continue all kinds of stark
and explicit violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law. Those violations include
arbitrary detention, abductions and abuses against
Yemeni civilians in the absence of legal proper
procedures. The militias are randomly using huge
quantities of landmines in all the areas under their
control, including Al-Hudaydah and Taiz governorates,
as well as in coastal villages along the Red Sea.
Indeed, at least 172 civilians have been killed and 136
injured by landmines since January 2018. Moreover,
improvised explosive devices have been placed at
sea, posing a threat to international navigation. They
further restrict the movement of civilians in and around
Taiz governorate by setting up barriers and trenches
and using snipers. Even women were not spared from
violations by the armed Houthi militias.

The militias have also been impeding the delivery
of humanitarian aid, terrorizing humanitarian workers
and illegally seizing their personal belongings as well
as those of humanitarian organizations in Sana'a,
while also disrespecting their independent status. They
practice violence and compulsion on beneficiaries and
impose administrative and bureaucratic impediments
on them. The Houthi militias try to use hunger as a
means to impose their sectarian armed agenda.

The Yemeni Government condemns in the strongest
terms the attacks against the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia by the Houthi militias, most recently targeting
the Shaybah oilfield. We categorically reject the use of
Yemeni territories by the Houthi militias for launching
such attacks against neighbouring countries.

As a remarkable step, the Houthi militias have
normalized their relations with the Iranian regime.
Indeed, they have now even appointed a Yemeni
Ambassador to the Iranian regime. The Yemeni
Government totally rejects this act by the militias
and the political regime in Iran. We condemn it, as it
explicitly contravenes the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions by seeking to legitimize the presence of the
armed militias, in Violation of State sovereignty.

It is high time for the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities and implement its own resolutions
relating to Yemen, as well as to bring an end to the
suffering of Yemeni people due to the unjust war, now
entering its fifth year, led by the Houthi militias with
the support of Iran.

