Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to welcome Mr. Ian Martin,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste, and to thank him for his briefing this morning.

We also commend the efforts of the Secretary-
General to find a peaceful solution to the situation in
Timor-Leste in order to ensure lasting peace, security
and national reconciliation there.

Events in Timor-Leste have accelerated and
deteriorated in recent weeks. It is to be feared that this
will lead to a humanitarian crisis in a situation that is
already exacerbated by poverty. The information
emerging from the camps to which people have fled

from the violence indicates that current conditions
could lead to further tension, given the precarious
circumstances there. We must act rapidly to respond to
the humanitarian needs and to ensure the restoration of
security and stability in Timor-Leste.
In that respect, my delegation welcomes the
actions of the four friendly States amongst us who sent
forces to Timor-Leste in order to restore peace, security
and stability. Despite the strenuous efforts of those
forces, acts of violence and vandalism continue in Dili.
A return to stability requires the strengthening and
combining of the efforts of the international
community to halt the violence, to relaunch the process
of national reconciliation and to overcome all
differences.

The United Nations has played an important role
in the young country of Timor-Leste in recent years.
The Organization has invested much energy in
achieving stability and supporting the young State.
Given the United Nations achievements there and the
need to prevent them from being undermined, it will be
necessary for the international community, through
joint action, especially in the Security Council, to give
total support to an expanded United Nations presence
on the ground and in military terms, as well as to
accord the greatest attention to the proposal to be made
by the Secretary-General concerning United Nations
action in Timor-Leste. That will allow us to establish
conditions conducive to the forthcoming elections.

