Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): First, let me join the
previous speakers in expressing our appreciation to the
United Kingdom presidency for his timely and
pertinent initiative in bringing the crucial issue of the
role of the United Nations in ensuring justice and the
rule of law to the fore of our attention.

It is not easy at this juncture of the deliberations
to uncover any new, unspoken arguments in favour of
the vitality of these two notions concerning the
maintenance of international peace and security.
Thoughtful consideration has also been given to the
importance of the more ambitious role to be performed
by the United Nations in this context.

The unanimity of views expressed by Council
members last week, as well as by other speakers today,
bodes well for the eventual increase in the ability of the
United Nations to enforce these two pillars of the
international code of conduct anytime and anywhere
such a need arises. In this regard, one cannot but fully
agree with the Secretary-General that "the rule of law
is not a luxury and that justice is not a side issue".
(S/PV4833, p. 2)

The international community, and by this I mean
in the first instance the United Nations and its Security
Council, should be resolute, motivated and bold
enough to promote and enforce international law
anywhere necessary and to restore peace and security,
including the undermined sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political unity of its own Member States.

It should also be consistent in doing so, because
otherwise the notorious practices of double standards
and selective approaches that are unfortunately
sometimes favoured by the international community
will seriously shatter its credibility. The result of this is
that the confidence in the role of the international
community on the part of a victimized Member State is
ruined and, at the end of the day, the victim of injustice
might truly believe that it has to rely solely on its own
means in righting wrongs and restoring justice.

Inaction or lack of sufficient action on the part of
the United Nations in ensuring the implementation of
its own decisions sends another wrongful and
dangerous signal to the violators of justice and the rule
of law. The latter begin to believe in their permanent
impunity and thus lack any motivation to engage in the
meaningful search for peace. Therefore, putting an end
to this environment of impunity should be the primary
role and responsibility of the United Nations.

With regard to a specific matter in question,
namely the ongoing conflict between Armenia and
Azerbaijan, how much longer will the United Nations
and its Security Council turn a blind eye to a situation
in which four of the Council's resolutions - 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993)
continue to be ignored by the aggressor State of
Armenia?

How much longer will nearly 20 per cent of the
territory of Azerbaijan, recognized as such by the
United Nations, continue to remain under Armenian
occupation? How much longer will the bitter suffering
of nearly one million Azerbaijani refugees and
displaced persons, who were ousted from their homes
more than ten years ago and who face another winter in
tent camps endure? Unfortunately these questions have
remained unanswered during all these years. It is also
unfortunate that the Security Council fell short of even
naming the aggressor State, let alone taking concrete
action against the country that has openly challenged
the entire world by occupying and committing ethnic
cleansing in another State's territory.

The United Nations should be able to respect its
own decisions. If it wants to strengthen its image and
role in tackling pressing international issues, it should
openly challenge the attempts by some countries to
behave on the basis of fait accompli and force them to
be guided by the letter and spirit of the founding
document of this house organization, the United
Nations Charter.

In conclusion, let me reiterate the view expressed
previously by a number of delegations here, that the
primacy of the rule of law must be the real and sole
basis for the comprehensive settlement of ongoing
conflicts, especially those inter-State conflicts that
have resulted in the violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of United Nations Members States.

The role of the United Nations in this regard can
hardly be overestimated. We genuinely believe that this
debate will produce practical results and will not go
down on the record as a futile discussion. I believe this
will then be to the benefit of all those who desire the
United Nations to be able to efficiently further its
primary mandate.

