We thank the Russian Federation for convening the open debate on this important issue. We also thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2020/946) and all briefers for sharing their insights. Five years after the Fourth World Conference on Women, the Security Council adopted a path-breaking decision on 31 October 2000 - resolution 1325 (2000), which, for the first time, linked gender equality and the maintenance of international peace and security and recognized women's participation as key to resolving conflict and securing peace. Conflict and humanitarian crises already hold women and girls back from progress. The further burdening of health care systems and the economic fallout of the coronavirus disease threaten to put women and girls in war-torn, fragile and humanitarian contexts at even higher risk. The women and peace and security agenda has transformative potential. It is now recognized internationally, but there are still challenges. Patriarchy, inequalities and discriminatory power structures inhibit effective conflict prevention, inclusive peace, women's rights and participation. To realize the transformative potential of the women and peace and security agenda, it is time to move from verbal commitments to action. Governments, the United Nations, civil society and other actors must implement relevant commitments across all thematic areas. States must identify and address barriers to women's meaningful participation in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in post- conflict peacebuilding efforts and programmes. Violence against women and girls perpetrated by terrorists deserves our strong condemnation. Such violence targeting women distorts the very basis on which civilized societies rest. Advancing democratic structures and the rule of law in post-conflict situations is instrumental to addressing the inequalities faced by women and to ensuring their full and meaningful participation in peaceful and inclusive development. It is also important that the Council strive to effectively integrate women and peace and security considerations into sanctions regimes, including by listing terrorist entities involved in violence against women in armed conflicts. The positive impacts of the increased participation of women in United Nations peacekeeping is well recognized. Members will recall that in 2007, India provided the United Nations Mission in Liberia with its first all-female formed police unit. The formed police unit provided critical policing support, deterring sexual and gender- based violence, and helped rebuild safety and confidence among the population. The formed police unite proved to be a strong and visible role model for Liberian women, gaining worldwide attention. India attaches the utmost importance to the representation of women in decision-making positions. In India, more than 1.3 million elected women representatives lead the formulation and implementation of public policies at the grassroots level. India has been using new and innovative people-centric schemes and technologies to advance women's empowerment. Through the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Member States are committed to implementing the women and peace and security agenda by increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women in peacekeeping. Despite United Nations efforts, women form only 5.4 per cent of the military and 15.1 per cent of police in peacekeeping operations. India is committed to working in favour of the meaningful participation of women in peace and security issues. India's experience of mainstreaming women's leadership and political participation will continue to inspire our actions.
