Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
too, want to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
report today and for the efforts he and his staff have
made to produce this document. It is a good piece of
work and an innovative piece of work in helping us to
be more concrete about this important subject.

I also want to join others in thanking you, Sir, and
your delegation for your efforts in working with
Council members and the Secretariat to reach
agreement on the document. I think this was a good
practice and is a good precedent, and I hope we can
emulate it in the future.

We have always considered the protection of
civilians in armed conflict to be at the heart of the
United Nations task and this Council's task in dealing
with war and conflict. Unfortunately, the long list of
examples of the difficult problem that the Under-
Secretary-General provided this morning could be even
longer. It is an urgent and pressing problem, but I think
that today's discussion and the aide-memoire show that
we are, in fact, institutionally making some progress in
dealing with it. I also want to welcome Mr. Oshima's
affirmation of the zero tolerance policy to be followed
when the protectors begin to prey on the protected.

The aide-memoire is a useful step forward, I
think, because it provides clarity, focus and specifics to
the discussion that we are having about how best we
can organize ourselves to afford the maximum amount
of protection to civilians. It sets out rather clearly,
schematically and usefully the instruments that the
international community and this Council can bring to
bear, depending on the circumstances. I was also glad
to hear Mr. Oshima's remarks about how knowledge of
the existence and use of these instruments could be
spread more broadly throughout Governments and the
United Nations system. We support very much the
intent to follow up on the aide-memoire and to refine it
further in the future, as our experience in the use of the
instruments increases.
I was particularly struck by the aide-memoire's
"precedents" column, which shows, I think - as one
would hope - that we are bringing these instruments
to bear. It is also interesting that almost all of the
examples set out in the "precedents" column are
contained in resolutions that we have adopted in the
last two years. I hope this shows that we are, in fact,
merging our operations in the Council with the more
theoretical approach taken in the thematic discussions.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
in November. We join others in encouraging better
coordination and integration within the United Nations
system and between the United Nations system and
nations that are participating in various aspects of
peacekeeping or other operations. I would like to lend
my support to the thought that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO)
consider providing us with a joint briefing on this
effort in the future.

