Ms. Bensouda: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate Japan on assuming the presidency of this
organ for the month of December, and to acknowledge
publicly the notable support your country, Sir, has
provided to my Office, and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) more generally, as an active and committed
State party.

Today, I provide the Council with my twenty-sixth
report on the situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). In the Darfur situation, effecting warrants
of arrest remains a difficult challenge and a crucial area
where greater collaboration is sorely needed. The entire
judicial machinery of the Court can be frustrated and
held in abeyance unless persons sought by the ICC appear
before it. Similarly, States party reception of suspects
the Court seeks to arrest cannot become business
as usual, not least out of respect for the suffering of
victims and their yearning for accountability, and in the
interest of greater enforcement of international justice.

I regret to note that over the years my reports have
highlighted the consistent failure of the Council to act
when a number of States parties to the Rome Statute
have welcomed Mr. Omar Al-Bashir as an ICC suspect
to their territories. These States parties have failed to
comply with the Court's requests for his arrest and
surrender, despite a clear treaty obligation to do so. In
most cases, a lack of legal clarity has been claimed to
justify the failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir.
As the Court's legal jurisprudence, including recent
judicial pronouncements, have reaffirmed, there is no
legal lacuna or ambiguity concerning States parties'
obligation to arrest and surrender ICC suspects to the
Court's custody when they travel to their territories.
My Office has been of the firm and consistent view
that such failures to apprehend Mr. Al-Bashir are
not only a flagrant violation of the Rome Statute but
equally undermine the Council's own reputation and
are an affront to the respect owed to its resolutions. I
have thus repeatedly urged the Council to employ its
powers as a tangible demonstration of its disapproval
of such failures.

For those who may have entertained doubts about
the legal obligations of States parties and the Republic
of the Sudan to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir,
all such doubts have since been dispelled following
the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber II of 6 July. That
decision, it is recalled, related to South Africa's failure
to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the ICC in June
2015. The Chamber found that South Africa failed to
comply with the Court's request to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir, contrary to the Rome Statute, and that
this failure prevented the Court from exercising its
functions and powers under the Statute. That important
decision by the Chamber, which was not appealed by
either party, establishes that there is no legal or factual
justification for South Africa's failure to comply with
its obligations under the Statute to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court.

The Chamber, through that decision, has sent a
clear message that, in such circumstances, there can
be no justification for States parties to fail to arrest
a suspect against whom an ICC warrant of arrest has
been issued, irrespective ofthat person's official status.
It is my Office's hope that this message will be heeded
and, furthermore, that the Council will do its part to
enforce decisions by the Court in relation to situations
that the Council itself has referred to the Court. This
specific inter-institutional role is clearly envisaged by
the Rome Statute and codified, as negotiated during the
Rome Conference, which also saw the participation of
permanent members of the Council.

Ultimately, despite its finding of non-compliance,
the Chamber chose not to refer South Africa to either
the Assembly of States Parties or the Council. The
Chamber's decision in that regard was informed by a
number of factors, in particular that South Africa was
the first State party to utilize article 97 of the Statute to
consult with the Court in relation to a request for arrest
and surrender. In addition, the Chamber took note of
the robust domestic proceedings which concluded that
South Africa acted contrary to its obligations under the
Statute by not arresting and surrendering Mr. Al-Bashir
to the Court. As a further factor in its decision not to
refer South Africa, the Chamber noted that States parties
have been referred to both the Assembly of States Parties
and the Council in six instances in relation to failures
to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir. Additionally, the
Chamber noted that despite 24 meetings ofthe Council,
including my biannual reports, the Council has taken no
action against States parties that have failed to comply
with their obligations to cooperate with the Court.
That, the Chamber observed, is despite proposals from
different States, including Council members, stressing
the need to develop a follow-up mechanism concerning
the referral of States by the Court to the Council.

These developments once again cast the spotlight on
the repeated inaction of the Council in response to any
of the Court's referrals of those States parties, as well
as the Sudan, that have failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while in their territory. That
is a matter ofgrave concern, in particular for the victims
of the crimes allegedly committed by Mr. Al-Bashir
and the four other suspects in the Darfur situation.
Furthermore, this costly inaction has the potential to
undermine the fight against impunity, the effect of
which is to lower the bar of accountability that many
have fought to raise. This continuous nonfeasance only
serves to embolden others to invite Mr. Al-Bashir to
their territory, safe in the knowledge that there will be
no consequences from the Council for such breaches.

Continuing on the issue of non-cooperation, just
yesterday, Pre-Trial Chamber II of the Court found that
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan failed to comply with
its obligations under the Statute by not executing the
Court's request to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
to the Court when he was in Jordanian territory in late
March. The Chamber found, by majority, that because
the rights and obligations provided for in the Statute are
applicable to the Sudan, the immunities of Mr. Al-Bashir
as Head of State under customary international law do
not bar States parties from executing a request for his
arrest and surrender. The Chamber decided that J ordan's
non-compliance should be referred to the Assembly of
States Parties and the Council. The Chamber noted, in
particular, that at the time oer. Al-Bashir's presence in
Jordan in March, the Chamber had already expressed in
unequivocal terms that South Africa, also a State party,
had in similar circumstances, the obligation to arrest
and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir and that consultations
pursuant to article 97 of the Statute did not suspend
this obligation.

In short, since my last report to the Council (see S/PV.7963), Mr. Al-Bashir has travelled to a number
of countries, some of which are States parties and all
of which are members of the United Nations. In that
regard, in relation to other States parties, most recently,
the Republic of Uganda, despite having been referred
to the Council in July 2016 for its failure to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while he was in
Ugandan territory in May 2016, once again invited and
hosted Mr. Al-Bashir during the week of 13 November.
As per protocol, in advance of the visit, the Registry
once again reminded Uganda of its obligation under the
Rome Statute to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to
the Court. To date, there has been no response from
Uganda. It is my understanding that due to the efforts
of civil society, in particular the Uganda Victims'
Foundation, an application was filed at the International
Crimes Division of the High Court of Uganda
requesting, among other things, a warrant of arrest
to be issued and executed against Mr. Al-Bashir. The
Ugandan court declined to issue that warrant of arrest,
in part, according to reports, due to the fact that Uganda
is currently awaiting sanctions from the Council for its
previous failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
on his visit in May 2016. That latest development
emphasizes the importance and consequences of the
Council's inaction on non-compliance referrals by
Pre-Trial Chambers of the ICC in respect of Uganda
and other States that failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir.

Like Uganda, the Republic of Chad was previously
been referred to the Council for its failure to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the ICC while he was on
Chadian territory. The two prior referrals are dated
13 December 2011 and 26 March 2013. It is with regret
that I note that public records show that Chad again
hosted Mr. Al-Bashir on an official visit during the first
week of December.

In relation to Mr. Al-Bashir's travel to non-States
parties, I note his official travel to the Russian
Federation, which is a permanent member of the
Council, during the week of 20 November.
Taken altogether, those events underscore the
detrimental impact on the Court's reputation and
credibility in the eyes of victims, who have pinned
so much hope in the Court to deliver justice for their
suffering. I once again urge the Council to act on the
sensible, moderate and entirely actionable proposal
placed before it by New Zealand and other States.
Concerted and uniform efforts should be made to
discuss the Court's referrals of non-compliance by
States parties to the Council, with the aim of exploring
the options available to compel the States concerned
to comply with their statutory obligations. That will
encourage States to render cooperation to the Court
for the arrest and surrender of the Darfur suspects and
dissuade other States from breaching the cooperation
provisions of the Rome Statute.

I welcome the declarations made on behalf of the
European Union (EU) in relation to Mr. Al-Bashir's
recent visits to Uganda and Russia. In particular, I
welcome the call of the European Union to all States
Members of the United Nations to abide by and
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
notably resolution 1593 (2005). In relation to Uganda,
the EU also urged it to honour its obligations as a
State party to the ICC. I note with appreciation the
expressions of support for the ICC that were provided
in those declarations.

While cooperation has been a significant challenge
in the Darfur situation, I also acknowledge with
gratitude the support and cooperation that my Office
has received, and continues to receive, from other States
parties. That support has been crucial in obtaining
additional information and evidence. Without such
cooperation, the effective discharge of the Court's
mandate can be undermined.

I also note that the Sudan continues to adopt an
antagonistic posture towards the ICC and refuses to
cooperate with the Court. I invite the Sudan to rethink
that position. My Office stands ready to constructively
engage the Sudan on the issue of surrendering any or all
of the Darfur suspects to the Court.

As in the past, I again take this opportunity to
recall that Mr. Al-Bashir and the other suspects in the
Darfur situation are alleged to have committed serious
crimes under the Rome Statute against the people of
Darfur, including murder, torture and persecution. My
Office will continue to independently and impartially
investigate those allegations. Let me once again stress
that Mr. Al-Bashir and all other suspects from the
situation in Darfur are presumed innocent until they
are proven guilty, and the burden of proving their guilt
rests with my Office.

Allow me to also recall that the Council recently
adopted resolution 2363 (2017), which extended the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. In that resolution, the Council
called on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, while stressing
the importance that the Council attaches to ending
impunity, including by ensuring accountability and
bringing to justice the perpetrators of crimes, including
sexual and gender-based violence, that were allegedly
committed by all parties in Darfur. The work of the ICC
is essential for fighting impunity for the world's most
serious and destabilizing crimes, as well as for ensuring
accountability in Darfur. To that end, I respectfully
submit that the Court ought to be actively supported
by the Council and by the international community as
a whole.

Notwithstanding the decrease in the scale of
violence in Darfur, my Office continues to receive
reports of unlawful killing of civilians, as well as of
the continuing forced displacement of approximately
40,000 people due to the conflict. Moreover, while
there has also been a decrease in reports of sexual
and gender-based crimes, my Office notes with great
concern that those crimes are reportedly continuing,
particularly against young girls. Those crimes cannot
be left unaddressed.

Finally, I stress that the annual operating budget
of my Office is increasingly insufficient to support our
ever-growing workload. I again urge the Council and
the United Nations to make suitable arrangements to
provide financial support towards my Office's ongoing
investigative activities in Darfur, as envisaged by the
Rome Statute.

To conclude, I thank you, Mr. President, as well
as the Council and all those who are following the
proceedings before the Council, within the Chamber
or through video-link, for their concern and attention
to the important issues that are the focus of today's
discussions. In sum, concrete follow-up action by the
Council on matters relating to outstanding ICC arrest
warrants will demonstrate the commitment of the
Council, as a pillar of the United Nations system, to
peace and security in Darfur through the vector of
international criminal justice. Accountability for crimes
under the Rome Statute is a necessary complement to
sustainable peace and stability in Darfur. As such, I call
on the Council to prioritize action on the outstanding
warrants of arrest that have been issued by the Court.

To the victims of Rome Statute crimes allegedly
committed in Darfur, Ipledge to them that my Office and
I will continue our efforts to bring those responsible for
such crimes to justice. Notwithstanding the challenges
that we face, our resolve is unshakable. I hope that
there will be solace in knowing that, as the history of
international criminaljustice has often demonstrated in
practice, time is not on the side of perpetrators. Rather,
it is on the side of the victims and the cause ofjustice.

