Mr. Berrocal Soto (Costa Rica) (interpretation from Spanish): In the light of the recent events in the Middle
East, in particular the difficult situation resulting from the
Israeli decision to build a housing project in Hat Home -
a traditionally Arab area in East Jerusalem - which is the
reason for the Security Council's formal meeting today, the
Government of Costa Rica, in the context of its steadfast
support for the peace process in that region, wishes to
make the following statement.

Costa Rica, true to the traditional principles of its
foreign policy, has always expressed its firm and
determined support for the peace process and, in the
context of its deep feelings of friendship for and solidarity
with all the peoples of that region, reiterates that peace,
stability and reconciliation in the Middle East should be
based on faithful compliance with the Oslo accords.

Those principles will determine the positions taken
by our Country in the Security Council, as the
Government of Costa Rica is convinced that the Oslo
accords are the path to peace and that the international
community has an obligation to contribute constructively
to the effective conclusion of this process in a spirit of
solidarity with Israel and the Palestinian National
Authority.

Costa Rica therefore considers it of great importance
that all parties to the peace process should act in
accordance with the agreements made in Oslo, and that
the implementation of the agreements should continue
normally while the concrete and positive actions
necessary to achieve such a goal are carried out. This will
to achieve peace, which was expressed at Oslo and
reaffirmed by the signing of the Hebron protocol, should
be maintained at all costs, in order to overcome negative
situations that impede the proper implementation of
agreements.

Costa Rica believes that in the present circumstances
it is of the utmost importance for the parties to begin as
soon as possible the final stage of the negotiations aimed
at achieving all the necessary agreements for the
definition and establishment of a permanent status. This
should include the matters pending with regard to
settlements, refugees and the permanent status of
Jerusalem.

In this connection, our country wishes to take this
opportunity to reiterate its stance of full and unconditional
support and respect for all the consensual agreements that
maybe undertaken during this final stage by'Israel and
the Palestinian National Authority with regard to the
matters pending, including the status of Jerusalem and the
other matters addressed in the Oslo accord. Costa Rica
has supported the recognition of all the rights of the
Palestinian people since the General Assembly of the
United Nations adopted resolution 181 (II) on 29
November 1947, in particular its right to establish its own
Security COMIC" 37451h meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March 1997

 

State. Costa Rica reaffirms this position and its willingness
to develop full relations of friendship and cooperation with
Palestine.

Costa Rica, also a friend of the State of Israel, pursues
an open and constructive policy regarding the situation in
the Middle East and has always supported Israel in its just
demands for secure borders. Our country also believes that
unfortunately,i in the current circumstances some positions
taken by certain radical Israeli political factibns impede the
full realization of the Israeli people's legitimate desire for
peace and the fulfilment of the Oslo accords. It is therefore
essential to maintain the spirit of Oslo. _

My country trusts that the important mediating role
that the Government of the United States has undertaken
and continues to carry out, along with the importance of the
direct contacts between President William Clinton, Israeli
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the President of
the Palestinian National Authority, Yasser Arafat, will make
it possible to overcome these difficulties and create the
necessary conditions to begin this last and essential stage of
the negotiations.

At the same time, my country believes that it is
essential to point out the important role that President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt and His Majesty King Hussein of Jordan
have played in the peace efforts. Both leaders have
dedicated their best efforts and national endeavours to
create the proper conditions to achieve peace and a
comprehensive solution to the conflicts in the Middle East.

In this context, and in full agreement with the
international community, my country firmly believes that a
firm and lasting peace in the Middle East should be based
on a wide and comprehensive vision that should necessarily
encompass all areas of disagreement. It must also include,
without exception, all the Governments in the region that
have some influence in the settlement of those conflicts.
Otherwise, peace in that sensitive part of the world will
always be precaridus.

In this spirit, Costa Rica reaffirms its support for the
need to maintain and respect, the tenitofial integrity and the
internationally recognized borders of Lebanon. It also
underlines that'a comprehensive solution to the conflict in
the Middle East also requires a just and balanced solution
to the problem of the Syrian territories currently occupied
by Israel. Our country hopes that the development of
constructive negotiations in that direction will come to
complement and unify the current process of negotiations
between Israel and Palestine.

Finally, my country, in its capacity as a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, believes this
to be an appropriate occasion to reaffirm its traditional
and historical policy in favour of peace and international
security through dialogue and negotiations that guarantee
the timely implementation of the resolutions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly of the United
Nations and the full observance of international law.

