Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): It is a pleasure for me to
report on the leg of the Security Council mission to
Africa that covered the meetings at the African Union
Commission in Addis Ababa. It was a pleasure for me
to co-lead that segment with my colleague,
Ambassador John Sawers, Permanent Representative of
the United Kingdom.

The visit by members of the Security Council to
the African Union (AU) in Addis Ababa was within the
framework of cooperation between the Security
Council and the African Union under Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations. The meeting, which
was the third between the two bodies, reviewed the
2

situation in Sudan and Somalia, the resurgence of
unconstitutional changes of government and the
financing of peacekeeping operations in Africa. The
meeting was co-chaired by the Permanent
Representative of Burundi to the AU, who is also the
Chairperson of the AU Peace and Security Council; my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom; and myself.

On the situation in the Sudan, the meeting noted
that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), as a hybrid mission
between the African Union and the United Nations,
was a concrete expression of the commitment of the
two organizations to work closely together. The
members of the Council expressed concern at the
humanitarian situation in the Sudan. It was noted that
the Sudan was now entering a critical phase, with
elections planned for 2010 and a referendum for 2011.
As such, the Sudanese parties should be strongly
encouraged to overcome any obstacles to the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement.

On Somalia, the meeting noted that, while there
had been some progress on the political front, the
security situation remained precarious. The meeting
reaffirmed that the Djibouti Agreement represented the
basis for the resolution of the conflict in Somalia and
stressed the importance of broad-based and
representative institutions established through a
political process that was ultimately inclusive of all.
The meeting commended the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) for its contribution to peace and
security in Somalia and underscored the need for the
strengthening of AMISOM. and the effective
development of the Transitional Federal Government's
security forces.

Turning to the question of unconstitutional
changes of government in Africa, the meeting
welcomed the adoption by the Security Council of a
presidential statement (S/PRTST/2009/ll) on 5 May
2009. The statement expresses concern about the
resurgence of unconstitutional changes of government
in a few African countries and welcomes the preventive
measures undertaken by the African Union and
subregional organizations against unconstitutional
changes of government.

On the financing of peacekeeping operations in
Africa, the members of the Council underlined the
09-35198
importance the Council attaches support for the
development of African capacity in peacekeeping, as
demonstrated by the support package being developed
for AMISOM. Both bodies look forward to the report
to be submitted by the Secretary-General in September
2009 in accordance with the Council's presidential
statement (S/PRST/2009/3) of 18 March 2009, as well
as to the AU's input in that report.

While in Addis Ababa the members of the
Council also met with Mr. Ping, Chairperson of the
African Union, as well as with Ambassador Lamamra,
the Commissioner for Peace and Security. The
members of the Council also met with His Excellency
Mr. Meles Zenawi, Prime Minister of Ethiopia, and
discussed the peace and security situation in the region.
In addition, the members of the Security Council also
met with former President Olusegun Obasanjo, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General on the Great Lakes
region, with regard to the situation in eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the Great
Lakes region. I believe that my colleague the
Permanent Representative of France, who led the leg of
the mission to the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will say something about that.

The conclusion that can be drawn from the visit
to the AU is that the meetings between the two bodies
are useful in strengthening cooperation, in particular in
the prevention and resolution of conflicts,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including the
promotion of human rights, democracy and the rule of
law and the constitutional order in Africa. In order to
facilitate closer cooperation and the desired
partnership, the two bodies should work closely
together to agree upon the optimal modalities for the
organization of their future consultations, including
their next consultative meeting, which is due to be held
in New York in 2010 on a date to be agreed upon.

