Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their briefings. On 18 February, Martin Griffiths sounded the alarm about the consequences of a new escalation of violence on the peace process in Yemen and the progress made since last year (see S/PV.8725). Mark Lowcock, of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, was also not overly optimistic about a humanitarian situation that is deteriorating daily. Today, the picture that has just been presented to us is far from encouraging. We therefore condemn any military escalation and call on the parties to refrain from any action that could jeopardize the progress made towards the resumption of peace talks and the implementation of the various agreements towards a political settlement of the conflict. My delegation supports the appeal made by the Special Envoy during his recent visit to Yemen for an immediate cessation of hostilities and the unconditional resumption of the peace talks. Those talks must be inclusive of all sectors of society, including women, whose achievements we celebrate in this month of March. My country remains concerned about the ongoing human rights violations and non-respect for the fundamental principles of international humanitarian law in a country where one of the worst humanitarian crises in the world is taking place. On 25 February, we renewed our solidarity with the people of Yemen and our commitment to maintaining international peace and security through the adoption of resolution 2511 (2020) (see S/PV.8732). My delegation expresses the hope that this new resolution will play a decisive role in accelerating the political process and overcoming obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian assistance. In conclusion, my delegation urges the parties to respect their commitments and to build trust in order to resume dialogue once and for all and to give every opportunity to the political process, which alone can lead to lasting peace. I will conclude my statement by paying tribute to Ambassador Pierce and wish her every success in her new duties.
