Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I support
the statement in explanation of vote on the American
draft resolution (S/2018/32l) made earlier in the
meeting by the representative of the United Kingdom,
who said that today is actually a sad day. It is a sad
day for the non-proliferation regime, and a sad day
for civilians - particularly women, children and the
elderly - throughout Syria, and specifically Douma
in eastern Ghouta. We ask their forgiveness because
we have disappointed them once again. The Council
has been unable to establish a mechanism that would
hold accountable those who commit crimes by using
chemical weapons in Syria. We ask their forgiveness
because the Council has been unable to put an end
to the serious and gross violations of international
humanitarian law, human rights law and many Security
Council resolutions condemning the use of chemical
weapons in Syria. We ask their forgiveness because
the Council has been unable to hold to account the
perpetrators of crimes related to the use of chemical
weapons in Syria.

Our position has always been clear. We have called
for consensus in the Council on this sensitive issue,
which touches on accountability and impunity. We voted
in favour of the United States draft resolution because it
contains the basic elements that we think are necessary
to establish any new accountability mechanism in
Syria in order to guarantee its independence, neutrality
and professionalism. The mechanism would identify
the perpetrators responsible for any chemical attack,
and then the Security Council would shoulder its
responsibility in terms of sanctions.

We abstained in the voting on the draft resolution
presented by the Russian Federation (S/2016/175)
because it did not include the elements to which I have
referred. It would undermine the credibility of the new
mechanism by depriving it of its fundamental terms of
reference, namely, to determine whoever is responsible
in the event of attacks using chemical weapons. We are
very concerned about the result of voting today because
it will encourage parties to the conflict to continue using
chemical weapons in the absence of accountability.

Kuwait supported the code of conduct whereby the
States members of the Security Council would commit
to not opposing draft resolutions dealing with crimes
against humanity, genocide and war crimes. We also
supported the French-Mexican initiative on abstention
in the use ofthe veto in cases ofhuman rights violations.

As a result of the voting today, and based on
our commitment to abiding by the four Geneva
Conventions and their two Additional Protocols,
international humanitarian law and the final outcome
of 2016 World Humanitarian Summit, we call again
for crimes against humanity and war crimes, as well
as humanitarian issues, to receive due attention. That
would include allowing the safe and sustainable delivery
of humanitarian assistance and medical evacuations,
and preventing the siege of residential areas. These
should be treated as procedural issues; they should not
be subject to a veto so that such human tragedies and
sufferings are never repeated.

