Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): I thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Ms. Sandra Honore, for his
briefing and for her exemplary work in the service of
all Haitians.

Luxembourg aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union.
We recognize the progress made in Haiti, but we are
also aware of the difficulties that still face the process
of stabilizing the country. As Ms. Honore' just said, the
priority in the weeks and months ahead is to hold, as
soon as possible, free legislative and local elections
that are credible and open to all. That is especially
essential to ensuring the continuity of Parliament in
2015. The inter-Haitian dialogue and the El Rancho
Accord, including specifically on the composition of
the Electoral Council, are positive developments that
reflect the willingness of politicial stakeholders to
resolve their disagreements. Nevertheless, we deeply
regret that it has not yet been possible to adopt the
amended election law, which recently led the Electoral
Council to declare that it would not be possible to hold
the elections by 26 October.

We take this opportunity to call on all political
actors in Haiti to pursue dialogue so that the various
elections that have been delayed for so long can be held
as quickly as possible. The continuity of democratic
institutions and the consolidation of the rule of law
are at stake. They are essential for socioeconomic
development and the sustainable stabilization of the
country. The time has come for all political actors to
set aside their differences in the greater interests of the
country and its people.

The challenges in Haiti are numerous. Certainly,
in collaboration with international partners, the Haitian
authorities have managed to relocate about 90 per
cent of displaced persons. But we are very concerned
about the living conditions of people who continue
to live in camps. Their access to water and sanitation
is not guaranteed everywhere, and the rate of acute
malnutrition remains very high. We must also continue
to improve the resilience of those populations against
natural disasters. Although we welcome the progress
made in the fight against cholera, it is clear that the
United Nations must continue to play its full role to
support the Government in its efforts to eradicate that
scourge.

We must properly appreciate the true value
of the fact that the security situation in Haiti has
remained relatively stable overall, including in the
five departments in which the military component of
MINUSTAH is no longer present. We are encouraged
by the significant improvement in the capacity and
professionalism of the Haitian National Police. However,
it is not yet able itself to provide security throughout
the country. The Government of Haiti should therefore
pursue vigorously efforts to strengthen the capacity of
the National Police, in accordance with development
plan for the period 2012 to 2016.

Beyond the police, strengthening all the
institutions for guaranteeing the rule of law and the
protection of human rights is essential for the long-
term stabilization of the country. In that regard, we
welcome the establishment of the Ombudsman's Office,
the promulgation of the anti-corruption legislation and
the pursuit of legal proceedings to try serious crimes
committed in the past. We also welcome the progress
made in recent months in terms of legislation to promote
the protection of children. Nevertheless, there is still
a long way to go to strengthen judicial institutions, to
address the practice of lengthy pre-trial detention and
to improve conditions of detention in prisons.

At our most recent debate, in March (see S/PV.7147),
we expressed the hope that the Council could decide,
against the backdrop ofa full awareness ofthe situation,
the future United Nations presence in Haiti. I would
like therefore to thank the Secretary-General for his
proposal for the reconfiguration of MINUSTAH, which
is based on the results ofa strategic assessment mission
that allowed for consultation with key stakeholders.
Luxembourg supports the gradual transfer of
MINUSTAH tasks to the Haitian Government, in
particular to the Haitian National Police in terms of
maintaing a secure and stable environment. We support
the one-year extension of the mandate of the Mission,
with a deepening of the consolidation process, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. In our view,
the phased withdrawal proposed is perfectly tailored in
order for us to continue to ensure the stability of the
country and to support Haiti and its institutions in view
of the crucial elections of 2015.

