Mr. Vieira de Mello: I shall also speak on behalf
of Jose Ramos-Horta in answering the questions that
were formulated by several of the speakers. But let me
first of all extend thanks to all the members of this
Council and to the non-members of the Council that
took the floor today for yet another unanimous
expression of support for the East Timorese people and
for the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET). Their strong support for the
process we are leading - in particular the electoral
process which is presently under way, as well as the
formation after these elections not only of the
Constituent Assembly, but also of the new, enlarged,
all-Timorese transitional Government - and their
support for the continued United Nations presence after
independence, are, as always, a source of inspiration
and encouragement for the people of East Timor, for
their leadership and indeed for ourselves in meeting the
many challenges ahead of us. East Timor and the
United Nations know that they are privileged to enjoy
such broad, unreserved support from the membership
of this Council and from the membership of the United
Nations as a whole. I can assure them that we shall
continue to endeavour to deserve their confidence,
which we never took for granted.

On the question of foreign relations, and here
definitely speaking on behalf of Jose' Ramos-Horta, the
importance of relations with the region as a whole, but
perhaps in particular with the Association of
South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), have been
highlighted by a number of speakers. As Jose Ramos-
Horta indicated, we came to New York in fact from
Hanoi, where we were invited to attend the ASEAN
ministerial meeting. We also had the opportunity - in
addition to exchanging important ideas and views with
the ASEAN Foreign Ministers on the future of East
Timor and its relationship with ASEAN - to hold
discussions with a number of partners of ASEAN,
including your own Foreign Minister, Mr. President.

It is also a priority for Jose' Ramos-Horta to
establish within his department, which will soon
become a ministry, the capacity to better manage
relations with neighbours and, in particular, with
ASEAN. That is also part of our overall capacity-
building effort.
The importance of relations with Indonesia has
been highlighted by many speakers this morning and
this afternoon, and we very, very much welcome
Ambassador Widodo's confirmation that the new
Government of Indonesia will stay the course set by the
previous Government, led by President Gus Dur.
Indeed, good relations with Indonesia are vital to the
future of East Timor.

I would like to touch on a few points in reply to a
question posed by Ambassador Hume of the United
States. We have made significant progress - indeed, in
recent weeks i on the question of pensions for East
Timorese who formally served in the Indonesian
administration, and we are presently preparing a
consolidated list of those former civil servants who
will be entitled to pensions. But this entitlement - as I
reported to the Council in the past - will cease on the
date of independence. We are continuing discussions
with the Government of Indonesia, which has made a
very, very genuine effort to respond to the expectations
of these civil servants, some of whom remain in West
Timor as refugees and are unlikely to return to East
Timor until this question is resolved.

As for the question of refugees, many speakers
also referred to this issue, and I would like to say at the
request of Jose Ramos-Horta that the East Timorese
leadership is of the opinion - and this is to a large
extent confirmed by the outcome of the civil and
electoral registration - that the total number of East
Timorese refugees in West Timor is, at the most,
60,000 to 70,000. This is the assessment of the East
Timorese leadership.

The Indonesian Government that carried out a
registration of the refugee population in West Timor on
6 and 7 June did a very thorough job, which was
observed by a number of international observers. It has
not yet provided us with final figures. They are still
rechecking, double-checking the data obtained during
that registration, so I am unable to provide the Council
with any final and reliable estimate. But certainly the
Government of Indonesia and ourselves believe that the
fact that only a minority expressed an interest in
returning to East Timor should not be taken as
reflecting the definitive wishes of those refugees. On
the contrary, we believe that the majority - up to 80
per cent of those who remain in West Timor - will
eventually return. No doubt many will choose to do so
after the elections have taken place peacefully, as we
know will be the case.

I must also commend the Government of
Indonesia for very actively supporting all the initiatives
that we have taken in terms of promoting the return of
refugees from West Timor. They have established a
commission known as Satgas, an inter-agency
commission, and Major-General Willem da Costa, who
is the commander of the ninth military region, which
also includes West Timor, has personally accompanied
my chief of staff, Ambassador Parameswaran of
Malaysia, on many visits to West Timor, in order to
provide the refugee population with accurate, objective
information on the situation in East Timor and in order
to counter the systematic disinformation being spread
in refugee camps by some of the most extreme
elements, which belong either to the political umbrella
organization known as UNTAS, or to some of the hard-
line militia groups.

In recent days we have held an important meeting
in Jakarta of the Joint Border Committee. This meeting
covered a number of issues, including the question of a
demarcation of the border between West and East
Timor. In the discussions we held in Jakarta the
Government of Indonesia expressed an interest in
moving forward with this plan, which incidentally
would significantly decrease the likelihood of incidents
such as the one that occurred on Saturday. We welcome
that.

We have also discussed in Jakarta the question of
the enclave of Oecussi, a subject that was raised by
some speakers here today. We discussed arrangements
for freedom of movement for the population of the
enclave, in accordance with the joint statement signed
between Foreign Minister Alwi Shihab and myself on
29 February of last year, during President Wahid's visit
to East Timor.

On the question of judicial cooperation, which
was also raised by some speakers, I think I did state
this morning in my presentation that it was important
that the ad hoc human rights tribunal be finally
established without any temporal restrictions to its
jurisdiction. Unfortunately, as you know, the first
decree issued by President Gus Dur, did impose a
temporal limitation. We discussed this with the then-
Attorney General, Marzuki Darusman, who indicated
that they would be working on a second degree that
would wave this temporal limitation. As you know, the
Attorney General was replaced was Professor Lopa,
who unfortunately died only a few days after his
appointment. Now with a change of government, I
believe that we must wait until the new attorney
general is appointed to renew contacts with the
Indonesian Government on this question.

There are many other issues pending in the
judicial area between us and Indonesia, and I cannot
fail to refer to the question of the light sentences for
the six individuals found responsible for killing the
three United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) colleagues in Atambua in September of last
year. Attorney General Marzuki had assured me before
he left his functions that indeed the Chief Justice of
Indonesia was planning to present an appeal to the
Supreme Court with a view to correcting what was
recognized by all, including the Indonesian
Government, as unacceptable sentences of these
individuals.

On the question of the post-independence mission
in East Timor, we have taken, obviously, very, very
careful note of all the comments made here today. We
have taken particular note of the request by several
members the Council for a detailed report in October,
which I have pledged we will submit through the
Secretary-General to you, not only on the future size of
our military and civilian police presence, but also on
the question of the civilian presence in support of the
new administration following the independence of East
Timor.

Let me open here a parenthesis, because the
Ambassador of Canada referred to the question of
civilian police in his earlier statement. I would like to
reassure him that only a small number of East Timorese
policemen who have, in fact, gone through the police
academy are now being trained as the embryo of the
future rapid response unit of the East Timorese police.
International police should not continue to provide
rapid response, particularly crowd control. This is a
function that Xanana Gusmao, Jose Ramos-Horta and
many other East Timorese leaders believe should be
carried out - if at all necessary, God forbid - by East
Timorese policeman. I can assure him that if they are
being trained outside the academy, it is because, after
their basic training, they require more technical
training that is being provided by two of our supporters
in the training of the East Timorese police force.
Focusing on the civilian component of the post-
independence United Nations presence, Ambassador
Hume asked me what were the current figures of the
international civilian presence as part of both the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and the East Timor Transitional
Administration (ETTA). The figures I can provide you
with are the following. As part of the ETTA structure,
we have at present 550 international staff and 606
United Nations Volunteers, most of whom are currently
engaged in the preparation of the elections and will
leave East Timor in the course of the month of
September. Regarding UNTAET, we currently have 672
international staff and 217 United Nations Volunteers.
As indicated in the Secretary-General's report, we are
planning to bring the ETTA international staff in East
Timor down to 25 percent of its present strength at the
end of the current mandate of UNTAET and to
downsize the civilian component of UNTAET to about
80 percent of its present size by that date.

Ambassador Doutriaux of France and
Ambassador Valdivieso of Colombia, as well as the
United States, insisted on the importance of a greater
participation of international agencies in supporting the
new Government. I hope you will allow me to reply to
Ambassador Doutriaux in French.

(spoke in French)

Ambassador Doutriaux asked me whether we
were planning to involve intergovernmental
organizations even further, in particular the specialized
agencies of the United Nations system and
international financial institutions. I can assure him
that the answer is in the affirmative, as I noted in my
introductory statement this morning. We hope that the
agencies of the system will be in a better position to
meet our needs in the post-independence phase than
was the case at the very beginning of our mission. The
international financial institutions are very much
present and have provided us with invaluable support.

I have in mind the World Bank, the Asian Bank
for Development and the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). The IMF, in particular, has assured us that it
would continue to support us with specialized
personnel in the area of finance and the future
Timorese central bank. The Fund is represented in this
room by Mr. Valdivieso, who once again reaffirmed to
me the medium-term commitment of the IMF, well
beyond independence, in these two fields, more
specifically.

We will also need by October to take stock of the
resources which will be made available to us on a
bilateral basis. We should therefore be in a position in
October to present to you a comprehensive chart with a
detailed description of these three civilian support
elements for the new Timorese Administration: the
multilateral component, the bilateral component and
the one which we will be proposing to you for
financing by United Nations mandatory contributions,
if this Council were to agree with that.

(spoke in English)

The Ambassador of Colombia also put three very
specific questions to me, to which I will try to reply.
First of all, on the question of the interface between the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
a future possible Deputy Special Representative who
might also wear the hat of Development Coordinator in
East Timor, I am very happy that you put this question,
Ambassador Valdivieso, because this is very important,
not least for achieving what you and other members of
the Council have called for, which is a more active
participation of the United Nations system in the
continued building of the new administration in East
Timor. I know that my good friend Mark Malloch
Brown, who visited us in February, fully supports this
recommendation by the Secretary-General.

As you know, this is a formula that we have
tested elsewhere - in Haiti, in Tajikistan and also in
Sierra Leone. There is, obviously, no conflict between
the position of the UNDP resident representative,
United Nations Development Coordinator and Deputy
Special Representative of the Secretary-General. On
the contrary, we believe that this would significantly
contribute to a truly integrated United Nations mission
after independence.

As regards the United Nations Development
Assistance Framework (UNDAF), I have been
informed by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) that since such documents are
negotiated with sovereign, independent Governments,
this has not yet started but will certainly begin as soon
as a sovereign Government of East Timor is in place.
Undoubtedly, this UNDAF will be based on the
medium-term economic development strategy that
Mr. Ramos-Horta referred to this morning and that we
shall start working upon immediately after
independence, as well as on the human development
report that I know UNDP is currently preparing.

On the question of the security assessment
mission, all I can say to Ambassador Valdivieso and
the others who expressed interest in the outcome of
that mission is that obviously that is outside my
purview, but I have been informed that the Secretary-
General will transmit the findings of the mission to the
Security Council as soon as is possible.

On the question of security, I shall start with the
incident on 28 July. Early this morning I received a
report on that incident, which led to the death of an
Indonesian Armed Forces First Sergeant. I will not go
into the details. We have agreed to establish a joint
investigative team with the Indonesian Government to
study the circumstances of that incident and establish
responsibilities. Of course, we deeply regret any death
on either side of the border, and we have every interest
in shedding full light on that incident and in
establishing relations of true and lasting confidence
between ourselves, the new East Timor Defence Force
and the Indonesian Armed Forces. But obviously, that
incident, as we are all aware, is related to the broader
question of security on the international border. I told
the Council that this was a prominent item on the
agenda of the Joint Border Committee, as it is on the
agenda of all the bilateral meetings between our Force
Commander, General Boonsrang Niumpradit, and
General Da Costa on the Indonesian side.

This morning Jose Ramos-Horta informed the
Council of a number of initiatives that Xanana
Gusmao, with our full support, has been taking with a
view to engaging the more moderate leaders of militia
groups in a dialogue that we hope will soon lead to
their return, as well as the return of those refugees they
claim to influence. And we know that they do influence
them. Mr. Gusmao has had a meeting with two of those
militia leaders on the southern border, at Salele, and he
is planning to have two more meetings in early August.
This has received the full support of the Indonesian
Government, and this is the way forward within the
broader context of the further normalization of
relations between East Timor and Indonesia. This will
also enable us to isolate those more extreme former or
current commanders of militia groups that we hope will
be dealt with once and for all by the Indonesian
authorities; and we trust General Da Costa to do that.

The representatives of Brazil and Ukraine asked
me whether there was any likelihood that parties that
did not sign the pact of national unity would disrupt the
process. No, I do not think so. I think I can reply on
behalf of Mr. Ramos-Horta that this is unlikely. We
know the individuals and very small groups that remain
determined to derail the process. We have them under
very careful watch, and we shall not hesitate to
intervene using all means at our disposal, particularly
the penal code, to deal with that threat should it ever
materialize in the coming weeks.

The representative of Ukraine also asked me what
other measures could be taken to prevent violence
during and after the electoral campaign, in addition to
the pact. We have adopted a regulation on electoral
offences. We have the penal code, obviously. But we
also have a strong military and police presence in the
country, which was obviously not the case in 1999. But
I must say that our strongest allies in maintaining a
peaceful process before, during and after the elections
are the East Timorese political leaders and the East
Timorese people. I toured all the districts of the
country before coming to New York and I noted with
great satisfaction a high degree of maturity and
vigilance on the part of the Timorese population, as
well as on the part of the political party leaders who
accompanied me on many of these visits. That is the
most reassuring development in recent months in East
Timor. The East Timorese may not know precisely
what democracy is, but they certainly know what
democracy is not. They reject violence in any form.
They have been calling on leaders of political parties to
abide strictly and scrupulously by the pact of national
unity. I think political leaders have heard that call and
will heed it.

Let me once again thank you very sincerely,
Mr. President, for giving this opportunity to
Mr. Ramos-Horta and me to brief the Council and
thank you again for your very strong support.

