Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing today's debate and to
thank the Secretary-General for his insightful briefing.
We also thank the briefers for their presentations, which
added the regional perspective to today's discussion.

When the peace and security of a country is

disrupted, it affects not only the people of the country
in question, but also the neighbouring countries,
thereby inevitably creating regional implications.
Under those circumstances, regional and subregional
entities are positioned to play a pivotal role by utilizing
their deep understanding of and potential influence on
the parties in conflict. Countries in the region are often
instrumental in preparing or executing peacekeeping
activities of the United Nations. We have witnessed such
examples in Somalia, Mali, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the Central African Republic and South
Sudan. In that regard, I would like to underline a couple
of points on ways to enhance regional partnerships with
respect to United Nations peacekeeping efforts.

First, swift response by regional players is critical
for the early stabilization of conflicts. The coordinated
response of the United Nations, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
the African Union (AU) to the situation in the Central
Africa Republic could be a useful case study for an
effective sequencing of peacekeeping activities. ECCAS
troops of the Mission for the Consolidation of Peace
in the Central African Republic were transitioned into
the African-led International Support Mission in the
Central African Republic, which is now undertaking a
further transition process to become part of a United
Nations peacekeeping mission - the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic. Bilateral partners and
donors have also played key roles in terms of logistics
and financing.

Secondly, interregional partnerships in
peacekeeping activities between the AU and the
European Union (EU) call for our attention, as they
facilitate a swifter and more flexible response to deal
with the situation in the field. It is an evolved form
of applying Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United
Nations, bridging a gap in the transition process
towards a full-fledged United Nations peacekeeping
mission under Chapter VII. In that regard, we welcome
the ongoing efforts among the regional organizations
to consolidate partnerships. We also hope that the
Secretary-General will take that aspect into account
when he reviews ways to ensure progress in partnerships
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
pursuant to resolution 2167 (2014), which was adopted
by the Council in the morning.

We need to note that international intervention
does not automatically resolve conflict. Indeed, as
we are witnessing in South Sudan, even full-fledged
United Nations peacekeeping operations and support
from donors can not prevent relapses into conflict.
Well-prepared strategies and enhanced partnerships
are needed. Regional organizations and the United
Nations need to devote a greater portion of their
partnership efforts to early warning and prevention
efforts. Preventive strategies are less costly and more
effective than peacekeeping operations. In addition,
the comparative advantage of the region of concern
and the United Nations should also be fully utilized in
mediation and reconciliation efforts.

The majority of peacekeeping missions currently
in operation are engaged in intra-State conflicts,
for which the primary responsibility lies with the
Government concerned. The combined efforts of the
United Nations and the regional entities should therefore
focus on enhancing national ownership and leadership.
Disarmament, demobilization and reintegration and
security sector reform are all very important elements
in that regard. We hope that the Council, building on
today's discussion, will continue to explore ways to
strengthen the United Nations partnership with regional
and subregional organizations.

