Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would like
to thank China, Angola and Senegal for organizing
today's important debate. I would also like to thank
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun for his briefing.
We fully support his efforts to assist the States of the
region to combat piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea.

Earlier this month, on 11 April at 7.56 p.m., pirates
attacked a cargo vessel off the coast of Nigeria. They
had waited for darkness before ambushing the vessel
and boarded with force. The captain and crew sounded
the alarm and hid in a protected space on the ship, only
to discover when they emerged the following day that
two oftheir crew were missing - a second officer from
the Philippines and an electrician from Egypt. Both are
still missing.

This is not the first pirate attack of the year, nor
even the first attack that day. Earlier on 11 April, the
very same day, pirates had attacked a Turkish cargo
ship off the coast of Nigeria, kidnapping six of the
crew, including the vessel's captain. Those men are
also still missing. Piracy and armed robbery in the
Gulf of Guinea are increasing at an alarming rate, with
some industry experts recording at least 32 attacks
off the coast of Nigeria alone in 2016, affecting many
Member States, including the United States. The
economic consequences for the people of the region are
devastating. According to a Chatham House report, as
much as 400,000 barrels of crude oil are stolen each
day in the Gulf of Guinea. By some estimates, Nigeria
is losing about $1.5 billion a month due to piracy, armed
robbery at sea, smuggling and fuel supply fraud. Illegal,
unreported and unregulated fishing also generates
a sizable income loss in the hundreds of millions of
dollars a year for many countries and communities that
depend on that sector to survive.

We have spoken many times in this Chamber
about the root causes of piracy: ineffective governance
structures, weak rule of law, precarious legal
frameworks and inadequate naval, coast-guard and
maritime law enforcement. The absence of an effective
maritime-governance system, in particular, hampers
freedom of movement in the region, disrupts trade
and economic growth, and facilitates environmental
crimes. We have also acknowledged in our resolutions
and in the presidential statement adopted this morning
(S/PRST/2016/4) that the solution to these root causes
lies in greater African stewardship of maritime safety
and security at the continental, regional and Member
State level.

Strong political will from African Governments
and leaders is needed to pursue and prosecute crimes at
all levels within criminal enterprises. Maritime crime
flourishes under ineffective or complicit governance
structures, but is diminished when rule of law is
effective. Absent African ownership and action from
national and local Governments to tackle maritime
security challenges, there is little reason to believe that
attacks in the Gulf of Guinea will decline. International
cooperation and integration among regional countries,
international organizations, industry and other entities
that have a stake in maritime security are also critical
to ensuring the full range of lawful and timely actions
to combat piracy and other maritime crime in the Gulf
of Guinea.

In this regard, we welcome the Yaounde Summit
documents, which articulated a comprehensive view
of maritime safety and security, including combating
illegal fishing, trafficking of arms, people and drugs,
and maritime pollution. We commend the United
Nations Regional Offices for West Africa and Central
Africa for providing capacity-building and technical
assistance to Governments in the region, as well
as subregional organizations, including the Gulf of
Guinea Commission, the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS), and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). We
urge the Member States of the regional and subregional
organizations to make the Interregional Coordination
Centre for Maritime Safety and Security in the Gulf of
Guinea fully operational.

In this context, the United States is doing its part to
support the efforts of our African partners in the Gulf
of Guinea. Our approach is based on three guiding
principles: the prevention of attacks, the response
to acts of maritime crime, and enhancing maritime
security and governance.

On prevention, we are supporting the efforts
of ECOWAS and ECCAS to strengthen regional
maritime strategies, including the completion of their
memorandum of understanding and Code of Conduct
for Central and West Africa. We are also encouraging
nations to fully implement the Yaounde Code of Conduct
and the African Union 2050 Integrated Maritime
Strategy. We encourage States of the region to further
enhance security by establishing Maritime Pilot Zone
E, covering the coasts of Nigeria, the Niger, Benin and
Togo - an area where the majority of attacks occur.
Establishing Zone E would provide the means for an
integrated approach to coordinating joint patrols, naval
drills, training programmes and intelligence-sharing
among the naval forces of countries in the Zone.

In responding to acts of maritime crime, the
United States trains, equips and conducts exercises and
operations with African maritime forces through our
Africa Partnership Station. One month ago, the Station
held a multinational maritime exercise in which the
Gulf of Guinea, European and South American nations
worked together, shared information and refined their
tactics, techniques and procedures to monitor and
enforce their territorial waters and exclusive economic
zones in the Gulf of Guinea. Through our African
Maritime Law Enforcement Partnership, we are also
improving partner capacity to conduct maritime
security operations off the coasts of Senegal, Cape
Verde, Ghana and Cameroon.

To enhance maritime security and governance, the
United States is assisting in strengthening the judicial
sectors of Gulf of Guinea nations and regional capacity
to address impunity for piracy and related maritime
crime, such as our support for the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. Technical assistance helps those
countries put in place the criminal laws necessary to
effectively prosecute armed robbery at sea and piracy
cases.

In closing, I would like to underscore the importance
of a comprehensive regional approach to addressing
maritime insecurity. A comprehensive approach will
help reduce the loss of national revenue, support
socioeconomic development and expand environmental
protection in the region. We look forward to supporting
the plenary meeting of the Group of Seven Plus Friends
of the Gulf of Guinea, to held in Lisbon in June, as well
as Togo's hosting of the 2016 African Union Maritime
Security Summit in October. The United States sees
those engagements as an opportunity to produce
concrete timelines and actions to help form a robust
national, regional and global response to maritime
security threats across Africa.

