Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Allow
me to join others in thanking Ambassador Motoc, both
for the terrific job he is doing as Chairman and for his
update to the Council this morning. The efforts in
which he and the other committees in this area are
engaged remain urgent. They are - and must be - a
very high priority for the United Kingdom, and also,
more widely, for the Council and the Members of the
United Nations as a whole.

As I have said in previous discussions, the
prospect of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs)
reaching the hands of terrorists is the ultimate
nightmare. It is a terrifying prospect, and terrorist
groups have already demonstrated their wish to obtain
and their willingness to use WMDs. When the Council
voted unanimously to adopt resolution 1540 (2004), we
demonstrated a common determination to take concrete
steps to mitigate that risk. That requires an effort by all
States, first, to adopt robust national legislation that
criminalizes attempts by non-State actors to acquire or
to traffic in WMDs and secondly, to establish and
enforce national controls to catch those who try to
evade the law. Shutting off the sources of supply and
shutting down the complicated networks of suppliers
will take a joint effort by all of us. As is evident where
there is any leakage in the system, the weak points in
the system are always exploited by terrorists. That
requires a global response by all of us.

The United Kingdom is fully behind a
collaborative approach to the implementation of this
resolution, with all States working together and
learning from each other. I would be less than frank if I
did not wonder why it has taken us so long to get to
where we are this morning. The rapidity with which we
have responded to the adoption of this resolution
actually does not do us much credit. The need now to
continue on this path, expedite progress and actually
achieve the goals of the resolution is, it seems to me,
quite apparent.

We were one of the first countries to submit a
report to the 1540 Committee. We welcome the large
number of reports that have already been submitted.
We must all call on the States that have not already
done so to submit their reports as a matter of priority.
The process of reporting is not in itself the goal of the
exercise, and in some cases it is difficult for States to
complete it. However, without the information that the
reports provide, we will not be able to plug the gaps in
the national and international systems that we want to
address and have to address. Otherwise, as I said, these
gaps will be exploited as points of weakness in the
international system.

The 1540 Committee has put in place the
essential foundations for its work, but, clearly, a lot
remains to be done. We look forward to getting down
to business, and the United Kingdom is ready to play
its full part in that process. The presence of experts
with the Committee should allow us to make swift
progress in the analysis of national reports. I hope then
to progress further and build on that foundation
through the second round of appointments in order to
fill the maximum quota with the necessary expertise.
The emphasis, however, must be on expertise, on
people who can actually do the job. That must be the
priority.

We look forward to the Committee developing
contacts with the Member States and with
international, regional and subregional organizations.
They have a key role to play in promoting the
understanding both of standards and of what we must
do to meet our obligations. The expertise and
experience of those organizations will help the Council
greatly, especially in those areas in which, by
definition, we lack experience and expertise.

Technical assistance is very important to the
implementation of the resolution. In our national
report, the United Kingdom stated that we would be
ready to provide assistance where we could. We stand
prepared to respond to specific requests from States
who may lack the legal infrastructure, the
implementation experience or the resources necessary
to fulfil the provisions of resolution 1540 (2004).

The Committee has a busy time ahead. What we
have to do is carry on our responsibilities undaunted by
the task but committed to actually achieving the
results. So, in the next phase we will be taking a long,
hard look at how each of us is doing against the
standards set in resolution 1540 (2004) with regard to
national legislation and controls and the implementation
and enforcement of legislation. We must reassure
ourselves as we move forward that we are each doing
everything that we can to prevent the worst nightmare
from coming true. That is why the relationship between
the Committee and the Member States is so important
and needs to be built upon. If the States are not sure
what the standards are, then we have to find ways to
actually provide the assistance and the advice
necessary. If States need help putting controls in place,
then we have to provide the concrete help to do so.

I will conclude by saying that the coordination
and the cooperation between the 1540 Committee and
the Committees established under resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1267 (1999) seem to us very important. The
Committees should pool their knowledge and skills so
that we have, in the end, a global effort which will help
us to combat terrorism and the threats identified in the
resolution.

My concluding thought is that with this
Committee - and I fear with the others - there has
been an excessive emphasis put on process rather than
substance. Process may be important, but the substance
has to be got right; otherwise we do not deliver what
we need to deliver. I was encouraged by the Secretary-
General when, in presenting the report of the High-
level Panel to the General Assembly yesterday, he said
very clearly that he intends in the early part of 2005 to
offer to the Assembly and to all of us a concerted
overall strategy to combat terrorism. That is long
overdue, and I think we should encourage the
Secretary-General in his efforts to identify and shape
that proposal. Then I hope we can move forward
rapidly to develop the substance and achieve what he
set out yesterday as a priority. We very much agree
with that.

