Mr. Lamptey (Ghana): Let me join in congratulating
you, Sir, on the work you are doing as President of the
Security Council. I wish also to thank you for this
opportunity to address the Security Council once more on
the question of Liberia, a subject of great importance to my
country and to other African countries.

Only four months ago, in mid-September 1995, I had
the honour to inform the Council of the positive
developments in Liberia: the signing of the Abuja
Agreement on 19 August 1995 by all the parties to the
Liberian conflict, in which they agreed to lay down their
arms and work towards peace in their country. In my
statement then, I noted that after many false starts and
failures, we could see the light at the end of the tunnel
leading to the end of the six-year-old fratricidal war in
Liberia. I called on the international community to shoulder
its responsibility to turn the hope for permanent peace into
reality.

I briefed the Security Council about the programme of
actions that would lead to free and fair elections in Liberia
on the road to ordered civil life, of which the Liberian
people have been robbed for over half a decade. On behalf
of the current Chairman of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), President J. J. Rawlings
of Ghana, I called on the United Nations to assume a more
active role in pursuing peace in Liberia, by urgently making
available the resources needed to preserve the positive
momentum for peace, which we would have an uphill
task to restore once lost.

The importance of an early solution to the Liberian
problem was underscored by the convening of the
Conference on Assistance to Liberia, co-chaired by the
Secretary-General, the current Chairman of ECOWAS and
the Chairman of the Liberian Council of State, on
27 October 1995. At that pledging conference, all
speakers - representatives of some of our countries -
underlined the urgent need for financial and logistical
assistance to the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) and to Liberia if the ambitious peace
programme was to be successfully implemented. We are
most grateful for the assistance pledged at the Conference
and for assistance offered since then by some concerned
States. However, I regret to note that not only are the
pledges slow to be redeemed, but the amounts offered are
grossly inadequate and do not reflect the expressed
sentiment of the international community that it wishes to
see the Liberian conflict put behind us.

We do not ask for much. But, at the risk of flogging
a dead horse, let me echo the words of my Head of State
at the commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the
United Nations:

"We cannot help being struck by the fact that
the international community is willing to spend $5
million a day on United Nations peace-keeping
operations in Bosnia and Herzegovina - and we do
not begrudge those noble people such international
solidarity - but when we have asked for a sum
that represents 10 to 15 days of that bill to help
[Liberia], there is a deafening silence". (Ofiicial Records of the General Assembly, F iftieth Session, Plenary Meetings, 38th meeting, p. 3)

ECOMOG troop contributors and ECOWAS member
countries are determined to pursue the objective of peace
in Liberia, even at great cost to our struggling national
economies. Let me say that my President restated the
commitment firmly just a couple of weeks ago, saying
that no matter what happened in Liberia Ghana and
ECOMOG would stay there to see the attainment of the
objective of peace and civil society there. Our need for
logistical and financial contributions to ECOMOG from
the countries represented here continues to be paramount.
We insist that the international community, represented by
the Security Council, has yet to show enough interest in
the situation in Liberia, which, compared to the situation

 

in other zones of conflict, does not demand too much for a
successful resolution.

Where do we stand now? As has been made
abundantly clear, the reluctance of the international
community to pay serious attention to Liberia with material
assistance is beginning to reflect negatively on the peace
process. The report of the Secretary-General says it all. The
lack of resources means that ECOMOG has not been able
to deploy troops all over the country as quickly as desired.
The disarmament and demobilization of combatants remain
behind schedule, and the skirmishes between some factions
and ECOMOG have led to casualties on all sides and
among the civilian population, a situation which it is within
the reach of the international community to halt.

The Liberian national Council has reiterated its
commitment to continue cooperating with ECOMOG and
UNOMIL to keep the peace process on track, and we in
ECOMOG are determined to continue our search for peace.
I would say that the light at the end of the tunnel, which
we all applauded in the last quarter of 1995, is beginning
to grow dim. But there is still hope and we can build on the
successes that we have so far achieved.

Let us take this meeting as another opportunity,
another step by the international community to seek
concrete assistance for ECOMOG and the Liberian people.
In that part of the world, the effective maintenance of
international peace and security is within our reach. This
opportunity should not be allowed to slip away. Let us
grasp it and with concrete deeds assure the people of
Liberia a quick return to permanent peace and normality,
which, like all of us, they rightly deserve, and they expect
of us. It is our common responsibility, and we cannot
afford to fail.

