Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
My delegation would first of all like to congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you complete success
in your work. I also extend my congratulations to your
predecessor, the Ambassador of the Gambia, for the
excellent work he accomplished last month.

The holding of this Security Council meeting to
consider the report of the Secretary-General of 13 April
1998, entitled "The causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa",
is indeed a major event, in View of the interest that both
Africa and the entire international community have in this
issue.

Tunisia, which since the advent of its new era on 7
November 1987 has made solidarity and cooperation with
Africa pillars of its diplomacy, welcomes the interest
shown by the Security Council, which took the initiative
of holding a ministerial meeting on 25 September 1997
on the situation in Africa, at which it adopted a
presidential statement, contained in document
S/PRST/1997/46. That statement requested the Secretary-
General to submit a report to the Security Council, which
is the subject of our meeting.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the painstaking preparation of this report, as
well as for its exhaustive and detailed content. This marks
a new and welcome chapter in the increasing interest in
the cause of Africa. This last chapter saw the
establishment by the Security Council of a new United
Nations Mission in the Central African Republic on 15
March 1998. This was a particularly important event, as
it had been more than three years since the United
Nations had established a peacekeeping operation in
Africa.

In order to consider the report of the Secretary-
General, one must first place the question within the
current African context. That context is characterized by
the growing awareness on the part of African States that
the roots of the problems must be addressed by adopting
an approach that dismisses the entirely obsolete vision
that the continent is assailed by irremediable misfortunes.

The successes attained by Africa in its struggle
against colonialism and apartheid resulted from the
determination of its peoples and leaders to defend their
cause and reach the goals they set for themselves. This
spirit has never dimmed, and is renewed today by the
enthusiasm of meeting the challenges in the darkest hours,
an enthusiasm that has always inspired the sons and
daughters of Africa.

Certainly, our continent remains the theatre of
conflicts that require us all to shoulder our
responsibilities. Nonetheless, our determination to restore
and maintain peace has remained constant and is
particularly manifest in the role of the Organization of

 

African Unity (OAU), an accomplishment of which we
Africans are very proud.

This determination became even more evident with the
establishment in 1993 of the Central Organ of the OAU
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution and with the commitment Africa undertook at
the Thirtieth Summit of the OAU, held in Tunis, to solve
the equation "peace, security and development" by relying
first and foremost on African capacity. This marked a new
phase in Africa's approach to continent-wide cooperation,
the main focus of which is prevention in its widest sense
and the principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes.

The OAU Central Organ has played a crucial role in
addressing several conflict situations and remains very
useful to preserving peace and security on the continent in
the understanding that, as affirmed by the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council remains the organ with the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

The United Nations and the Organization of African
Unity have already undertaken to strengthen their
relationship by establishing machinery for consultation and
cooperation to enhance the join action of the two
organizations, particularly that of the OAU with regard to
the maintenance of peace and the prevention of conflict.
We welcome the interest of the Secretary-General in this
question and his intention to continue promoting
cooperation between the two organizations.

The Security Council meeting of 25 September 1997
gave a new dimension to the importance of international
cooperation in helping Africa to meet the challenges before
it. This spirit was clearly reflected in the meeting of 5
December 1997, held at United Nations Headquarters, on
enhancing African capacity for peacekeeping. That meeting
was characterized by the determination to lend the
necessary support to the continent for that purpose. It was
stipulated that initiatives in that framework must be taken
on the basis of parameters defined by the African States
themselves, in accordance with the objectives of the
Organization of African Unity and in close cooperation with
the United Nations Security Council.

We believe that it is important to promote these
initiatives on the basis of universally agreed principles in
order to ensure all due success. Similarly, and given the
fact that United Nations and OAU activities in the
maintenance of peace and the prevention of conflicts
complement one another, it is essential that the international
community attach all due importance to strengthening
pan-African capacity with material and financial support
to the Central Organ of the OAU Mechanism for Conflict
Prevention, Management and Resolution.

The new impulse in the maintenance of peace and
security that we are witnessing today on the part of the
African States is accompanied by a rebirth, characterized
by the implementation by those States of far-reaching
political and economic reforms. Indeed, having long lived
under the one-party system, Africa is increasingly turning
towards pluralist systems and the establishment of
democratic constitutional institutions. Those States have
also been drafting policies to ensure that the principles of
democracy and respect for human rights are firmly rooted
in society. These efforts should be recognized by the
international community and encouraged through positive
activities that take into account the social realities of the
continent and its components, as well as the necessary
global and interdependent approach to human rights,
including the right to development.

In another vein, for several years now the African
States have been adopting new economic policies that
have entailed real challenges for them. These policies
were aimed at reflecting Africa's commitment to
undertaking reforms in keeping with its development
needs and priorities by taking into account the imperatives
of globalization. The difficulties encountered in this
regard were such that it was necessary to make structural
adjustments and to liberalize the economy by opening
national productive infrastructures to international
competition. This had the difficult social and budgetary
consequences which the Secretary-General recalls in his
report.

For its part, within the context of its reform and
restructuring policies, Tunisia has adopted a wide-ranging
and humanist approach, guaranteeing the harmonious
development of society. While seeking the financial and
budgetary equilibrium it requires, the Tunisian
Government has endeavoured to take broad social action
focused on education, training and national solidarity.

While certain African countries have obtained
encouraging results in recent years with regard to
economic growth, others, unfortunately, have encountered
huge obstacles impeding their development. In this regard,
States that are emerging from a recent conflict find
themselves in an even worse situation, since they have to
start from scratch with the reconstruction and economic
recovery of their countries.

 

Today, it is widely held that there can be no
sustainable development without lasting peace, just as there
can be no lasting peace without sustainable development.
Moreover, the Secretary-General is right to point out in his
introduction to this report that reducing poverty must be a
priority, because success in that field will determine peace
and development alike.

The current international economic situation is
characterized by trends and situations that are not all
conducive to supporting the efforts of the African States to
promote their own development and improve the well-being
of their peoples. Reduced official development assistance,
the debt burden and the imbalance in world trade
competition are factors whose impact on the still fragile
economies of the States of the continent give rise to great
concern. That is why we believe it necessary to prepare an
effective comprehensive plan for African development in
order to facilitate the continent's integration into the world
economy.

It is likewise crucial to give special attention to
promoting regional and subregional integration in the
framework of existing mechanisms on the continent.
Tunisia attaches particular importance to Maghreb
integration in the framework of the Arab Maghreb Union.
The Tunisian Government considers this integration to be
a strategic option and strives tirelessly to strengthen and
develop it. We also attach great importance to integration
at the continental level, as manifested in the Abuja Treaty.

In this context, we believe that the development of the
African economies can also profit from cooperation,
particularly technical cooperation, among developing
countries and from triangular cooperation linking African
countries with developed countries or multilateral
development agencies. Moreover, while emphasizing the
importance of the Secretary-General's ideas on the African
debt question, as mentioned in his report, we would
reiterate the appeal, voiced by President Zine El Abidine
Ben Ali of the Republic of Tunisia, that debt be recycled to
the benefit of social projects and environmental protection.

The Secretary-General's report is a far-reaching
contribution that stresses several highly sensitive issues and
includes most interesting recommendations for helping
Africa to meet its challenges and overcome the difficulties
it faces. The report should allow us to continue educating
the international community about the needs of the
continent - the entire continent - in order to preserve
stability, peace and the well-being of its citizens. While we
support the spirit of the approach proposed by the
Secretary-General, we feel it to be crucial that we
continue, in both the Security Council and the General
Assembly, to give further thought to translating this
obvious interest in the continent into concrete and
effective measures.

