Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation initiated the
convening of today's meeting of the Security Council
because events in our brotherly neighbour Ukraine
raise deep concerns for us. The crisis provoked by the
State coup in Kyiv as a result of the armed takeover by
radical extremists continues to deteriorate and generate
very serious threats to the future of that country.

Today in Geneva our Minister for Foreign Affairs
Lavrov spoke in detail about the situation in Ukraine. We
are convinced that any internal crisis must be overcome
through a dialogue held among all political forces and
ethnic and denominational groups in a constititional
framework and in accordance with international
obligations, including most importantly those related
to international humanitarian law, in defence of human
rights and the rights of national minorities.

We must decisively sideline those extremists seeking
to take control of the situation through illegal methods,
violence and open terror. We all know who unleashed
the crisis in Ukraine. By disputing the unequivocally
legal actions of the legitimate authorities, some of
our partners have chosen to support anti-Government
statements and encouraged participants to move to
forceful aggression by capturing and setting fire to
administrative buildings, attacking the police, stealing
from warehouses, mocking regional officials and
launching crude attacks against churches. The centre
of Kyiv and many towns in western Ukraine have been
overrun by armed national radicals chanting extremist
anti-Russian and anti-Semitic slogans.

On 21 February, almost three months after the
onset of the unrest and excesses, an agreement was
reached between the President of Ukraine and the
opposition. It was signed by the Ministers of Foreign
Affairs of Germany, France and Poland. The authorities
have refused to declare a state of emergency. They
have removed the law authorities from the streets. The
opposition has done nothing. They have not surrendered
their illegal weapons. The civic buildings and streets
of Kyiv have not been restored to order. The radicals
continue to control the towns.

Instead of the promised establishment of a
Government of national unity, a so-called Government
of victors has been formed. The Parliament of
Ukraine took a decision limiting the language rights
of minorities; they have disbanded the judges of the
Constitutional Court and insisted on their criminal
prosecution. Demands have been made to limit or
criminalize the use of the Russian language, to ban
undesirable political parties and to make examples of
them. The victors wish to exploit the fruits of their
victory to trample the rights and basic freedoms of the
people.

All of this has alarmed the authorities of eastern
and southern Ukraine and the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea, home to millions of Russians who do not wish
to see such developments in their regions. In a situation
of ongoing threats of violence by ultranationalists
against the security, lives and legitimate interests of
Russians and all Russian-speaking peoples, popular
self-defence brigades have been established. They have
already put down attempts to take over administrative
buildings in Crimea by force and to funnel weapons and
ammunition into the peninsula. We have information
about the preparation of new provocations, including
against the Russian Black Sea fleet in Ukraine.

In such circumstances, the legitimately elected
authorities of the Republic have asked the President
of Russia to help them to restore calm in Crimea.
Such assistance is entirely legitimate under Russian
law, given the extraordinary situation in Ukraine and
the threat posed to Russian citizens, our compatriots,
and the Black Sea fleet of the Russian Federation in
Ukraine. The President of Russia therefore went before
the Federation Council to request that the Russian
armed forces be permitted to deploy in the territory of
Ukraine until the civic and political situation there has
been normalized. On 1 March, the Federation Council
supported that appeal, which we hope will sideline
the radicals. I repeat, the issue is one of defending our
citizens and compatriots, as well as the most import
human right - the right to life.

Today, I am also authorized to say that the President
of Russia has received the following request from
