At the outset, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, and through you the Dominican Republic, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of April 2020. It has fallen to you, Sir, to preside over this important body at a crucial moment for humankind, in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. In this regard, I would also like to express my delegation's appreciation for the efforts made since March, under the Chinese presidency, and now, under Dominican leadership, to continue the work of the Security Council by leveraging technology. Likewise, I take this opportunity to reiterate the importance Ecuador attaches to the broadest possible participation of delegations in the work of the Security Council under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure. I therefore urge all members of the Security Council and the Secretariat to make the greatest possible effort to provide opportunities for Council non-members to participate via video-teleconference until in-person meetings resume at United Nations headquarters in New York. Ithank you, Sir, for convening this debate and, in addition to aligning ourselves with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, I would like to add the following remarks in my national capacity. Last December marked three years since the Security Council adopted resolution 2334 (2016). Since its adoption, the situation on the ground has only worsened. We deeply regret that, after yet another year, this conflict remains unresolved. By reaffirming our unfailing solidarity with the Palestinian people, we reiterate our commitment to alleviating their dire situation until a peaceful, fair and definitive political solution can be reached by the parties, based on the existence of two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace and security, within recognized borders based on those of 1967 - a consensus reaffirmed in resolution 2334 (2016). We reject any incitement to violence, which only takes us farther away from a peaceful, fair and definitive political solution between the parties. We reiterate the call made in resolution 2334 (2016) for both parties to act in accordance with international law, including international humanitarian law, and to observe calm and restraint. We are deeply concerned at the humanitarian situation, human rights violations and non-compliance with international humanitarian law in the occupied Palestinian territories. We call on all parties to unite in a joint effort to launch credible negotiations and step up regional and international diplomatic efforts aimed at achieving, without delay, a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. Unfortunately, the report reflects no progress in this regard. In our view, it is imperative that the Security Council act, as it has been repeatedly requested to do, and take measures to fully uphold the fundamental principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations. What is needed are political solutions, based on justice, human rights and international law. Preventive diplomacy is a critical tool for calming tensions before they escalate and intensify. I wish to reiterate Ecuador's full support for, and endorsement of, Secretary- General Antonio Guterres's call for a global ceasefire and cessation of hostilities, and to join forces in the fight against our common enemy, COVID-19. Heeding that call would be a first step towards achieving definitive and lasting peace. The effects of the COVID-19 pandemic make all the more urgent our call to stop all types of illegal settlement policy, in particular demolitions and confiscations of Palestinian-owned structures, including water and sanitation and humanitarian assistance structures, throughout the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Ecuador expresses its gratitude to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East for its work in providing education, medical care, relief and social services to Palestine refugees, as well as the essential emergency assistance to help Palestine refugees face the COVID-19 pandemic. We once again urge that the Agency be provided sufficient and predictable funding to enable its operations to continue, in accordance with its mandate from the General Assembly. Finally, it is our shared responsibility to fight the pandemic in all corners of the planet. We are only as strong as the weakest health system. Overcoming the pandemic in one country or region will be useless if it continues in any other corner of the world. Today cooperation and solidarity are the only vaccine we have against the destructive effects of COVID-19.
