Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, allow me to
join in the expressions of gratitude and congratulations
to Ambassador Pierce and her team on their steering
of the presidency of the Security Council last month. I
also wish you and your delegation, Madam President,
the greatest success this month.

It is also a privilege for me to join in welcoming His
Excellency Mr. Denis Moncada Colindres, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Nicaragua, a fraternal country.
I also wish to welcome someone whom I consider
as a personal friend, Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Chief of
Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States.

I take the floor to reiterate our rejection of the
holding of today's meeting in the Security Council.
This is a place for considering matters related to
threats to international peace and security, and
Nicaragua does not constitute any kind of threat to
the region or the world. The members of the Security
Souncil, in particular its permanent members, have
the responsibility of avoiding turning this organ into
an instrument for political or ideological ends. We
therefore think it absurd that, under the theme "regional
and subregional cooperation", our attention is being
drawn to the internal situation of a Member State of
this Organization.

Likewise, Bolivia believes that the argument for
addressing the situation in Nicaragua today under
Article 34 of the Charter of the United Nations is
not applicable, for no dispute or situation is being
investigated that could lead to international friction
or give rise to a dispute whose continuance could
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, since at present the reality in Nicaragua is
relatively calm.
Along the same lines, in accordance with Article
54 ofthe Charter of the United Nations, regional bodies
shall keep the Security Council informed of activities
undertaken or being contemplated under regional
arrangements for the maintenance of international
peace and security.

None of those conditions are met when one
considers the situation in Nicaragua.

By way of a review of the events, the mobilizations
in Nicaragua took place in April and May. The
Nicaraguan State resorted to legal and constitutional
domestic mechanisms to pacify the country and called
for a national dialogue with the mediation of the
Catholic Church, all with the primary aim of pacifying
Nicaragua and identifying and bringing to justice those
responsible for farming and perpetrating the violence.

All of us are aware of the regrettable toll of hundreds
of people killed or wounded. We are convinced that,
with the efforts by Nicaragua's democratic institutions,
those responsible will be duly identified, tried and
punished to the fullest extent of the law.

Bolivia opposed the holding of this meeting based
on the Charter of the United Nations, which clearly
establishes the principle of non-interference in the
internal affairs of Member States. We also oppose
the manipulation of agenda items whose legitimate
purpose is to support cooperation mechanisms with
regional organizations to serve as an umbrella under
which everything can fit.

We oppose the manipulation of the Secretary-
General's strategy for preventive diplomacy for
purposes far removed from helping to alleviate a crisis
situation, which in fact serves to make the situation
worse by trying to put a Member State on the stand as
accused and giving the right to take the floor to persons
who represent only a single point ofview on the conflict.
This approach undermines multilateralism, saps the
momentum of preventive diplomacy, puts dialogue
between the parties further out of reach and violates the
principles of sovereignty and equality among States.

Not to agree with the representative of the United
Kingdom when she referred to history, but history is
indeed very important. Not only does it make it possible
for us to have perspective on what is happening, but it
lets us learn relevant lessons. Regrettably, Nicaragua's
history over the course of almost two centuries has
been marked by the interventionist obsession of the
United States. It is worth mentioning the lunacy of
the incursion by the mercenary William Walker who,
supported by American businessmen and politicians,
invaded Nicaragua militarily and proclaimed himself
President of Nicaragua in 1856. Mercenary invasion
was followed by military invasion when the United
States Marines invaded Nicaragua in 1912, where they
remained until 1933 when the rebellion of Augusto
Cesar Sandino managed to expel them from the country.
Later, the United States left in power the national guard
headed by Anastasio Somoza - one of the cruellest
dictatorships ever in Latin America - who governed
for the benefit of himself and his family for more
than 40 years, with the full financial, economic and
military support of that country. When, in 1979, the
Sandinista National Liberation Front finally managed
to defeat the Somoza dictatorship, the United States
intervened again, arming and supporting the contras
and sabotaging the Nicaraguan economy until it almost
destroyed it.

That is why history is important.

It could be said that there has not been a moment
in its history in which Nicaragua has not been subject
to intervention, abuse, interference and threats. In fact,
as the representative of the Russian Federation aptly
reminded us, in 1986 the International Court of Justice,
one of the main organs of our system, found the United
States responsible for

"training, arming, equipping, financing and
supplying the contra forces, to the detriment of
the Nicaraguan republic infringing upon the
obligation incumbent upon it under customary
international law not to intervene in the affairs of
another state".

Interventionism, interference and the financing of
opposition groups constitute the big elephant in the room
that is not discussed in this Chamber. The real interest
of the United States is not the defence of democracy;
were it so it would not employ double standards or
give speeches about defending democracy while at
the same time financing coups d'etat and destabilizing
democratically elected Governments.

The real interest is not in defending human
rights; otherwise States claiming to do so would sign
all the international agreements under our system
on defending and promoting human rights. If human
rights were the real reason, the United States would not
have abandoned the Human Rights Council, one of the
greatest achievements of our system. If it were really
about human rights torture would not be promoted and
asylum seekers would not be put in jail, giving rise to
the inhumane separation of parents from their children.
The recent history of interventionism is a long one.
We need only consider what happened in regions such
as the Middle East. As we have said on many occasions,
in Libya, Syria and in Iraq these policies have created
the worst situations in this century. What is the true
interest? The true interest is to promote situations of
instability and to exploit them to change regimes and
to control natural resources. That is the key objective.

We listened closely to the briefing given by the Chief
of Staff to the Secretary General of the Organization of
American States, and we agree with him on several of
the issues, including with respect to the fact that it is
not just Nicaragua but all countries of our region and
the world that need democracy, justice, truth and peace.
To that I would add that, in addition to democracy,
justice, truth and peace, it is absolutely essential that
States be free of interference and interventionism.
How many millions of dollars have been earmarked to
finance opposition groups in Nicaragua? What is the
source of those millions of dollars to finance instability
in countries such as Nicaragua? Moreover, in speaking
of the multilateral system, we also need to consider
the enforcement of unilateral sanctions, which are
violations of international law.

If the international community truly wishes to
help Nicaragua to resolve its problems, it must do so
in the framework of the Charter of the United Nations.
It must respect Nicaragua's sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity, while also condemning any
interference, interventionism or policy of regime
change. The response to the problems of Nicaragua
must be provided by the Nicaraguans themselves within
the framework of the rule of law.

