Mr. Donoghue (Ireland): I would like to thank the
United Kingdom for organizing today's timely debate
on this important subject.

I would like also to express my country's deepest
condolences to the Government and the people of
France following last Friday's atrocities in Paris. Our
sympathies go also to the Government and the people
of Lebanon over their own recent suffering at the hands
of terrorists.

Last week's terrible events were assaults on
fundamental human freedoms and values. They must
be condemned unreservedly. They reinforce our
determination to eradicate the scourge of terrorism
from our societies.

Central to that, of course, is the need to remove
environments of grievance and inequality within
which terrorists can flourish. We have to go to the
roots of conflict situations and tackle the problems
of inequality and disadvantage that all too frequently
underlie them. There is clear evidence to show the
deep interconnections among underdevelopment,
fragility and conflict. In many parts of the world there
is a vicious cycle linking those, which must be broken.
Only in that way can we hope to build peaceful and
inclusive societies that protect human rights, provide a
stable and prosperous environment and allow all human
beings to reach their full potential.

As our Heads of State and Government recognized
less than two months ago, there can be no sustainable
development without peace and no peace without
sustainable development. Both of those conditions are
predicated on the promotion and protection of human
rights, without discrimination. The agreement adopted
in September is often referred to as the 2030 Agenda,
but it is important to remind ourselves of its full title,
namely, "Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development". The Agenda is about
nothing less than transformation: transforming the
conditions in which we all live and transforming the
future we offer our children. The challenges we face
globally are huge and urgent, and we must all work
collectively to overcome them.

One in four people in the world today lives in an area
that suffers from repeated cycles of violence. People
living in such areas are more than twice as likely to be
undernourished as those in other developing countries;
more than three times as likely to miss school; and twice
as likely to see their children die before the age of5. And
the cycle continues, piling insecurity on top of poverty
and fuelling further insecurity and, in many cases,
conflict. A specific Goal in the 2030 Agenda recognizes
that fact of life - and indeed, of death. It recognizes
that reducing violence, insecurity and fragility is a
legitimate objective of development policy and that it
is essential for sustainable long-term growth, stability
and poverty reduction. The 2030 Agenda, which world
leaders endorsed in September, has enshrined that
objective in Goal 16 and its accompanying targets. That
is the most formal expression to date of a connection
that has in fact been made for a number of years
now. The 2011 New Deal for Engagement in Fragile
States and this year's reviews of the United Nations
peace operations and peacebuilding architecture all
point to the need to rebalance programming efforts
and resources in support of conflict prevention and
peacebuilding.

The 2030 Agenda makes clear that we must use all
of the tools at our disposal to ensure that we do not
pursue sustainable development without addressing the
root causes of conflict. It also makes clear, for example,
that we cannot address inequality without addressing
human rights and that we cannot pursue economic
growth without recognizing the impact that it has on
the environment and stability.

We are embarking on an integrated and holistic
approach to these great global challenges, which we
believe is the one that offers the greatest prospect
of success. It is the challenge and the opportunity of
sustainable development. All States Members of the
United Nations have committed themselves to this
integrated approach. It follows that the United Nations
and each of its organs should reflect that integration
and the interconnectedness of all the goals and targets.
We must all come out of our silos.

The Council, of course, has particular
responsibilities under the Charter ofthe United Nations.
But it must also play its role in ensuring that progress
is made on the interconnected and interdependent
priorities of peace and development. The Council must
recognize the central importance of the achievement of
both peace and development of ensuring that we have
inclusive institutions, the rule of law, the protection of
human rights and access to justice. The inclusion of a
dedicated goal on peaceful and inclusive societies in
the 2030 Agenda is a platform for the promotion and
protection of human rights for all.

Ireland trusts that, with the 2030 Agenda now
agreed as the basis for our work over the next 15 years,
a major effort will be made to ensure coherence and
unity across the United Nations system in tackling
issues related to security, development and the root
causes of conflict.

