Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines): Saint Vincent and the Grenadines congratulates you, Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of March. We also recognize the presence of the representative of Iraq in the Chamber. We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her insightful briefing. Since taking up our seat on the Council, this is the first time that we can officially extend our gratitude to the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) for its indispensable work. We therefore welcome this opportunity and reaffirm our support to her and her team. UNAMTIDs mandate provides a platform to support the Government of Iraq in tremendous ways, including in the advancement of political dialogue. We welcome UNAMI's engagement with the Women Advisory Group for Politics and National Reconciliation in Iraq to solicit input on the Government's ongoing constitutional review. Meaningful participation by women in political processes and economic and social planning is essential for achieving peace that extends beyond silencing the guns. On that note, it would be remiss of me not to mention the appointment of a woman as Chief Executive Officer of the Independent High Electoral Commission as indicative of the kind of transformation required to secure a more just organization of Iraqi society and polity. Similarly, we recognize as progressive UNAMI's engagement with young civil activists. We appreciate that UNAMI has created a platform for dialogue between local youth representatives and senior local political figures. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines commends the constructive cooperation between UNAMI and the Government of Iraq regarding missing Kuwaiti persons and third-country nationals. We note the success of those efforts, as catalogued in the most recent report (S/2020/133). We encourage the Government to continue building on the progress made with regard to the return of missing Kuwaiti property, including the search for Kuwaiti books and national archives. We remain concerned about the ongoing protests and the allegations of abuses. While the establishment of a committee to investigate reprisals against protesters is a positive move, we urge greater progress in holding individuals and groups accountable. In addition, we encourage steps towards the formation of a Government. In our efforts to assist the Government of Iraq, we recall relevant international principles, namely, those of sovereignty, non-intervention and non-interference. Those are the pillars upon which we can peacefully coexist. Iraq, as a sovereign State, has full authority to oversee its domestic affairs in accordance with international law, free from any external interference. That right, deeply embedded in our rules-based system, must not be abrogated in practice. It must be respected by all States, including those that operate in Iraq, and, therefore, within the parameters set out by the Government. In that regard, the Government of Iraq's commitment and efforts to work constructively with UNAMI are commendable. It is a mutually reinforcing and beneficial relation that should be encouraged. Too many Iraqis have suffered at the hands of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). We remain deeply concerned that ISIL's remaining elements continue to carry out attacks. The complete eradication of those spoilers is critical in safeguarding reconciliation and redevelopment in Iraq. We wish to reiterate that issues related to conflict and development must be addressed concurrently. There is a need to combat poverty, unemployment and inequality, and for the urgent economic and social reconstruction of Iraq. Sustainable reconciliation and reconstruction are achievable only when accompanied by efforts to safeguard human security. The international community remains duty-bound to provide the Republic of Iraq with all of the support necessary to materialize its future possibilities across the peace, security and development nexus. We end by reaffirming our support to UNAMI and the Government of Iraq as they work towards achieving a lasting and positive peace.
