Ms. Adamson: I am honoured to address the
Security Council today again, on behalf of Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European Union
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).

First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
Guterres and Ambassador Sebastiano Cardi of Italy,
who is serving as Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in 2017, for their excellent
cooperation. Let me also express my gratitude to our
colleagues in the Security Council Affairs Division for
their unwavering support and excellent cooperation, in
particular regarding the management of the Procurement
Channel. I would also like to note my appreciation for
their work in preparing the most recent report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/ 1030) on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).

As we approach the second anniversary of the
JCPOA's Implementation Day - 16 January 2016 - I
believe it is right to say that we are at a criticaljuncture.
On 13 October, President Trump announced his decision
not to certify Iranian compliance with domestic United
States legislation. We respect that as having taken place
in the context of United States domestic legislation, but
it has created uncertainty regarding the United States
continuing commitment to the JCPOA. In response to
that announcement, the European Union (EU) stressed
that it expects full and effective implementation of
the agreement by all sides. That view was expressed
by High Representative Mogherini and all Foreign
Ministers and Heads of State and Government of the 28
EU member States.

Since implementation day, seven JCPOA Joint
Commission meetings have taken place, chaired
by the Secretary General of the European External
Action Service, on behalf of the High Representative/
Vice-President, monitoring implementation and
providing guidance on a number of implementation
issues. The most recent meeting took place in Vienna
on 13 December and I am pleased to report that all
participants expressed their continued adherence to
their respective JCPOA commitments. They stressed the
importance of ensuring the effective implementation of
all sections of the Agreement, in good faith and in a
constructive atmosphere.

The JCPOA is a key strategic priority, not only
for European security but also for regional and global
security. While the community of nations again faces
the threat of unchecked nuclear capabilities, the J CPOA
has become an example of peaceably resolving issues
pertaining to the international non-proliferation
agenda. An overwhelming number of partners around
the world - in Asia, Africa, Latin America and the
Pacific - have signalled that they share the view that
the JCPOA must be preserved and fully implemented.
The EU fully agrees with the Secretary-General's
assessment that it is in the interest of the international
community that the JCPOA - an achievement of
multilateral diplomacy - overcome its implementation
challenges, cementing our collective commitment to
diplomacy and dialogue.

The JCPOA functions as intended. As the only
body mandated by the Security Council to undertake
the necessary verification and monitoring of Iran's
nuclear-related commitments under the JCPOA, the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has issued
nine reports f the latest on 13 November i confirming
that Iran is abiding by its commitments under the deal.
Iran's nuclear programme is the subject of a strong
monitoring, verification and transparency mechanism.
In accordance with Iran's commitments under the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the country will be required to apply the IAEA
comprehensive Safeguards Agreements and Additional
Protocols, which will allow the Agency to continue
monitoring Iranian nuclear activities and provide
assurances about the exclusively peaceful nature of
Iran's nuclear programme.

But while the JCPOA is working, a number of
serious issues outside of the deal cast a shadow. The
situation in the region has clearly worsened over the
past few months and the EU has repeatedly called upon
all parties to de-escalate their current rhetoric and find
common ground on which to base their neighbourly
relations. The EU closely follows developments
concerning ballistic missile launchers aimed at
the territory of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, and
encourages the Secretariat to seek more information
in that regard. I call upon all actors in the region and
beyond to do their utmost to contain the current trend
towards violence and conflict. What we need above all
is for all actors to demonstrate their full commitment
to finding a peaceful solution to the problems at hand.

The EU has a long-standing track record of
expressing its concern about the regional military
build-up, including Iran's missile programme. The
EU has repeatedly called upon Iran to refrain from
activities that may deepen mistrust, such as ballistic
missile tests, which are inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015), and from making statements that reference
them. The situation in the region, including the issue
of ballistic missiles, must be addressed as a priority
outside the JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear agreement
that is working would certainly not put us in a better
position to discuss all the rest. The EU stands ready
to actively promote and support initiatives to ensure a
more stable, peaceful and secure regional environment.

In addition to Iran's nuclear obligations, which
are laid out in annex 1 of the JCPOA, and to elements
related to sanctions-lifting, contained in annex 2,
allow me to touch upon issues related to annex 3 of the
Agreement, which covers civil nuclear cooperation.
The EU views annex 3 as key to the overall balance of
the Agreement and essential to the overall objective of
ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme.

The EU engages with Iran on the basis of an EU-
Iran statement on civil nuclear cooperation, adopted in
April 2016, in a number of concrete projects focused
on nuclear safety and research. Last month, the second
EU-Iran High-Level Seminar on International Nuclear
Cooperation: Progress and Prospects was held in
Isfahan, building further on the concept that civil nuclear
cooperation and the adherence to international norms
on nuclear governance must go hand-in-hand. While
implementing projects on the ground and conducting
research, Iran is also taking steps towards its accession
to the international nuclear regulatory framework. Such
steps must be encouraged and supported further.

I will now focus on the reporting related to annex B
ofresolution 2231 (2015), in particular on the work ofthe
Procurement Working Group, responsible for reviewing
proposals by States seeking to engage in activities
with Iran that offer nuclear and non-nuclear civilian
end uses. Since Implementation Day, the Procurement
Working Group, which is comprised of the E3+3 and
Iran representatives and coordinated by a delegated
coordinator of the EU High Representative, has been
in full operation. Setting up that new authorization
mechanism after a long prohibition period was not an
easy task. As a result of outreach efforts and as proof
the mechanism works, the number of States interested
in transfers to Iran has increased, as has the number of
countries submitting proposals.

Transparency has been one ofour guiding principles
during the negotiations and a cornerstone of the J CPOA.
According to paragraph 6.10. of annex 4 of the JCPOA,
the Joint Commission reports to the Security Council
every 6 months on the status of the Procurement
Working Group's decisions and on any implementation
issues. In that context, on 1 December the Coordinator
of the Procurement Working Group submitted to the
Facilitator, on behalf of the Joint Commission, its
fourth biannual report. That report aims to provide
the Facilitator and Security Council members with an
overview of the work undertaken by the Procurement
Working Group from 13 June to 30 November. The
report has been circulated as document S/2017/1009.

During this period, the Procurement Working
Group has continued to work intensively to further
develop and update the Group's operational modalities.
It has also intensified its efforts to be as transparent
as possible without compromising confidentiality
by reaching out to Member States and promoting
a better understanding of its aims, objectives and
review process, which are embedded in the JCPOA's
multilayered system of checks and balances.

In addition, it is important to underline that the
proper functioning of the Procurement Channel needs
to be ensured. Proposals need to be judged based on
their technical merits, as the aim of the Procurement
Channel is to support the transfer of sensitive goods to
Iran while ensuring that they cannot be misused. The
Procurement Channel is ready to receive more proposals
for transfers, and we are ready to further support
countries and authorities interested in such transfers.
To that end, our outreach efforts will continue, together
with colleagues from the Security Council secretariat
and the Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).

Allow me to conclude by calling upon all parties
to remain committed to the full implementation of
the JCPOA in good faith, as well as to resolution 2231
(2015) in all its dimensions. The very same values
embodied by the United Nations community are the
building blocks of the JCPOA, which has allowed us
to tackle a nuclear proliferation issue in a peaceful
way. We need to continue to build on that achievement
of multilateral diplomacy, which is the best hope
for security and stability in the region. As ever, the
Coordinator of the Joint Commission stands ready to
work with United Nations bodies and Member States to
support the objectives of the JCPOA.

