The President (spoke in French): As I am aware
that this is the last meeting of the Security Council in
which our colleague Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad,
Permanent Representative of the United States of
America, will participate, I should like, on behalf of
the Security Council, to say how much we regret to see
his departure as a colleague, but above all as a friend.
Zalmay Khalilzad is a man of conviction, and of
commitment, and, above all a man of talent. I think that
none of us will forget the warmth of his personality,
and I am sure that we will long remember his
resounding laughter echoing in and around the
corridors of the Security Council. I know that we will
miss it.

The role of Permanent Representative of the
United States to the United Nations is not an easy one.
He has the privileges of status and power, but the
reality is that he also often has the privilege of
solitude. In this role, Zalmay Khalilzad has always
acted with great dignity and grace, as a great diplomat
and a tough negotiator. He always applied the old
saying: always dialogue; always negotiate; never turn
away.

We all know his curriculum vitae, which clearly
embodies the American miracle of integration and
personal success. But also in a way, it powerfully
embodies the United Nations and the cultural diversity
of the world: Afghanistan, where he came from;
Lebanon, where he grew up; and then the United
States, which both gave him opportunities and
benefited by his talent.

I would like to stress, in particular, after a
difficult period, how Zalmay Khalilzad has brought the
United States of America closer to the United Nations.
We all know how our common Organization needs the
support and active commitment of all of its Members,
and in particular of the United States.

So, my dear Zal, we all wish you every success in
your journey through life. And in order to help you
improve your French, I will tell you we are not saying
adieu, but an revoir.
2
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Somalia

Letter dated 19 December 2008 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2008/804)

The President (spoke in French): I propose, with
the consent of the Council, to invite the representatives
of Burundi, Italy and Somalia to participate in the
consideration of the item of the agenda, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side ofthe Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): The Council
will now begin its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council is meeting in accordance
with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/37, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Burkina Faso, Burundi, Italy,
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Turkey, Uganda and the
United States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia contained in document 8/2008/709. I should
also like to draw the attention of the members of the
Council to documents 8/2008/804 and S/2008/846,
containing letters dated 19 December 2008 and
31 December 2008 from the Secretary-General
respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
09-21124
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1863 (2009).

I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.


