Mr. ngowe (Botswana): Let me at the outset
congratulate you most warmly, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
August. My delegation has full knowledge of the diplomatic
skills and leadership qualities you have demonstrated in
your capacity as Chairman of the Coordinating Bureau of
the Non-Aligned Movement. You can rest assured of the
full support and cooperation of my delegation during your
tenure of office. I also wish to extend a word of
appreciation to the Permanent Representative of Honduras,
His Excellency Mr. Gerardo Martinez Blanco, for the able
manner in which he steered the work of the Security
Council during the month of July.

The delegation of Botswana is grateful to the
Secretary-General for his untiring efforts in the search for
solutions to conflicts in Africa. We are particularly grateful
for his briefing to the Security Council on his recent visit
to Angola. We have no doubt that this Visit, along with
those he has made to other parts of Africa, has advanced
the course of peace.

The Secretary-General's report, contained in
document S/ 1995/588, registers progress in the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. This has given us
reason for optimism that the peace process in Angola is
entering a phase in which we can nurture the hope that
the process will soon be irreversible. We welcome with
satisfaction the commitment of the Government of Angola
and UNITA to the implementation of the Lusaka Protocol
and the efforts they have made to bring peace to their
long-troubled country.

This commitment has enabled the international
community to come to their assistance, as manifested by
the deployment of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III), whose presence has helped to
consolidate the cease-fire. We are particularly encouraged
by the intensification of high-level contacts, which have
made it possible for an agreement to be reached on a
number of areas outlined in the report of the Secretary-
General, including, to mention but a few:

"... quartering of UNITA forces; return of FAA to
barracks; incorporation of UNITA troops into the
national armed forces; reopening of roads and free
circulation of people and goods; [and] disarmament
of the civilian population ...". (S/J 995/588, para. 16)

My delegation is concerned that the mine clearance
programme is proceeding very slowly. It is most
unfortunate that the people of Angola, who have suffered
so much over the years, should now be exposed to the
hazard of land mines at a time when those whose lives
were spared by the cease-fire can begin to nurture dreams
of a better tomorrow. In this regard, we fully support the
Secretary-General in his appeal to Member States to
provide the necessary equipment for mine clearance.

The Secretary-General's report also deals with the
economic and social aspects of the peace process in
Angola. It is the View of my delegation that it is
important to address these aspects in a manner that will
create a firm foundation for durable peace. After many
years of war, concerted efforts should be made to help the
Angolans "beat their swords into ploughshares". The
effects of the war are beyond the capacity of the people
of Angola to tackle on their own. While we do not expect
this to be part of a peace-keeping mandate, we certainly
express the hope that the international community will
continue to contribute substantially to the economic and
social reconstruction of Angola. Southern Africa eagerly
awaits the return of peace and stability to Angola, a
member of the Southern African Development

 

Community, whose contribution to regional economic
integration and cooperation is of the utmost importance.

The draft resolution before the Council contains
several elements which my delegation is delighted to be
associated with. The seventh through the eleventh
preambular paragraphs succinctly capture the essence of
developments in Angola and the Security Council's
assessment of those developments. It is appropriate
therefore that the Council should commend the Secretary-
General, his team of dedicated personnel and the three
observer States, Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United States, for their contribution to the peace that is
unfolding in Angola. It is also important that the Council
should take note of the consolidation of the cease-fire, and
of the fact that the peace process is entering a new and
promising phase.

This is a clear acknowledgement of the progress that
has been registered and an unambiguous message to the
people of Angola that they have made a good start and that
they should continue the good work they have started for
the benefit of future generations of Angolans and for their
subregion, as well as for the greater human family whose
many beautiful faces are amply represented in UNAVEM
III. There can be no doubt that much remains to be done to
advance the process to a stage of irreversibility.

The operative paragraphs specifically address concrete
issues highlighted in the Secretary-General's report. My
delegation fully supports the overall spirit of the draft
resolution, as it clearly goes to the heart of issues which are
vital to the settlement of the Angolan conflict. As the
Security Council extends the mandate of UNAVEM. III for
a six-month period, the peoples of southern Africa can look
with hope and appreciation to the role the international
community is playing to make their subregion a better place
to live in. We look forward to yet another success story in
the resolution of conflicts in southern Africa.

