Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa commends
the delegation of Morocco for organizing this important
open debate on post-conflict peacebuilding. We also
wish to thank the Secretary-General as well as the
Permanent Representative of Bangladesh, Ambassador
Abulkalam Abdul Momen, the Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), for their respective
statements. South Africa aligns itself with the
statement to be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on behalf
of the Non-Aligned Movement.

In South Africa's view, the Peacebuilding
Commission remains a critical tool for the international
community in the broad realm of conflict prevention
and peace consolidation. The progress that has been
registered by the countries on its agenda is a clear
testimony to the value added by the Commission to
national peacebuilding efforts.

While the PBC has registered some gains in a
number of areas, the reversals in the peace consolidation
phase we have witnessed recently in Guinea-Bissau
and the Central African Republic reflect the challenges
faced by the Commission. It is therefore my delegation's

assessment that the Commission continues to evolve
and that it has not yet reached its full potential. Today's
reflection on the achievements and challenges of the
PBC is therefore crucial, as we continue to assess the
effectiveness and lessons learned thus far.

We are encouraged by the progress made by the
PBC and its country-specific configurations in the
countries on its agenda, and we welcome the 8 October
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/20l2/746). The PBC
has adapted to the diverse peacebuilding requirements
of countries emerging from conflict and has become
more agile in responding to them. It has done so through
developing integrated strategic frameworks, setting
shared objectives and timelines in relevant mission
environments, expanding partnerships with the World
Bank and regional organizations, institution-building
through the deployment of civilian capacities, and
through financial support during critical transitional
moments from the Peacebuilding Fund.

In moving forward to increase the effectiveness of
the PBC, we concur with the three priority directions
for peacebuilding set out by the Secretary-General,
namely, inclusivity, institution-building and sustained
international support.

Countries in post-conflict situations often have
weak human and institutional capacities. It is important
to build local institutional and human capacities and to
provide training in order to create new capacities and
enhance those that already exist. We welcome the process
led by the United Nations Development Programme
on strengthening the United Nations system-wide
approach to capacity development for peacebuilding.
My delegation cannot overemphasize the importance,
in developing those capacities, of forging partnerships
at the local, regional and subregional levels, in order
to exploit the unique advantages inherent in human
capacities at those levels.

In that regard, on 15 December the African Union
Commission and the United Nations the Department
of Political Affairs convened a continental workshop
in Bujumbura on the development of an African Union
strategy and framework for reconstructing public
service and administration in post-conflict countries.
The workshop sought to address key issues relating
to public service and administration facing post-
conflict countries, including the restoration of human
resource capacity, legitimacy and public confidence,
effectiveness and efficiency, and inclusivity and
equitable distribution. It further sought to share
lessons learned, experiences and best practices on
how to strengthen the public sector and administration
after conflict, in pursuit of sustainable peace and
development. It is important, in developing those
capacities, that national ownership be emphasized at all
stages of the peacebuilding process.

Increased coordination is crucial for ensuring
effective international efforts in post-conflict situations
and international interventions. United Nations efforts
are often fragmented and the Organization struggles
to pull its critical resources together and to maximize
the strength of collective effort. In that regard, South
Africa strongly supports the call for greater coherence,
coordination and interaction among the various
United Nations organs and agencies, especially in the
field. Greater coordination has the potential to avert
duplication of efforts and to maximize output at a time
of limited and constantly shrinking resources.

The relationship between the Security Council
and the PBC is something we have often discussed. It
is perhaps the most important relationship, given the
mandate of the two bodies. My delegation is pleased to
note that the PBC's relationship with the Council has
continuously developed during the reporting period.
That positive development is evidenced, inter alia, by
the introduction of informal interactions between the
Council and the chairs of the country configurations.

We would like once again to stress the need for the
Council to consider flexible working methods so as to
allow the PBC to effectively play its role in advising
the Council on post-conflict situations. Whereas the
Council has incorporated peacebuilding tasks in most
peacekeeping mandates, we nevertheless stress that the
advice of the PBC should be sought at all times where
it is deemed relevant. We once again emphasize that
peacekeeping and peacebuilding should be mutually
reinforcing in the pursuit of lasting peace in post-
conflict countries.

Peacebuilding in post-conflict countries requires a

substantive injection of resources. We believe that timely,
sustainable and predictable financing remains a crucial
ingredient in realizing the objectives of peacebuilding.
We therefore emphasize the need for the United
Nations to consider utilizing sustainable mechanisms
as a means of kick-starting peacebuilding activities in
countries emerging from conflict, including assessed
contributions, especially with regard to quick-impact
projects. Such projects are critical for the consolidation
of peace dividends, so as to avert a total relapse into
conflict. The international community should provide
flexible and risk-tolerant funding mechanisms for
countries emerging from conflict.

Sustainable peacebuilding requires that those
previously marginalized at the political, social and
economic levels be included in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding processes. In that regard, the role of
women in the post-conflict setting cannot be ignored.
Therefore, measures to enhance women's engagement
in conflict prevention, resolution and peacebuilding,
including the protection and promotion of their rights,
are critical.

On the issue of peacebuilding, South Africa
reiterates its commitment to the work of the PBC,
because we believe it has a critical role to play in
conflict prevention, including in the early detection
of root causes and in identifying potential triggers
of conflict. There is no shortcut to sustainable
peacebuilding. Long-term and sustainable partnerships
will have to be forged and significant financial and
resource investments will have to be made if we are to
avoid relapses into conflict.

Before I conclude, we would like to note that this
is probably the last public statement that South Africa
will deliver in the Chamber as an elected member of the
Security Council in its current term. We would like to
express our appreciation to the members of the General
Assembly for having given us this opportunity to serve
the interests of international peace and security. We
thank all delegations with which we have worked for
their spirit of cooperation and congeniality over the past
two years. We thank the Secretariat for its unwavering
assistance, and we wish all the incoming five members
of the Council the very best during their terms.

