Mr. Olhaye (Djibouti): Mr. President, I thank you
for calling this emergency Council meeting. I also
welcome the timely and pertinent statement made by
the Secretary-General. We find it forthright and
visionary. We applaud his courage and his relentless
efforts to achieve peace and stability in that troubled
region.

Before the historic Arab League conference
concluded its business, Israeli tanks were already at the
gate of President Arafat's compound. Ironically, at the
same time, Mr. Arafat was declaring an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire. He was under intense pressure
to make that declaration, and he did it. But what did he
get in return? We all know by now what has transpired
since then, and there is not the scantiest cause for
optimism as things stand now.

No one condones violence, and we have
consistently condemned attacks against civilian
populations, be they Israeli or Palestinian. What is
unacceptable, however, is to place squarely on the
shoulders of Mr. Arafat the blame for all the actions of
Palestinians, who are revolting against unbridled
aggression, gross injustice and relentless brutality
accumulated over the last three and a half decades of
occupation.

The Palestinians are at a military disadvantage,
and whatever they have achieved in the last decade by
way of security infrastructure has been deliberately
targeted and destroyed by Israeli air power and tanks.
Yet this humiliated, embattled and disenfranchised
leader, under complete siege, is required to deliver
peace and to control his angry and frustrated people in
order to abide by the dictates of Israel, the occupying
Power. Where are the carrots? Thirty-seven years have
elapsed since the occupation began, and the
Palestinians are asked to continue being patient and not
to lift a finger. Otherwise, they will be dealt with
vigorously and mercilessly. That is the unfortunate
dilemma that the Palestinians find themselves in today.

Mr. Sharon's Government has embarked upon
what it calls "widespread actions" against Palestinians
throughout their territory. This is a declaration of war
unleashed against the people under occupation who lost
all hope a long time ago in the absence of any credible
strategy or sense of direction for peace. By negating
the Oslo Peace Accords, which provided the only
meaningful hope for necessary compromises towards
peace in the Middle East, Mr. Sharon seems determined
to bury the Palestinian aspirations for good and on his
own terms.

One wonders about the meaning of the words
emanating from Israel to the effect that it has decided
on the absolute isolation of Yasser Arafat and intends
not to physically harm him. What we see, read and hear
is the complete opposite of these words: the battle
raging this very moment in Mr. Arafat's own
compound, the Palestinian symbol of nationhood, as
well as the demolition and occupation of buildings in
it, with an unknown number of casualties and prisoners
taken, and the confinement of Mr. Arafat to almost a
corner of the complex. This is indeed alarming. It is
unjustified, illegal and in complete violation of all
civilized norms and behaviour. After all, the
Authority's facilities and infrastructure, particularly its
seat of power, are supposed to be inviolable and out of
bounds to any infringement or incursion.

We call on Israel to respect international norms,
to desist from harming Mr. Arafat, to desist from any
further aggression and to withdraw immediately from
the Authority's headquarters.

This Council is called upon to move swiftly in
order to bring about a ceasefire between these two
peoples, in conformity with the solemn duty entrusted
to it by the Charter of maintaining international peace
and security. To do nothing in the current insane
situation is to abdicate its primary responsibility under
the Charter.

Israel has decided to replace the offer of peace,
recognition, security and normal relations with
arrogance, rejection, force and futility. We call on
Israel to heed the merits of the Mitchell report and the
Tenet plan, the tireless efforts of the Secretary-General
and the sense of this Council. It is inconceivable that
the international community will just stand by idly as
this theatre ofthe absurd continues to unfold before our
very eyes.

