Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I thank you, Sir,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict, an issue to which Portugal attaches great
importance. Let me congratulate Germany on its
leadership in the Working Group and the work that has
been accomplished there.

I naturally thank the briefers for their excellent
presentations and join others in warmly welcoming the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui. I assure her of Portugal's full
support in her work and efforts to ensure increased
protection of children in situations of armed conflict.
I would also like to add a word of appreciation to the
former Special Representative for her work over the
past six years.

Portugal obviously shares the views that will later
be expressed by the observer of the European Union
regarding this issue, but allow me to underline some
aspects of particular significance to my country.

The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2012/26l) provides us with a clear overview of the
progress made on the situation of children and armed
conflict. Much has been done, and we have added steps
to prevent the recruitment and to end the use of children
by armed forces and groups. Some of these important
steps have already been mentioned today. Every release
of a child is indeed a concrete advancement, and by
now tens of thousands of children have been released
worldwide.

The advocacy and dedication of the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as of UNICEF and peacekeeping missions, have
been crucial in furthering this agenda. In this regard,
specific commitments by parties to conflict to stop
the recruitment and use of child soldiers have proven
to be very effective, and we should encourage them.
The strong normative framework and the mechanism to
monitor, report and respond to grave violations against
children, established by the Security Council, are also
fundamental tools to stop child soldiering. Resolution
2068 (2012), which we adopted today, is another
important piece of this normative framework.

The theme of this open debate is very relevant
indeed. The need to tackle impunity regarding
persistant perpetrators who have been clearly identified
should certainly guide our work in the near future. We
are referring to individuals or entities that have been
identified as persistent perpetrators for five years
or more, and most of them are non-State actors. The
Council needs to address those difficult cases and
ensure that such individuals are accounted for and
sanctioned. If we do not do so, it will be the credibility
of the system that we have built that will be at stake.

The Security Council has started to apply targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators in situations
on its agenda, but we strongly believe that the mandates
of existing sanctions committees, as they are being
renewed or established, should also include child
protection criteria, as is already the case with some
of them, thus furthering the normative framework for
child protection in situations of armed conflict.

We also believe that the Council needs to find a
way to consider targeted measures against perpetrators
of grave violations against children in situations where
a dedicated sanctions committee does not exist. We
welcome the discussion that will take place in the
Council on this issue, and we believe that one possible
solution to increase pressure on persistent perpetrators
would be to establish a thematic sanctions committee
to target individuals and entities that are identified as
such.

But sanctions are and should continue to be a last
resort, too. Prevention through national strategies and
concrete commitments on the part of the parties and
Governments is obviously the most effective tool for
promoting and protecting children. In this context,
national protection and accountability mechanisms
are fundamental. As has already been mentioned, the
primary responsibility for child protection lies with
national authorities, and any international action in that
regard must be closely coordinated with them.

Finally, in the past year decisive steps have been
taken to ensure accountability for those responsible
for recruiting and using child soldiers. Portugal has
welcomed the recent decisions of the Special Court
for Sierra Leone and the International Criminal Court,
which constitute important landmarks for international
justice and demonstrate that accountability is achievable
and can be implemented. Such verdicts send a clear
signal to parties to armed conflict throughout the world
that impunity is unacceptable.

The Security Council must also show strong resolve
and political engagement to render even more effective
its response to counter impunity for crimes against
children and to enhance accountability for violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

