Mr. Moeller (Denmark): For four weeks, we
have witnessed a violent conflict between Israel and
Hizbollah, causing untold suffering and devastation on
both sides. I am deeply shocked by the unacceptably
high number of casualties among innocent civilians.
Almost one million people have fled their homes in
southern Lebanon and northern Israel.

In order to stop further human suffering and pave
the way for a negotiated political solution, the
hostilities must end immediately. There is no military
solution to this crisis. To the contrary, further violence
and combat will only fuel the hatred and fanaticism
that have obstructed a comprehensive settlement of the
Middle East conflict for so long. We must not let the
extremists win and set the agenda for the future.
Intense diplomatic efforts have been carried out
in recent weeks by all parties around this table in order
to reach a solution. I am convinced that this resolution
is the necessary and indispensable step towards the
cessation of the hostilities, a permanent ceasefire and a
long-term solution to the conflict.

There are several parties responsible for this
conflict. Hizbollah is the main cause. We have also
called on Syria and Iran to act responsibly and on
Israel to show the utmost restraint and to avoid
disproportionate action, and have warned it against
destroying Lebanon in its fight against Hizbollah.

We mourn the deaths of innocent men, women
and children. Our hearts go out to their bereaved
families and to the peoples of Lebanon and Israel. The
cruelty of war reminds us of our common obligation to
maintain international peace and security and to seek
solutions by peaceful means to all conflicts. I believe
that it is high time to look forward and finally to lay
the foundations for a stable and durable peace in that
troubled region.

We urge the Governments of Lebanon and Israel
to agree to the principles and elements mentioned in
the resolution in order to arrive at a long-term solution.
We pledge our full support for the efforts of the
Secretary-General in that regard and stand ready to
assist wherever possible.

We cannot and must not return to the status quo
ante. The root causes of the conflict should be
addressed urgently. As long as armed forces outside the
control of the Government operate in and from
Lebanon, instability will prevail.

Denmark stands firmly behind Prime Minister
Siniora in Beirut and the fragile Lebanese democracy.
The overriding challenge is to safeguard a stable and
democratic future for Lebanon and to avoid the
strengthening of extremism in general in the region.

One of the main objectives of today's resolution
is to ensure the sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity
and political independence of Lebanon in line with
resolution 1559 (2004). With a view to achieving those
goals, Denmark welcomes the decision of the
Government of Lebanon to deploy 15,000 troops in
southern Lebanon and supports the enhancement of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon in numbers,
equipment, mandate and scope of operations.

06-4649]

The humanitarian efforts carried out by the
United Nations and other relief organizations have
been essential in saving human lives. It is imperative
that they be guaranteed safety and unhindered access.
Denmark has contributed to those efforts and to the
humanitarian appeal from the United Nations, and we
stand ready to extend further assistance.

In conclusion, we have today taken an important
first step in trying to end this bloody and senseless
conflict. To break the logic of war and replace it with
the logic of peace, we have now endorsed a road map
for a long-term solution. To get there, however, we are
dependent on the political will and strength of all
parties. The international community can and must
facilitate and support, but in the end, only the parties
can make the peace, and they must do so to the benefit
of the citizens of their countries. They deserve it. I urge
them to do so.

