Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2448 (2018),
which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for one year.
In a context that is characterized by ongoing serious
violence carried out by armed groups, as unfortunately
evidenced by the current situation in Alindao, and with a
heavy toll paid by the civilian population, humanitarian
personnel and Blue Helmets, it was essential for the
Security Council to reaffirm its support for MINUSCA
and the Central African authorities.

In order to promote consensus, we have sought
relentlessly, through extensive consultations and,
of course, with respect for each other's positions, to
strike a delicate balance among the various positions
expressed during the negotiations. All the members of
the Council actively participated in those negotiations
and shared their sometimes diverging positions, which
we have spared no effort to reconcile.

In that context, we solemnly call on everyone to
actively and in good faith implement the resolution
by putting the interests of the Central African people
above our national interests. Action in favour of the
Central African Republic can be achieved neither
through a solitary and exclusive approach, nor by
methods that ignore the solutions provided by our
African partners themselves - first and foremost, the
African Union - nor through initiatives that call into
question the decisions of the Security Council.

To return to what should be at the heart of our
common concerns, the MINUSCA mandate, I would
like to underscore three points here with regard to the
important resolution that we have just adopted.

First, the resolution maintains MINUSCA's
robust format and mandate, which is key. MINUSCA,
which operates in a difficult environment, has
repeatedly demonstrated that it can act proactively
and robustly, when necessary, to protect the civilian
population - particularly the most vulnerable, namely,
women and children - from the threat of armed groups.
Now that MINUSCA has reached its full operational
capacity with the arrival of the last contingents, which
resulted from the increase in the troop ceiling authorized
last year, we hope that MINUSCA will be able to
pursue its efforts to enhance its mobility and improve
its operational performance. It must also intensify the
efforts already under way to prevent cases of sexual
exploitation and abuse and ensure that they do not go
unpunished. In that regard, I recall the importance of
the Special Criminal Court and cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

Secondly, the resolution also reinforces
MINUSCA's role, in accordance with the Secretary-
General's recommendations, in supporting the political
process in the Central African Republic, under the aegis
of the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic, which is also absolutely
essential. The African Initiative is the only direct
and inclusive dialogue process between the Central
African Government and armed groups from which a
comprehensive peace agreement can emerge.

In that context, we welcome the decision of the
United Nations and the African Union to integrate
MINUSCA into the African Initiative, as well as to
include the Permanent Representative on the panel
of facilitators. We also welcome the decision to
support the African Initiative through a joint United
Nations-African Union Special Envoy, and stress the
importance of an early appointment at this crucial
time to advance the peace and reconciliation process.
Under the resolution, MINUSCA could also strengthen
its substantive support for and mediation role in the
African Initiative, in addition to the support it already
provides in the technical, logistical and security areas.
Its role as coordinator of international support for the
African Initiative will also be bolstered.

Thirdly and lastly, the resolution authorizes
additional support from MINUSCA to the Central
African authorities for the extension of the State's
authority throughout Central African territory. I am
thinking in particular of the logistical support, albeit
limited, that MINUSCA will be able to provide to the
Central African armed forces trained or certified by
the European Union Military Training Mission in the
Central African Republic, as well as the internal security
forces, in order to allow them to gradually redeploy
within the Central African territory and conduct joint
operations to ensure the safety of local populations.
Negotiations on that point have been difficult. That
is a fact, and expectations should not be unrealistic.
MINUSCA is already working with armed forces of
the Central African Republic who have either been
trained or certified by EUTM. RCA and could therefore
continue to do so by adding logistical support to the
extent that its resources permit and within its areas of
deployment.

France is well aware of the commitment and
sacrifices that MINUSCA and its civilian, police and
military staff are making in order to promote peace
in the Central African Republic, and will continue
to give them its firm support both on the ground and
here in New York. We will also continue to give our
full support to President Touadera and the people of
the Central African Republic, who have suffered far
too long in this crisis. I want to say once again that
France's motive is its desire to support the people of the
Central African Republic, and that motive should guide
the action and commitment of every Council member.

