Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special
Representative Honore Braithwaite for her informative
briefing on the latest developments in the Republic
of Haiti and on the activities of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We take
this opportunity to express our gratitude for her work at
the helm of MINUSTAH.

During the visit of the Security Council to Haiti
in June, President Moise shared the vision of his
Government with respect to confronting his country's
principle challenges, while placing emphasis on the
"Caravane du changement" initiative and the joint
legislative agenda, and expressed his desire that
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) be reclassified under Chapter
VI, instead of Chapter VII, of the Charter of the
United Nations. Bolivia supports Haiti's request and
emphasizes the need to change the mandate of the new
mission under Chapter VI of the Charter, especially as
there is no threat to international peace and security.
With regard to the progress on the ground, we commend
the work carried out by the Government of the Republic
of Haiti in connection with the road map focused on
the security, justice, energy, education, health and
agriculture sectors. Similarly, we commend its efforts
to adopt a joint legislative agenda that undoubtedly
demonstrates a commitment to democracy and stability.

During the visit of the Security Council, we
received first-hand information on the situation in the
brotherly country of Haiti, the preparation process for
closing MINUSTAH and planning the transition to the
new mission. The purpose of receiving that information
was to explore how the Council could further contribute
to the long-term stabilization of Haiti and collaborate
with the Haitian people in their efforts to develop their
country. The valuable information, which we received,
must be used as input for refining the new mandate of
MINUJUSTH in order to make it understandable, clear
and more specific, especially with regard to the rule of
law and reform of the justice sector.

Given that the new Mission is designed to carry
out its work within a time frame not to exceed two
years, it must fulfil a series of tasks and strategic goals
during that same period. Bolivia would like to warn
of the potential risk of not meeting the goals set out
within such a short period oftime because ofa desire to
encompass too many tasks lacking defined objectives.
Such a flaw may counterproductively affect the work of
the new mission.

With regard to the work of MINUSTAH, we
congratulate the Mission on prioritizing its efforts so
as to ensure a successful transition and for assessing
its work, thereby leading to a review of the situation
and the progress achieved thus far. That work is without
any doubt reflected in the latest report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/604). We note that, before its final
closure, the Mission must address the outstanding
issues pertaining to the cholera situation, the justice
sector and sexual exploitation and abuse.
At the same time, Bolivia emphasizes the
importance of coordination between the new Mission
and the United Nations country team so as to ensure
that the responsibilities and tasks of other United
Nations bodies, such as the Human Rights Council and
the General Assembly, do not overlap. In that regard,
we support the joint MINUSTAH transition plan with
the country team in Haiti in coordination with the
Government of Haiti, while always taking into account
the priorities and needs of our brotherly country.

We reiterate that the United Nations has a moral
responsibility with regard to victims of cholera in Haiti.
In that vein, we stress the international community's
obligation to help the Republic of Haiti overcome
that crisis and reach the goal of building sound water,
sanitation and health systems. During the visit of the
Council, we heard from several stakeholders, including
a cholera victim, about current concerns relating to the
situation. We therefore call on the entire United Nations
membership to join in the fight against cholera in Haiti
and support General Assembly resolution 71/161 B,
adopted on 13 July, establishes a trust fund for that
purpose and calls on countries to voluntarily contribute
their respective share of unencumbered balance for
MINUSTAH to that fund. We urge the countries
members of the Security Council and of the entire
United Nations membership to shore up that fund.

Concerning, gender-based violence in Haiti, it
is related to the poverty and social discrimination
experienced by women. We urge the United Nations to
remain vigilant in its actions so as to combat gender-
based violence in Haiti, in particular sexual abuse and
exploitation under the principle of zero-tolerance.

Bolivia recognizes the national ownership and
the primary responsibility of the Government and
the people of Haiti as they relate to all aspects of the
development of their country, and encourages the new
mission to provide logistical and technical experience
in coordination with the Government, while respecting
its sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.

In conclusion, I call on the Security Council to
reflect on the intrinsic interconnectedness between
peace and security and the basic needs of the
population. If basic needs, such as health, education,
water and sanitation services are not met, the road to
lasting stability and development will be difficult, if
not impossible, to achieve.

