Ms. Reitano: It is a great pleasure and an honour for
the Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized
Crime to address the Security Council today during this
briefing on policing in the peacekeeping operations of
the United Nations. In this statement, we would like to
highlight three conclusions from our research and the
experiences of our 350-person network of experts. We
hope that those insights can potentially strengthen the
strategic response of the Security Council to organized
crime in conflict zones.

Our first conclusion, which we think is now broadly
accepted, is that organized crime is a global and
accelerating phenomenon and a threat to international
peace and security. In a collaborative project with
INTERPOL and the RHIPTO Norwegian Center for
Global Analyses, we analysed over 1,000 major global
smuggling and trafficking routes associated with
environmental crimes, drugs and people. Those routes
and flows represent a confluence of global illicit trade.
Not only do they map across contemporary conflicts
in Africa, Asia, the Middle East and the Americas, but
there also is often a link between those illicit trafficking
routes and international terrorism.

Based on our field research, we estimate that in
the region of $31.5 billion-worth of illicit profits are
generated annually in conflict areas. While there is
obviously margin for error with this figure - as with
any estimate of the illicit economy - all evidence
suggests that the scale of illicit markets is staggering
and that their intersection with contemporary conflict
is incontrovertible.

The sources of revenue that fund non-State
armed and terrorist groups are diversifying. They
are increasingly based on criminal activities, and
that phenomenon is sustaining conflicts worldwide.
The illegal exploitation and taxation of gold, oil and
other natural resources are sources of income that are
overtaking traditional threats to finance sectors, such
as kidnapping for ransom and drug trafficking.

Our second conclusion, however, is that these
non-State armed groups and combatants collectively
receive only a very small fraction of the sum total of all
illicit finance flows generated by organized crime in or
near conflicts. By far the larger share ofthe $31.5 billion
goes to political actors at all levels and associated
transnational criminal networks. These, therefore, are
the main beneficiaries of instability, violence and lack
of State capacity for enforcement, and they thus retain
an interest in the perpetuation of conflict.

The nature of organized crime activity varies
from conflict zone to conflict zone and criminal
groups exist on a spectrum from loose networks that
can include Government and external criminal actors
to hierarchically organized armed groups that engage
in criminal activity to sustain themselves and project
their influence. In some cases, such networks may
seek to control key transport nodes such as ports and
landing strips. For others, the control of territory
itself is essential, as it allows them to tax both licit
and illicit activities in what could be termed criminal
governance. Combating organized crime must therefore
be considered a significant factor in conflict prevention
and resolution, reversing ecosystems that enable
criminal governance. Where crime thrives, there can
be no sustainable peace.

Our third conclusion is that while the Security
Council has recognized the growing convergence
of criminal activity, illicit markets and conflict, the
response across the peacebuilding cycle has not always
kept pace. In an analytical exercise undertaken by the
Global Initiative, we reviewed each of the 1,113 Council
resolutions that were adopted between 2000 and 2017.
From that analysis, we found that 35 per cent of those
resolutions made reference to some form of organized
crime or illicit markets. Significantly, however, we also
found that the proportion of such resolutions has been
growing. In each of the past five years from 2012 to
2017, more than 60 per cent of the resolutions of the
Security Council have mentioned one or more forms of
organized criminality.

Yet, we see a strong disconnect between a clear
awareness of the problem, on the one hand, and a more
limited operational response, on the other. For example,

a project by the University of Edinburgh shows that
of 1,500 separate peace agreements covering more
than 120 countries between 1990 and 2016, only 21
mentioned organized crime. And in mandate design for
the Organization's 35 peacekeeping, special political
missions and envoys currently in effect, only eight have
operational organized crime functions, representing
only 23 per cent.

The few peace operations that do have mandates to
respond to organized crime tend to address the problem
exclusively within the mission's policing function.
But what global experience in addressing organized
crime has clearly shown us is that while policing is
critically important, it cannot alone successfully fight
organized crime, address its drivers or mitigate its
impact. The policing function needs to be part of an
integrated response.

However, as the 2016 external review of United
Nations policing observed, in most contexts the police
component has been insufficiently integrated with
the political and other functions of the peacekeeping
missions, and significant underresourcing hampers the
division's ability to perform a more integrated function.
Furthermore, except in a few recent missions, the
United Nations police have been seen as the bedrock of
a mission's exit strategy rather than as a critical part of
the central planning and peacekeeping functions.

Instead, the way in which criminal actors have
become embedded in conflict zones suggests that
policing must be a strategic consideration at all stages
of a mission's planning and deployment. Even if peace
operations are not intended to actively fight crime, they
need to be crime-sensitive and ensure that criminal
groups do not threaten the security of the mission
or become long-term peace spoilers. More regional
approaches, including stable neighbouring States,
can provide a buffer to respond to the cross-border,
transnational threats posed by fragile and conflict-
affected countries.

In a peacekeeping setting, the United Nations
system as a whole needs better situational awareness
of criminal networks, organized crime and the illicit
economy in order to provide a basis for policymaking
and programming. Expanding the analytical capacities
of peace operations by providing information-gathering
task forces with sufficient resources is an essential first
step towards accomplishing those aims. Integrating a
political-economy approach - one that extends into
the political side of mission mandates and encompasses
the illicit economy in its considerations- is a second
step. A sustainable response must address the often-
documented challenge of political actors at all levels
who profit from illicit flows. Otherwise there is a risk
of rewarding bad behaviour and allowing governance
itself to become criminalized.

There is currently no written guidance for
peacekeepers or United Nations mission staff that has
been prepared or provided by the system with regard
to addressing organized crime. Similarly, there is no
guidance module on organized crime for the United
Nations system disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration framework, although one is envisaged.
Peacekeeping missions should also be able to draw
upon the benefits of the experience of the whole United
Nations system in understanding and responding to
criminality in a conflict zone. but currently there is no
systematic linkage between peacekeeping missions and
the specialized agency for organized crime - the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime - or for others with
expertise in specific forms of organized criminality.
That may mean, therefore, that peace operations
are working without the much-needed understanding
of the forms of criminal governance or the criminal
ecosystem in which they operate. As a result, they
attempt to use structures and strategies designed for
dealing with non-State conflict or engaging legitimate
political actors without necessarily addressing the way
in which organized crime underpins those theatres of
operations. A poorly framed response to illicit markets
can have highly detrimental impacts on human rights,
the legitimacy of some local actors, the protection of
civilians and the size and strength of criminal groups
themselves. We therefore acknowledge and welcome
those instances where senior, highly experienced
police officials are working alongside or even replacing
their military counterparts, who have traditionally
taken a lead role in designing and, thereafter,
implementing peacekeeping operations. In a context
where peacekeeping is as much about introducing,
reintroducing or reinforcing the rule of law as it is about
keeping warring factions apart, the role of policing in
these missions is critical.

Tackling organized crime in conflict zones is an
integral part of tackling organized crime holistically at
the global level. The two are closely connected. From
the Global Initiative's perspective, there is little doubt
that the United Nations system needs a more coherent,
streamlined and strategic approach to addressing
organized crime and bringing its tools to bear to counter
its impact. Counter-crime initiatives need to be linked
to and reinforced by interventions in the recovery and
development space, which are required to address the
socioeconomic underpinnings of the illicit economy.

In conclusion, organized crime is a threat to the
three pillars on which the United Nations system is
based - human rights, peace and security, and good
governance and development. If we are to prevent
conflict more effectively and build sustainable peace,
then we need a more comprehensive and effective
response to organized crime. We therefore urge the
Security Council, with its leadership, to move this
issue from the margins to the mainstream of the United
Nations work, and particularly its work in the field.

