Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): There is very
good reason why questions that are of great concern to
Africa in recent weeks have been the subject of such
careful - and, we hope, fruitful - consideration by the
Council.

The emphasis placed today by the Security Council
on the tragic situation of children in armed conflict stems
not only from the Council's long-standing interest in this
question but also from your personal commitment,
Mr. President, to just causes in general and to African
causes in particular. It stems also from the fact that, out
of solidarity with all those who are suffering, your
country - our sister country, Namibia - has always
sought to espouse those causes, as the day-to-day work
done by Ambassador Martin Andjaba in the United
Nations has made abundantly clear.

On behalf of the current Chairman of the
Organization of African Unity, Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika,
whom I represent here, and on behalf of the Group of
African States - which I have the honour of chairing
during this month of August - I wish to convey to you,
Sir, my heartfelt congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council and to express our
confidence in you and in your wise and successful
conduct of the work of the Council.

I should like also to take this opportunity to pay
sincere tribute to Ambassador Hasmy of Malaysia for his
presidency of the Council, which he assumed with
discretion and skill.

In one of the United Nations Children's Fund's
publicity campaigns, a child, asked what he wants to be
when he grows up, answers, "I want to be alive". That
answer sums up in a nutshell the magnitude of the
tragedy suffered by the tens of millions of children
affected in some way by natural or man-made disasters.

I am certain that all present today recall the
terrifying figures quoted a year ago in this Chamber by
Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, who today has returned to express his
horror at the continuing tragedy of children in Africa and
elsewhere and to remind us of our obligations and our
past commitments.

 

More than 2 million children have been killed,
millions of others wounded or maimed for life, 10 million
seriously traumatized and 12 million abandoned to their fate
and left homeless - all of this in the past decade alone.
The nightmare goes on, because conflicts have in recent
years increased in number and in intensity, continuing to
cut short the lives of thousands of children, primarily
among those 300,000 who serve as child soldiers in several
areas of conflict; also among civilian populations, which
today are being particularly targeted and where women and
children are the primary victims of violence; and finally in
situations where anti-personnel and other types of
landmines killing and maim, year in and year out, more
than 800 children.

It is true that war is not a recent phenomenon. It is as
old as the human race. It has accompanied its evolution
throughout the ages and served its interests. Women and
children have always suffered from the savagery of men,
have been used as war booty and have supplied the slave
markets. But never have children been so targeted,
massacred, abused, raped, mutilated and robbed of their
innocence and childhood dreams as they are at the dawn of
the third millennium.

These children - Victims of war, physically and
mentally disabled, orphans raised in street Violence and in
poverty - what kind of future can they dream of, if they
can dream at all? Tens of thousands of them remember
only atrocities and battle from their childhood, whether as
actors or as victims. They are caught in a spiral of violence
and despair whose causes they do not know and whose
consequences they cannot control.

How have we arrived at this senseless dehumanization,
at this wanton desecration of life, these outrages committed
against our children? Explanations abound, and they
indicate to us the path to follow and the solutions to be
implemented to put an end once and for all to the
unbearable pictures that television networks, as if to make
us feel guilty, show us in all their stark brutality and
inhumanity.

First, many of the conflicts in the world are clearly
internal in nature with strong ethnic or religious overtones.
It is not regular armies that are waging war; those armies
are supposed to enforce respect for the limits by which the
law of war and international humanitarian law have tried to
manage the conduct of war, trying to humanize somehow
the deadly madness of mankind.

In fact, we are talking here about armed groups that
increasingly conscript adolescents forcibly into their ranks
and that indulge today in violence that is particularly
unrestrained because they are not bound by any code of
honour. This violence is directed not against military
targets, but against defenceless civilians, whom they
terrorize in order to subjugate and use them or whom they
exterminate because of the evil represented by their ethnic
or religious identity.

It is hardly surprising, therefore, that 90 per cent of
the victims of conflicts going on in the world are
civilians, a large proportion of which are women and
children. The reason for this is that these conflicts are
often fuelled, supplied and perpetuated - and they can
go on for decades - by illicit small arms trafficking,
which, despite all the declarations, appeals and warnings,
continues to prosper, placing in the hands of children the
tools of their own destruction, thus undoing all of our
efforts to curb conflicts.

Similarly, and despite the adoption almost three
years ago of a Convention that was described as a historic
turning point in our struggle to ban anti-personnel
landmines, the use of these arms has hardly diminished.
Even if it had, we would hardly have noticed it, so
numerous are the mines that were planted in the past,
including during the colonial period and up to the Second
World War. Every day, in Angola, Rwanda, Cambodia
and elsewhere, they kill and maim.

Last year, as Mr. Otunnu said in his first statement
to the Council, the fate of children is tied to a genuine
crisis of values at the international and the local level. At
the international level, instruments establishing the limits
of war are often violated. Recent and not so recent events
offer many examples of the bombing of civilian targets,
even civilian populations, which have been presented as
a necessity or at best as a regrettable mistake. The life of
the individual has lost the sacred quality it is supposed to
have; now everything is permitted. This abandonment of
civilized norms is also clear in certain occupied territories
where the occupying Power disregards the provisions of
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, by subjecting civilians to the worst excesses
without batting an eyelash.

At the local level, underdevelopment and poverty,
the prevalence of political interests and tactics and,
finally, the infiltration of alien ways of thinking and
patterns of behaviour have often led to the undermining
of a society, breaking the subtle balance that held it

 

together and toppling the system of references and the scale
of values on which it was built.

But it is in particular the globalization and the growing
ordinariness of violence, disseminated by the media, and
sometimes practised or encouraged by States, and also the
failure of the culture of solidarity, the extreme poverty
rampant in the countries of the South, the extreme
selfishness of the well-off minority, the lack of prospects
for the great majority, human distress and despair; all these
things are behind this crisis of values, which is first and
foremost a crisis of confidence in man's humanity, of
humanity towards itself.

Given this serious degradation of universal values and
the tragedy that is the daily lot of tens of millions of
children, and not just because of war, the United Nations
has responsibilities to shoulder and a role to play. Of
course, the international community has not been inactive
in recent years, even if its efforts have scarcely been
marked by the staunchness or resolve that the gravity of the
situation would require.

The holding of this debate demonstrates that a real
awareness is developing, an awareness that was activated
near the beginning of the decade with the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and continued with
the ongoing drafting of the optional protocol, the
appointment of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and the adoption by the Security Council last year
of a statement condemning abuses against children, calling
upon States to comply with the norms of international law
and outlining a number of steps and actions to save children
from the violence of which they are Victims.

Similarly, by introducing provisions relating to
children in paragraph 16 of the resolution adopted last week
on Sierra Leone, the Security Council took an innovative
step that we hope will be taken regularly.

Africa has supported this movement and has
sometimes taken the initiative, as when it adopted the
African Charter on the Rights and Welfare of the Child,
which will enter into force as soon as 15 States ratify it.
We hope this will occur in the near future.

In fact, in 1979 the member States of the Organization
of African Unity (OAU) adopted in Monrovia the
declaration on the rights and well-being of children,
followed 10 years later by the African Charter, which bans
the recruitment of children under 18 years of age as
soldiers and which says in its preamble that children, given
their specific needs for their physical and mental
development, require special attention for their health and
their physical, mental, moral and social development, and
require legal protection in conditions of freedom, dignity
and security.

Furthermore, the OAU, at the Yaounde summit in
1996, adopted a resolution stating that the use of children
in armed conflicts was a violation of their rights and
should be considered a war crime.

Finally, the thirty-fifth Assembly of Heads of State
and Government, which met in Algiers from 12 to 14
July, adopted three very important resolutions dealing
with this most sensitive issue, which was the subject of
special attention by all member States.

In the first decision, on the ratification of the
African Charter on the Rights and Well-being of
Children, the OAU makes an urgent appeal to States that
have not yet done so to sign and ratify that Charter, and
it calls upon member States to work together with the
United Nations Children's Fund and the OAU Secretariat,
within the framework of a protocol of agreement, to
speed up effective implementation of the Convention.

The second decision deals with the African
Conference on the Use of Child Soldiers which was held
in Maputo from 19 to 22 April this year, the outcome of
which was the adoption of a declaration condemning the
recruitment of children as soldiers, calling for raising the
recruitment age - even for voluntary recruits - to 18
and advocating the physical and psycho-social
rehabilitation of demobilized children and their
reintegration into society, as well as the indictment of
those who use children as soldiers.

In the Algiers decision, which refers to this
conference, the summit welcomed the positive results of
the Maputo meeting. It recommended the establishment of
a special committee on the situation of children in armed
conflict; urged States to adopt and promote norms
banning the recruitment and use of child soldiers under
the age of 18; and called upon the Secretary-General of
the OAU to set up appropriate mechanisms to activate the
process of combating this phenomenon with a View to
drafting an international convention on the subject.

In the last decision, which deals with proliferation
and the illicit circulation of and trafficking in small arms,
the Algiers Assembly welcomed initiatives taken by
member States and regional organizations concerning the

 

question of small arms, in particular the moratorium of the
Economic Community of West African States on small
arms, the destruction of surpluses of small arms and
obsolete weapons in South Africa and the destruction of
illicit weapons in Mozambique. The Assembly launched an
appeal to the international community to give affected
African countries every necessary assistance in order to
enable them to implement programmes to resolve problems
relating to the proliferation of small arms, and it urged the
Secretary-General once again to solicit the views of
member States on the proliferation and illicit circulation of
and trafficking in small arms, in particular with regard to
actions to be undertaken.

In that decision the summit stressed the impact of the
proliferation and illicit circulation of and trafficking in
small arms on the recruitment of an increased number of
child soldiers and the psychological trauma resulting from
this, and the need to comply with provisions of the African
Charter on the Rights and Well-being of Children. It also
appealed to all member States of the international
community to lend assistance in the psycho-social
rehabilitation of children affected by the proliferation and
illicit circulation of and trafficking in small arms.

In a word, by calling for compliance with relevant
international and regional instruments, by taking necessary
practical steps to prohibit the recruitment as soldiers of
children under the age of 18 and by adopting measures
against the proliferation of and the illicit trafficking in small
arms, the Algiers summit has indeed proved the seriousness
with which Africa intends to tackle this problem and, in so
doing, indicates to the rest of the international community
the path to be followed.

However, Africa cannot alone resolve the problem of
children affected by conflicts. Doubtless it has today
shown the political will. It has decided to declare the
coming year a year of peace and stability in the continent,
and for some months it has with courage and determination
committed itself to resolving conflicts that ravage the
continent and use up its energies and resources. But clearly
it does not have the resources and it cannot do this
alone - that is, without the effective mobilization of the
international community and without strong support for its
efforts to resolve conflicts, to consolidate peace and
stability throughout the continent and to rebuild the
economies that have been ravaged by wars. It cannot do
this as long as the lucrative arms trafficking continues, as
long as the plunder of the continent's resources goes on, as
long as the sanctions imposed by the Security Council or by
the OAU are circumvented and as long as, in the name of
some justification or consideration, the independence and
sovereignty of African States is violated.

The appointment of Mr. Olara Otunnu - who
succeeded Mrs. Graga Machel, a great lady from our
continent whose gentle persistence has lifted the dark veil
of indifference hanging over the cruel fate of children -
has galvanized us all, States, intergovernmental
institutions and non-governmental organizations which
refuse to accept the ugly treatment meted out to children.

At the first debate the Council held on this serious
question, Mr. Otunnu opened up a number of directions
for possible collective action. He also urged - and he
did so again today - the international community, and in
particular the Security Council, which has primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, to attack the causes of the tragedies suffered
by children, that is to say, to work to prevent conflicts.

The point today is not to try to redress, to lessen or
to mitigate the effects of conflicts on children.
Humanitarian assistance, however necessary and welcome
it may be, does indeed have its limits, and it can be
misused. There is also the risk of it being used for

political or media purposes - which has already
happened - of it becoming a substitute for prevention
and settlement of conflicts - which has already

happened - and even of its being used as an alternative
to development assistance, as is often the case.

In fact, the only real solution is to extirpate the roots
of conflicts by, as a matter of priority in Africa, attacking
the primary causes of wars - that is, the poverty,
destitution and human distress which often are the
breeding ground for intolerance, hatred and violence, and
by working to educate children to promote a culture of
peace as well as dialogue and understanding among
people.

From that standpoint, it is our wish that the solemn
appeal on 12 August by the United Nations Secretary-
General to donor countries to provide emergency
assistance in the order of $500 million for the victims of
conflicts and natural disasters in Africa be promptly and
totally heeded. Indeed, to repeat the language used by the
Secretary-General in an interview he gave last Thursday
to a European newspaper:

"Never has Africa more needed political and
financial assistance. But also, never has it been in a
better position to take advantage of it."

 

We hope that the international community will
shoulder its responsibilities to Africa, which is on the road
to recovery and which intends to take its rightful place in
the new world order which is being established. We hope
that African children like other children in the world can
once again start to dream of the day when they can be
teachers, doctors or farmers - in a word, where they can
become ordinary citizens of the world.

