Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes Mr. Lacroix in his new role us Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and
thanks him for his briefing.

We welcome the participation of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Mali, Mr. Diop, and thank the
international mediation team, including Algeria, for its
good offices.

We extend our deepest condolences for the death of
a French peacekeeper.

China supports efforts of the people and the
Government of Mali to promote the peace process. We
commend the resolve and action of the Government
of Mali in applying the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. The establishment of interim
authorities in northern Mali has seen progress recently.
The joint patrols by the signatory parties to the peace
ageement have begun, and the National Accord
Conference was successfully held and adopted its final
report, all of which China welcomes.

At the same time, the Mali peace process faces
difficulties. Terrorist activities continue to spread,
posing challenges to the political and security situation
in Mali. The international community should actively
support the peace and reconciliation process in order
to achieve security, stability and social development. I
should like to make the following points.

First, we must support Mali in accelerating the
implementation of the peace agreement. We welcome
the promise of the signatory parties to the peace
agreement that they will continue promoting the peace
process. We hope that all parties will consolidate their
achievements to date and actively advance inclusive
political dialogue that encompasses all regions and
ethnic groups, and accelerate their implementation
of the provisions of the agreement so that peace and
reconciliation can be realized as soon as possible. The
international community should provide constructive
support to peace and development in Mali. The Council's
actions should be conducive to maintaining the existing
results of the peace process and mutual trust among all
parties. China commends the work of the international

mediation teams in promoting peace talks among all
parties in Mali, and hopes that the team will continue to
play a positive role in the political process.

Secondly, we must help Mali to strengthen
its security and counter-terrorism capacities. The
international community should continue to assist
Mali's security forces so that they may strengthen
their presence in the northern and central regions
and gradually assume the responsibility to maintain
national security. All parties should, upon request
from the Malian Government, provide assistance in the
areas of intelligence-collection, military training and
ammunition and weapons management.

Terrorist activities in Mali are rampant and highly
mobile across borders. This issue requires an integrated
approach based on regional cooperation. China
welcomes the decision of the Heads of State of the Group
of Five for the Sahel countries to create joint counter-
terrorism forces for regional security. We call on the
international community to support that decision. We
support Africa in resolving African issues in African
ways and jointly addressing the threat of terrorism.

Thirdly, we support the work of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA). China commends MINUSMA's
unwavering efforts to achieve peace and reconciliation
in Mali. We will continue to support MINUSMA. We
hope that the Mission will pursue its coordination
and cooperation with the host country and help Mali
to strengthen capacity-building in the area of security
and facilitate disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration.

MINUSMA is deployed in a complex and
dangerous environment; the security situation is very
serious and there is a severe shortage of resources,
including equipment. We hope that MINUSMA will
continue to strengthen security for personnel and
communication with troop-contributing countries and
assistance providers. We must ensure that MINUSMA
has the equipment and resources required to carry out
its mandate and defend itself.

China firmly honours its commitment to the Mali
peace process. At present, there are some 400 Chinese
peacekeepers in MINUSMA. China is ready to work
with the international community as a whole to continue
to support the peace and reconciliation process in Mali
and make our due contribution to lasting peace and
stability and economic and social development in Mali.

