Mr. Starcevie (Serbia): Let me, first of all,
welcome His Excellency Mr. Valentin lnzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

At the outset, I would like to reiterate the resolve
of the Republic of Serbia to fully honour the Dayton
Peace Agreement as a basis for stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the entire region of the Western
Balkans. Serbia respects the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a State of two
entities and three constitutive peoples.

My country has no intention of interfering in the
internal affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Instead, it
is fully committed to continuing, through cooperation
with it and other neighbouring countries, its efforts
aimed at bringing about reconciliation in the interest of
achieving lasting stability in the region. We believe
that the improvement of relations among the countries
of the Western Balkans will lead to the achievement of
our common goal of joining the European family of
nations.

The position of Serbia is that a solution can be
achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and the three constitutive
peoples. We believe that the international community
should treat the relations between the three constitutive
peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
respect for their mutual interests. Rather than calling
into question the integrity of the country, every
solution for Bosnia and Herzegovina should contribute
to its peace and stability. Serbia encourages all parties
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to make additional efforts
to reach sustainable solutions to all open questions.

My country is opposed to any imposition of a
solution, because solutions should be taken only by the
legitimately elected political representatives of
citizens. We consider the idea of suspending the
representatives of certain peoples to be dangerous.
Serbia is against divisions in principle, but also against
the disqualification of some actors from political
processes. Serbia supports the quest for a solution to
start reform processes in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that this quest would be helped by the closure
of the Office of the High Representative and the
cancellation of the so-called Bonn powers, because the
legitimately elected representatives of all peoples and
entities have the ability and capacity to assume
responsibility for the independent conduct of affairs of
State.

We consider that the announced referendum of
the citizens of Republika Srpska on the Court and the
Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
nothing to do with the territorial integrity of the
country and is not in contravention of the Dayton
Peace Accords. Without any intention to interfere in the
internal affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, we believe
that legislative initiative belongs only to competent
assemblies formed by the legitimately elected
representatives of citizens and that there are no powers
on the basis of which it could be taken over by other
governmental organs in Bosnia and Herzegovina or by
the international presence.

Serbia welcomes the earlier decision taken by the
European Union (EU) on the liberalization of the visa
regime, which we see as an important step on Bosnia
and Herzegovina's road towards membership in the
European Union. We are of the opinion that additional,
concrete encouragements from the EU are needed for
further stabilization of the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, bearing in mind that EU membership is
the common denominator for the peoples of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

We have special parallel ties with the Republika
Srpska but, at the same time, we are very interested in
deepening our relations, particularly economic
relations, with the Federation of Bosnia and

Herzegovina. Serbia participates in regular trilateral
and regional meetings. It hosted some of them recently,
at the highest level. We believe that such meetings are
a contribution and an impetus to the further promotion
of good-neighbourly relations and intensification of
regional cooperation, all of which will certainly help
speed up the process of European integration.

