Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): Allow me, Sir, to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and to express appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Andjaba of Namibia.

The protection of civilian persons in armed conflict
is a matter of great importance to the international
community. We believe that the concerted interest shown
recently by the Security Council in this matter is
appropriate and necessary and we hope that it will
continue until sufficient and serious protection of civilians
in armed conflict is ensured in all cases.

In this regard, we appreciate the report on this
matter presented by the Secretary-General to the Security
Council at the request of the latter. The report makes a
useful analysis of the threats and violence against
civilians in armed conflict and the role of the Security
Council in this regard, and it details recommended
measures to strengthen both legal and physical protection.
We agree with many of the recommendations made in the
report, especially in the field of accountability. The key
remains for the Council to take actions to promote a
climate of compliance. Ensuring compliance is a condition
for achieving credibility and avoiding the emergence of a
double standard and the application of different sets of
values.

We were perplexed, however, by the fact that the
report fails to mention the incessant Israeli occupation of
Palestinian land along with the examples it gives on
violations of international humanitarian law. The report
even fails to mention the occupied territories and Lebanon
among the places where peacekeeping personnel have
been harassed or have lost their lives. The Secretary-
General's report on Qana is still fresh in our memories.

Today, Palestine refugees number more than 3.5
million people, representing the oldest and biggest refugee
problem on the agenda of the international community.
Israel refuses to implement General Assembly resolution

 

194 (III) of 1949 on the Palestine refugees and Security
Council resolution 237 (1967) on displaced persons. For the
past 32 years, Israel, the occupying Power, has continued
to occupy the West Bank, including Jerusalem, and the
Gaza Strip. It has continuously committed grave breaches
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, Additional Protocol I and
the Hague Regulations. It has effectively created a situation
of colonization and annexation of parts of the occupied
territories, including Jerusalem - a unique case at the end
of the twentieth century.

The Security Council has responded by adopting 24
resolutions which reaffirm the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to the territories occupied by Israel
since 1967, including Jerusalem. Many of the Council's
resolutions called upon Israel, the occupying Power, to
comply with the provisions of the Convention and to accept
its de jure applicability. In several cases, the Council also
called for measures to ensure the safety and protection of
Palestinian civilians living under Israeli occupation. The
Council also called upon the High Contracting Parties to the
Convention to ensure respect by Israel for its obligations
under the Convention in accordance with common article I.
However, Israel, the occupying Power, has not complied
with or even accepted any of the aforementioned
resolutions.

Over the years, the General Assembly has adopted
even stronger positions. In April 1997, the General
Assembly held the tenth emergency special session to
consider illegal Israeli actions in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory. The
session reconvened four times, during which it
recommended that the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention convene a conference on
measures to enforce the Convention in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem, and to ensure its
respect in accordance with common article I.

On 15 July 1999, for the first time in the history of
the four Conventions, a conference to consider a specific
situation was convened in accordance with the
recommendations of the tenth emergency special session.
We believe that this was an extremely important step, not
only with regard to the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including Jerusalem, but also with regard to
international humanitarian law and the efforts to ensure
respect for and compliance with its instruments.

We emphasize our situation, while at the same time
we are aware of the many examples strongly requiring
serious efforts by the international community to bring an
end to the suffering of civilians, especially women and
children. It is unfortunate that today, as we celebrate the
fiftieth anniversary of the four Geneva Conventions, we
cannot also take pride in and celebrate their full respect
and applicability. In Palestine and everywhere, we have
to make progress to create a different and safer situation
than that faced today by civilians in armed conflict. The
draft resolution, which we hope the Council will adopt,
will be an important move in that direction.

