Mr. Al-Doreky (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank your delegation,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting at
the ministerial level to discuss humanitarian issues in
Syria, which are the subject of exceptional attention in
my country, countries of the region and the international
community as a whole owing to the humanitarian
dimensions and the great and dangerous repercussions
that this matter has on the future of security and stability
in the entire region.

Iraq is deeply committed to the security and
stability of the region. We have therefore from the
outset expressed our grave concern about the escalation
of the crisis in Syria, not only because it is a neighbour
and a sister country but because, more than any other
country in the region, it has been a victim of the
evils of terrorism, killing and violence. Iraq therefore
understands more than anyone else the dangers of the
events in its neighborhood. We continue to call for the
increasing suffering to be addressed responsibly, in
order to stop the Syrian bloodshed and establish the
necessary atmosphere to begin a comprehensive political
reform process, agreed upon by the representatives of
the Syrian people, that leads to the achievement of their
legitimate aspirations for democracy and reform while
simultaneously safeguarding the security, integrity and
stability of Syria, and thereby the security, integrity
and stability of the other countries of the region.

Iraq is determined to play an active role as Chair
of the Summit of the League of Arab States. We have
therefore worked tirelessly to find a peaceful solution
to the Syrian crisis by introducing an initiative focused
on establishing two negotiating tracks. The first would
be an internal Syrian dialogue, while the second would
entail an Arab-Syrian dialogue under the auspices of the
League of Arab States to peaceably resolve the crisis.

Along with its Arab brothers and friends in the
framework of the Action Group for Syria, Iraq has
also worked energetically to produce the Geneva
communique, which put forward a road map based
on three pillars. The first pillar entails the various
steps needed to implement the Kofi Annan six-point
plan, including the immediate cessation of all forms
of violence. The second pillar concerns principles for
a political transition process that fulfils the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people. The third pillar has to
do with providing the necessary support to the efforts
of the United Nations and the Joint United Nations-
League of Arab States Special Envoy to reach the goal
of establishing a comprehensive political process with
Syrian leadership. We continue strongly to believe that
the six-point plan and the Geneva document could lead
to resolving the crisis if the necessary support were
provided to Lakhdar Brahimi's mission.

Given Iraq's historic responsibility dictated by the
exceptionalcircumstancesinthe Arabregion,my country
believes that the continuation of foreign interference,
regardless of its origin or focus, in supporting one side
or the other will not lead to resolving the crisis, but will
exacerbate it and thereby worsen the Syrian people's
humanitarian situation. We therefore feel that stopping
interference in the Syrian issue and clearing the way
for the efforts of Joint Special Representative Brahimi
are the minimum conditions necessary for achieving a
peaceful solution to the Syrian crisis.

Iraq's position is always to stand by the legitimate
aspirations of the Syrian people and their right to self-
determination and to themselves decide their political
future. Iraq supports the political process ofa peaceful
political transition of power and condemns the acts
of killing, violence, bombardment and violations of
human rights. It also condemns the militarization of
the conflict and calls for an end to foreign interference.
We are also concerned about the consequences of the
Syrian crisis as manifested in the spread of extremism
and terrorism. We support every Arab, regional and
international effort to help achieve a just and honourable
political solution.

Like other countries of the region, Iraq, which is
linked to fraternal Syria by bonds of neighbourliness
and brotherhood, has taken on its burden of Syrian
refugees - in addition to the thousands of Iraqis living
in Syria who have returned to Iraq. That has compelled
the Iraqi Government to deal with two issues, namely,
addressing the situation of returning Iraqis and
providing a safe haven for their brothers, the Syrian
refugees.

There are currently more than 15,000 Syrian
refugees in Iraq. Despite all the difficulties, the Iraqi
Government has decided to establish a relief committee,
chaired by the Iraqi Minister of Immigration and
including the pertinent ministries and the Iraqi Red
Crescent working in cooperation and coordination with
relevant international organizations, in particular the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. The Government has allocated 50 billion
dinars from its emergency reserves to build refugee
camps for Syrian refugees and to provide for their basic
needs.

My Government believes in the importance of every
effort to resolve the issue of refugees in neighbouring
countries, so as to face up to this humanitarian
crisis. However, such efforts should be based on the
circumstances and be governed by the developments
in the crisis. The most viable and dynamic solution
would be to address the root causes of the crisis from
a perspective that encourages the parties to negotiate
through a framework geared towards a comprehensive
political process that spares the brotherly Syrian people
from the scourge of violence, killing and terrorism and
provides for a bright future of peace and security free
from the spectre of displacement and having to flee to a
neighbouring country.

