Ms. Rice (United States of America): Allow me
to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Araud and the
delegation of France for their able leadership last
month.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Takasu for
his comprehensive report and briefing today. But,
unfortunately, since we last met on this issue, our
concerns about Iran's nuclear programme have only
deepened.

First, the latest report of the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) once
again concludes that Iran is not complying with its
10-25834

IAEA and Security Council obligations, obligations
that are essential to building confidence in Iran's
assertion that its nuclear programme is for exclusively
peaceful purposes. Specifically, the Director General
confirmed that Iran has not suspended its enrichment
and heavy water-related programmes as required by the
Security Council. Instead, Iran has declared that its
stockpile of low-enriched uranium has increased and
that it is moving quickly to produce near-20 per cent
low-enriched uranium. Iran has also announced that it
intends to build 10 new enrichment plants, but it has
not offered the IAEA any information about their
location or design, as required by Iran's Safeguards
Agreement.

Moreover, Iran continues to make significant
progress in its heavy water-related activities,
particularly with the continued construction of the IR-
40 reactor. But Iran has denied the IAEA's request to
sample heavy water that the Agency discovered in Iran.
The Director General also recounts several key issues
and unanswered questions about a possible military
dimension to Iran's nuclear programme, and he
provides troubling information about the timing of
Iran's decision to begin work on its previously secret
enrichment plant at Qom. Iran's actions fail to provide
confidence in the nature of its nuclear programme and,
importantly, caused the Director General to declare that
the IAEA cannot confirm that "all nuclear material in
Iran is in peaceful activities".

We particularly regret the fact that Iran has not
taken advantage of an IAEA proposal to provide fuel
for the Tehran research reactor in a one-time exchange
for 1,200 metric kilogrammes of Iran's low enriched
uranium. By rejecting this generous deal, Iran is
missing yet another opportunity to build the confidence
of the international community in its assertions that its
nuclear programme is only for peaceful purposes, and
it has deprived the Iranian people of assured access to
life-saving medical treatments. Unfortunately, these
ongoing violations and this behaviour show a
continued pattern of disregard by the Government of
Iran for the clear and serious concerns over its nuclear
programme expressed by the international community.

Secondly, Iran's continued refusal to provide
meaningful responses to the request for information
made by the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) is further evidence of Iran's
disregard for the obligations imposed by this Council.
We commend the Committee's continued diligence in
3
carrying out its important mandate, even in the face of
repeated sanctions violations by certain United Nations
Member States. We were pleased that the Committee
issued a second Implementation Assistance Notice
urging all Member States to be especially alert to
additional violations involving similar circumstances,
such as those involving the Islamic Republic of Iran
Shipping Lines or transfers from Iran to Syria. That
Notice also reminded Member States that the
Committee has the authority to impose additional
targeted sanctions on entities that facilitate sanctions
violations or evasion, and we encourage the Committee
to continue to explore options for responding to
violations, particularly for how to most effectively
respond to repeated sanctions violations.

As my Government has noted before, the
effectiveness of Security Council resolutions depends
on follow-up and enforcement by the Committee, the
Security Council and all Member States. As such, it is
our responsibility to be vigilant in ensuring that these
sanctions are rigorously enforced and that thorough,
comprehensive investigations are conducted when
there is evidence of violations.

The United States remains firmly committed to a
peaceful resolution of international concerns about
Iran's nuclear programme. Over the past year and
more, the United States has reached out to Iran in
unprecedented ways, repeatedly demonstrating our
commitment to working towards a diplomatic solution
based on mutual respect. And yet, Iran has yet to take
steps to build confidence and honour the commitments
it has made.

As Security Council members, we must all
continue to stand firm in our conviction that Iran must
comply with its international obligations. Four years
have passed since the IAEA referred this serious
situation to the Security Council. In that time, the
permanent five members of the Council plus Germany
have dedicated themselves to a dual-track approach to
place a clear choice before Iran so that it can choose a
better way forward. The United States remains
committed to that strategy.

In light of Iran's continued non-compliance with
its obligations, this Council must consider further
measures to hold the Government of Iran accountable.

