Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution to extend the mandate of the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH).T h e C h i n e s e
Government and people have all along supported the
peace process in Haiti and the unremitting efforts of the
United Nations to assist the Haitian people to achieve
lasting peace. We welcome the fresh progress in the
Haitian peace process, marked by a situation that is, on
the whole, stable, the fairly smooth first round of
legislative elections and the continued improvement in the
security situation in Haiti. We appreciate the success that

 

UNMIH has achieved in assisting the Haitian Government
to maintain a secure and stable environment.

We have also noted that there are still many problems
in Haiti today, as is pointed out by the Secretary-General in
his report. The Haitian peace process is now at a critical
stage. We hope that the draft resolution before the Security
Council today will help the Haitian Government and
people, with the assistance of the international community,
to enhance national reconciliation and overcome the
difficulties on the way ahead so as to create a favourable
internal and external environment for the rebuilding of their
homeland.

In supporting the draft resolution, the Chinese
delegation has also taken into consideration the ardent
aspiration of the Latin American countries to consolidate
the achievements of peace in Haiti. The Chinese people
have most warm feelings towards the Latin American
people. China has consistently supported the Haitian people
in their efforts to seek peace and stability and to rebuild
their country, believing that this will help to maintain peace
and stability in the region.
We sincerely hope that UNMIH will successfully
accomplish its mandate in Haiti, thus making its
contribution to peace and development in Haiti and in Latin
America as a whole. We are of the view that the
establishment of a stable environment of peace favourable
for economic development is the only way to a strong and
prosperous country.

