Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Allow me to join previous
speakers in expressing Brazil's appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Sudan, Mr. Haile Menkerios, and President Benjamin
Mkapa for their briefings today.

My delegation is very pleased that the Southern
Sudan referendum was carried out peacefully and in a
transparent manner. The announcement by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission that the 60 per cent
threshold had been achieved, thus making the
referendum legally valid, is also encouraging. Brazil
welcomes the indications that the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement parties acknowledge that the voting process
was fair and their assurances that they will accept and
implement the results. We welcome the work of the
Secretary-General's Panel on the Referenda in the
Sudan and its conclusion that the polling allowed the
Sudanese people to freely express their will.

Brazil has sent a team of observers to the Sudan.
They have reported that the voting proceeded well and
that the Sudanese people showed enthusiasm,
commitment, patience and determination. We therefore
salute, first and foremost, the Sudanese people for this
important achievement. Their leaders, as well as the
Southern Sudan Referendum Commission and its
Bureau, deserve our appreciation for their outstanding
work. We are also grateful for the support provided by
the United Nations. We commend Mr. Haile Menkerios
for his dedication and skilful work, and thank President
Mkapa and the members of the Panel for their
invaluable contribution.

Our collective attention now turns to the process
of counting the votes, which we hope will proceed in a
manner as orderly and effective as the registration and
voting, in an environment of calm and transparency. In
this phase as in the previous ones, the parties will have
a special responsibility to maintain public tranquillity
and ensure that the electoral process moves forward as
planned.

Nowhere is calm needed more right now than in
Abyei. We deeply regret the clashes that took place in
Abyei between 7 and 9 January. We welcome the fact
that Abyei communities have worked together to ease
tensions. We appreciate the efforts made by the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan and the Sudanese
authorities to contain hostilities and avoid escalation.

As we know, resolving the question of Abyei is
critical to sustainable peace in the Sudan. Therefore, no
effort should be spared to address the issue effectively
and definitively as soon as possible. Holding popular
consultations in the Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile
states is also imperative.

Given the key role played by the United Nations
in Sudan, we reiterate our call on all Sudanese parties
to fully respect and cooperate with the Organization, in
particular its representatives on the ground. In this
regard, we condemn in the strongest terms the recent
kidnapping of three United Nations Humanitarian Air
Service staff members.

