Mr. Cunningham (United States): The United
States Government believes that the Government of
Sudan has taken substantial steps to meet the specific
demands of Security Council resolution 1054 (1996).
We note with concern, however, that the suspects
wanted in connection with the 1995 assassination
attempt on President Mubarak in Addis Ababa were not
turned over to the appropriate authorities. This was not
satisfactory.

However, we believe, as do the Governments of
Egypt and Ethiopia, that they are no longer in Sudan.
In this regard, we take very seriously the letters sent to
the Council by the Governments of Egypt and
Ethiopia - the victims of the incident that led to the
Security Council actions on Sudan - calling for a
lifting of Council sanctions anyway. We strongly urge
the authorities of all States to continue the effort to
bring these suspects to justice.

Sudan has recently apprehended extremists within
that country whose activities may have contributed to
international terrorism. Sudan is also engaged in
serious discussions with my Government about ways to
combat terrorism. We welcome those steps and expect
this cooperation to continue. We expect the
Government of Sudan to demonstrate a full
commitment to the fight against international terrorism
by taking every step to expel terrorists and deny them
safe haven.

The United States also has continuing concerns
about the enormous suffering of the Sudanese people.
The civil war in the Sudan has lasted some 18 years
and has caused immense human misery. Two million
people have died; there have been massive
displacements of civilians; human rights continue to be
abused; and human beings there continue to be treated
as slaves.

My Government will continue to demand that the
Government of Sudan address these issues while we
work to build greater cooperation in the international
fight against terrorism. The President named a truly
distinguished American, Senator John Danforth, to
engage Sudan on these and other issues. In light of
these considerations, the United States has abstained on
this resolution.

