Mr. Khare: I would like to thank all speakers. I
am particularly grateful for the kind words addressed
to me and my team. I am also grateful for the
suggestions that have been made to further improve the
efficiency and effectiveness of our interventions in
Timor-Leste with a view to ensuring the success of the
operations of the United Nations Integrated Mission in
Timor-Leste (UNMIT). These include a continuing
focus on the forthcoming elections, with the
implementation of the recommendations of the
Independent Electoral Certification Team; justice and
accountability, particularly the implementation of the
recommendations of the Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry; improving security and
expediting the reconstitution of the Timorese national
police; and making progress on the comprehensive
review of the security sector. We will, of course,
continue to work on those issues as our highest
priority.

A few questions were raised regarding the
compact. The compact in Timor-Leste is seen as a
resource coordination tool, rather than as one for
resource mobilization. As a first step, now that the
priorities for the next two years have been identified by
the Government, an operational framework will be
developed in consultation with the line ministries and
partners. The intention is to ensure that the
operationalization of the compact builds on existing
mechanisms, so as to ensure effectiveness and avoid
duplication.

It is, indeed, true that UNMIT is currently
operating with a fairly high civilian vacancy rate owing
to a variety of factors, including the specialized job
profiles required for many posts. I have made
recruitment one of my personal priorities. I am
delighted that, as a special case, some areas of
responsibility have been delegated to UNMIT by the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in order to
expedite recruitment. However, I believe that the
extension of the mandate for a further 12 months will
be critical to our efforts to address the challenge of
high civilian vacancy rates, as was, indeed, pointed out
by His Excellency Mr. J ose Ramos-Horta, Prime
Minister of the Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste.

I will return to Timor-Leste tomorrow, confident

of the support of the Council. In turn, I would like to
assure the Council that we will do our very best so that
Timor-Leste can be assisted to become a shining
example of long-lasting success. I am certainly not a
pessimist. But neither should we be overly optimistic,
as we were a few years ago when considering the
downsizing of previous operations in Timor-Leste. I
believe that what is required is a sense of cautious
optimism - a confidence that the leaders and the
people of Timor-Leste are committed to peace, stability
07-23460
and development. But converting their commitment
into real, concrete outcomes will require the continued
engagement of the Council and the international
community.

