Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): Ukraine remains
deeply concerned over the further deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East. We are appalled by the
daily news of new casualties among the innocent
civilian population. My country was shocked by the
latest massive rocket attack by Israel, which used
heavy weaponry against Palestinian Authority facilities
and other buildings in Gaza and the West Bank.
Ukraine condemns such acts of excessive and
indiscriminate use of force, and urges Israel to stop
them immediately and unconditionally. Everything
should be done to ensure full respect by Israel for the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We also call on the
Palestinians to demonstrate restraint and refrain from
any violent actions. We condemn all acts of violence
and terrorism. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to returning to the negotiating table and
implementing the Sharm el-Sheikh summit
understanding.

It is our conviction that the solution to the
question of Palestine should be based on the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the Madrid Peace
Conference formula and the Oslo accords. My country
supports the constructive engagement of the Secretary-
General in the current crisis and strongly encourages
him to continue his efforts to try to find ways to stop
the violence and bring the parties back to the
negotiating table. We look forward to the early
commencement of the activities of the fact-finding
committee.

My country also welcomes the declaration of
20 November by the Foreign Ministers of the European
Union. We share in the growing perception that the
Security Council should take further measures to bring
the situation to normalcy and ensure the
implementation by the parties of resolution
1322 (2000).

My delegation is in agreement with the
assessment that, given the further worsening of the
situation, the presence of a third party, representing the
international community, is critically important if we
are to avert a large-scale war in the whole region. In
our view, under current circumstances, the idea of
deploying a United Nations observer mission, as
proposed by France, is becoming increasingly topical.

Finally, my country, which continues to be
involved in bilateral consultations on the issue with the
parties concerned, stands ready to contribute further to
efforts aimed at bringing the ongoing crisis in the
Middle East to an end.

