Mr. Maqungo (South Africa): The strengthening
of, and adherence to, the rule of law has always been
central to ensuring democracy in conflict and post-
conflict societies. We are therefore pleased that the
Secretary-General has presented a report, entitled "The
rule of law and transitional justice in conflict and post-
conflict societies", that captures the wealth of relevant
expertise and experience within the United Nations
system. We welcome this report because it provides
valuable lessons which the Council can utilize in
implementing its resolutions and mandates.
The exercise of the rule of law, especially in
conflict and post-conflict societies, is critical in
creating conditions for peace and security that allow
for development to take hold. Quite often, in conflict
and post-conflict areas, especially in Africa, our
experience has been that poverty and
underdevelopment contribute to non-adherence to the
rule of law. Yet it is that same rule of law that, when
applied to regulate the conduct of individuals with each
other and with the State, creates conditions for
sustainable development.

The Secretary-General states that

"Peace and stability can only prevail if the
population perceives that politically charged
issues, such as ethnic discrimination, unequal
distribution of wealth and social services, abuse
of power, denial of the right to property or
citizenship and territorial disputes between
States, can be addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner." (S/2004/6I6, para. 4)

The Secretary-General further states that,

"In formulating recommendations for the
Security Council, planning mission mandates and
structures, and conceiving assistance
programmes, it is imperative that both the
Security Council and the United Nations system
carefully consider the particular rule of law and
justice needs in each host country" (ibid., para. 14).

n:

The Secretary-General also makes the point that, a
piecemeal approach to the rule of law and transitional
justice will not bring satisfactory results in a war-torn
or atrocity-scarred nation" (ibid., para. 23). Our
experience with our own peace process in South Africa
led us to the same conclusion: that the rule of law and
transitional justice must address the causes of the
conflict and the effects the conflict had on the
population.

In South Africa, the cause of the conflict was the
oppressive policy of apartheid. We adopted a
constitution that builds a non-racial society to resolve
that cause of that conflict. Following democratic
elections in 1994, we put in place, within that
constitution, State institutions supporting constitutional
democracy, such as a Public Protector, a Human Rights
Commission and a Gender Equality Commission.
Furthermore, our Government promulgated legislation
on affirmative action and passed policies on Black
Economic Empowerment to ensure that the problem of
unequal distribution of wealth was addressed.

We also had established the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission as a process to promote
national unity and reconciliation to heal the wounds
inflicted by the oppressive apartheid policy on our
society. That process offered an opportunity for victims
to face their perpetrators and find closure and for the
perpetrators to seek the forgiveness of their victims.
The meetings of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission were held in public and broadcast on
television so that the whole country could be part of
the healing process. Only those who had told the whole
truth were granted amnesty.

We have set up institutions for collective
reparation, such as the Freedom Park, to promote
programmes to remember those who died in pursuit of
our democracy and we are also engaged in providing
individual reparation measures. Reparations are the
State's way of participating in the healing process and
restoring some dignity to those who suffered under the
apartheid policy.

We are the first to concede that our South African
experience may not be applicable to other countries
emerging from conflict and the lessons we have
learned may not travel well. However, the point made
in the Secretary-General's report is that adherence to
the rule of law can contribute to lasting peace and
security.

We wish to associate ourselves with the
recommendations made by other delegations regarding
the institutional changes necessary to enable the United
Nations to better cope with its work to strengthen the
rule of law and transitional justice. The importance of
the rule of law and transitional justice cannot be
overemphasized.

We are convinced that international criminal
justice systems, such as the International Criminal
Court and the international tribunals established by the
United Nations, can contribute to establishing a lasting
peace in the areas where they are utilized. We wish to
encourage the Security Council to exercise its mandate
to refer situations to the International Criminal Court
when national assessment needs dictate such a referral.
That will guarantee that the practice of the rule of law
becomes the bedrock for strengthening democracy.

Finally, my delegation supports the overall
conclusions and recommendations of the Secretary-
General. We wish to underline the importance of
considering the needs of each specific situation so as to
avoid developing common strategies for each and
every conflict or post-conflict situation. After all, there
can be no one-size-fits-all solution for every problem.

