Mr. Ayafor: Before we address the issues that
have been raised by some members of the Council, I
would like, on behalf of the Panel, to thank the
members of the Council for their appreciation directed
to us, the members of the Panel, for the report.

If I correctly recorded the questions raised, there
was a question from Norway concerning information
on alleged Bin Laden network activities in Sierra
Leone. The same question was raised by the
representative of France. The representative of Mali
indicated that he wanted further clarification on the
usefulness of the monitoring mechanism proposed by
the Panel in its recommendation. Finally, three
questions were raised by the representative of the
United States. If there are any other questions that I did
not take note of, I request that they be indicated so that
we can give responses as we proceed.

On the issue raised by the representatives of
Norway and France, may I indicate that the focus of
attention on international terrorism, and, more
specifically, on the activities of bin Laden and his
Al Qaeda network, only surfaced at the United Nations
after the 11 September events. In this respect, while the
Panel did not particularly investigate anything
concerning the presence or activities of Al Qaeda in
Sierra Leone or Liberia, we did note in our report the
activities of the individual mentioned - Ibrahim Bah.
His name came up in the Sierra Leone report, as well
as the present report. Should it be the intention of the
Council to have this situation investigated further,
certainly the Panel would have no objections.

With respect to the issue raised by Mali
concerning our proposal in paragraph 66, we felt that
within the period between now and when we proposed
that the Panel could go back to the field there would be
a vacuum. To fill that vacuum, we thought that the
Secretariat could have an in-house officer for Liberia,
who could continue to monitor compliance with
resolution 1343 (2001). In the process, he could
develop a database of whatever violations are
registered from the field. He could also, in letters or
telephone calls, request clarification and/or details, so
that the Security Council Committee on Liberia, and
eventually the Council itself, could be informed.

I now turn to the question raised by the United
States as to why the activities of non-governmental
organizations in the region are limited. We, as the
Panel, cannot provide adequate answers as to why non-
governmental organizations are not operating in Liberia
or why humanitarian agencies, such as the United
Nations Children's Fund, are not doing enough in
Liberia. The representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, who is present,
could probably provide answers to those questions.

With regard to the humanitarian situation in
Liberia before the imposition of sanctions, the
Secretary-General's report (S/2001/939) contains on
page 6 a graph showing that humanitarian assistance to
Liberia started to decline some four years back. That
was not as a result of the imposition of sanctions,
because the sanctions came into force in May this year.
Besides, that is confirmed in the statement by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Liberia, who indicated
that humanitarian assistance to Liberia started
declining four years ago.

If there are other requests for clarification, I
would, with your permission, Madam President, invite
Mr. Harjit Sandhu, who served as the focal point and
Coordinator of the Panel, to add some details.

