Ms. Mapisa-Nqakula (South Africa): We welcome
the presence at this meeting of the French Minister
for Europe and Foreign Affairs. We also commend
France for its efforts in developing the comprehensive
resolution 2462 (2019), on preventing and combating
the financing of terrorism, which the Security Council
adopted at the beginning of this open debate.

We also thank the following speakers for their
informative remarks: Mr. Vladimir Voronkov, Under-
Secretary-General of the United Nations Office of
Counter-Terrorism; Mr. Marshall Billingslea, President
of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF); and
Ms. Mercy Buku, expert in anti-money-laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism.

South Africa is pleased that the Security Council
is today discussing ways to effectively prevent and
counter the financing of terrorism with the broader
membership of the United Nations.

South Africa aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed,
Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations.

We recognize with great concern that the scourge
of terrorism and violent extremism is spreading across
all corners of the globe, with devastating impact. I
would like to reiterate South Africa's unequivocal
condemnation of all acts of terrorism, whatever form,
for whatever reason and wherever they may occur.
Indiscriminate attacks against civilians can never be
justified under any circumstances. We again extend
our condolences to the people of New Zealand for the
horrendous attack that took place earlier this month in
Christchurch and express our solidarity with all victims
of terrorism.

As we have witnessed time and time again, the
scourge of terrorism knows no boundaries and continues
to evolve, despite concerted efforts by the international
community to counter it. No country or continent can
claim itself free from that threat. While terrorist groups

may have suffered military and financial setbacks, they
remain resilient and retain an ability, through various
means, to carry out attacks and generate funds in
support of their activities.

Against that background, we welcome France's
initiative on addressing the financing of terrorism,
as well as other related efforts on strengthening
international cooperation in halting the flow of funds to
terrorist groups. As a country from a continent affected
by terrorism, we recognize the importance ofhalting the
means of financing that sustain terrorist organizations
and the horrific violence that they commit, including
against our peacekeepers.

We know fully well that, unchecked, that threat
has the potential to derail our collective efforts to bring
about peace, security and sustainable development on
the continent. We have witnessed the devastation on
infrastructure and the displacement of people as a result

of terrorist acts. Our continent of 55 countries - a
rich tapestry of different peoples, histories, languages,
cultures and legal and financial systems - is

nevertheless guided by a common commitment, under
the leadership of the African Union, to take measures
to counter terrorism and the destruction it causes.
In that regard, the African Union, over the course of
its existence, has developed a wide-ranging policy
framework, legal instruments and programmes to deal
with that threat, including its financing.

Our efforts to fight terrorism and its financing
in South Africa are guided by those measures,
commensurate with the country's exposure to terrorist
financing activities, and its obligations as both a State
Member of the United Nations and member of the
Financial Action Task Force. In that regard, South
Africa is engaged in the implementation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, as well as the Financial
Action Task Force global standards on countering the
financing of terrorism.

Those measures are supported by South Africa's
legislative framework and its national counter-terrorism
strategy, and are implemented and achieved with the
assistance of our Financial Intelligence Centre and
other relevant Government structures. The sharing of
information and coordination at the domestic level and
private-public partnerships are important components
of addressing the threat.

In addition, together with our global counterparts,
South Africa is engaged in regional efforts to develop
the relevant counter-terrorism financing legislative
and regulatory frameworks. We are finding strategies
to detect, deter and disrupt terrorist financing and
militate against the inherent risks and vulnerabilities,
which could be exploited for the purposes of raising,
moving, storing and using funds in support ofterrorism
and terrorist activities anywhere in the world. Those
efforts include dedicated technical assistance and
capacity-building initiatives that South Africa shares
with its neighbours.

In a world where terrorist organizations utilize
sophisticated, high-technology means to move funds
around various regions of the world, we are pleased
that the resolution that we have just adopted provides
an equally sophisticated response to this challenge.

It is important that the fight against terrorism
continue to be led by the United Nations as the most
appropriate, representative structure for coordinating
our actions against this global challenge. It is
imperative that our joint response to the challenge of
terrorism internationally give due weight to the need
to address those conditions that influence vulnerable
people, particularly the youth, to become radicalized
and involved with terrorist organizations. This is true
not only in Africa but throughout the world. It is also
important that the fight against terrorism be undertaken
in a manner that does not have a negative impact on the
provision of humanitarian aid and medical assistance,
and we welcome the efforts made by France in providing
these assurances in the resolution.

In conclusion, South Africa remains steadfast in
its commitment and contribution to the fight against
terrorism, and we will continue to work at the bilateral,
regional and international levels to address this scourge
in all its forms and manifestations.

