Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Sir, for having organized
this public meeting on the situation in East Timor,
barely one month before the elections that will open
the way to that country's independence. I also wish to
thank the Secretary-General for his progress report on
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) and to welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, and Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Cabinet Member
of the East Timor Transitional Administration
responsible for Foreign Affairs. I thank Mr. Vieira de
Mello for his clear and precise presentation of the
Secretary-General's report and Mr. Ramos-Horta for
his very enlightening statement.

In the report before us, we take due note of the
considerable progress made by UNTAET since our last
meeting on 18 May towards building an independent,
democratic and stable East Timorese State. This public
meeting is an ideal opportunity for my delegation to
pay a warm tribute to the Special Representative, all
the staff of UNTAET and all the Members of the East
Timor Transitional Administration for the steps they
have taken in the political process leading to the
national and international sovereignty of East Timor
and the emergence of an independent East Timorese
Government.

The delegation of Mali endorses and supports all
the ideas, recommendations and analyses provided by
the Secretary-General in his report, and shares some
concerns expressed by those who have spoken before
us. Allow me to make a few additional comments.

First, there can be no doubt whatsoever that
UNTAET has been seriously and resolvedly involved
in the process of preparing for the elections for the
Constituent Assembly, to be held on the symbolic date
of 30 August. The dissolution of the National Council
and the opening of the electoral campaign on 15 July
were concrete demonstrations of that involvement.

The massive participation of East Timorese in
this first multi-party balloting is the biggest challenge
facing UNTAET and, through it, the international
community as a whole. In this connection, my
delegation welcomes the participation of 16 political
parties and the registration of 1,138 party and
independent candidates for the 88 seats in Parliament.
We welcome and encourage the women candidates in
particular.

The pact of national unity, signed on 8 July 2001,
by 14 out of 16 parties competing for the vote,
constitutes a strong political act that my delegation
welcomes and supports. The fact that these parties have
committed themselves to respecting the ballot results,
to conducting themselves peacefully with mutual
respect and to defending pluralistic democracy clearly
attests to the maturity of the East Timorese political
leaders and their determination to establish the bases of
a solid democratic and an economically viable State.

The political parties, we believe, must become
increasingly involved in the education, sensitizing and
training of their activists. In order to do this, the parties
need the means. In this context, we support UNTAET's
decision to solicit donors' support to organize a
programme of assistance for all the registered political
parties and independent candidates.

Regarding the various phases of transition from a
Transitional Administration to an independent East
Timorese Government, my delegation welcomes the
laudable progress made by UNTAET. It is encouraging
to note that steady progress has been made in the last
six months in the areas of staff recruitment and training
and the adoption of legislation on employment and
labour administration. All this certainly contributes to
the Administration's transition in good conditions to
the future East Timorese Government. The
Timorization of the Administration must be accelerated
before independence, in order to allow the country's
people to take control themselves of their country's
destiny.

East Timor's accession to independence must not
be synonymous with the international community's
disengagement. In view of the enormous sums that the
international community has invested there, everything
must be done to accompany the young East Timorese
democracy's first steps.

In this context, my delegation takes due note of
the comments made by the Secretary-General in
paragraphs 52 to 60 of his report and awaits with
interest his October 2001 report, in which he will
outline the new mission that will replace UNTAET. My
delegation attaches great importance to the questions
linked to defence, public safety and governance, which
must be ensured for the East Timorese throughout the
critical period that will follow the elections. I am
certain that the Secretary-General will make relevant
recommendations in his October 2001 report regarding
each of the aforementioned points.

Finally, I cannot conclude without reiterating
Mali's firm support for the remarkable work achieved
by UNTAET, under the effective guidance of
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, on the path to East Timor's
independence, of the Timorization of the
Administration and of the advent of an independent
East Timorese Government. East Timor will still need
the international community's support following its
accession to independence. The international
community does not have the right to shirk its
responsibilities vis-a-vis this emerging democracy.

