Mr. Mielus (Poland): Poland welcomes the adoption
of the important and timely resolution 2451 (2018). We
thank the United Kingdom for its efforts to have this
text adopted today.

The resolution reflects the significant achievements
of the recent consultations in Sweden and reiterates
the call upon the parties to ensure their swift and
full implementation. It also addresses the five points
on which Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock
requested the Council's urgent support. We are
pleased by the fact that the Security Council managed
to maintain its unity and was able to undertake this
much-needed step to address the humanitarian crisis in
the country.

I would like to take this opportunity to once again
express our full support for the five asks of the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We reiterate
our call on the parties to implement the agreement
on the cessation of hostilities across Al-Hudaydah
governorate and in the ports of Al-Hudaydah, Saleef
and Ras Isa, which will make it possible to reopen the
humanitarian corridors and facilitate the delivery of
life-saving assistance.

We urge all parties to guarantee the unimpeded flow
and movement of vital imports, humanitarian supplies
and personnel into and across the whole country,
including by removing any bureaucratic impediments
that could restrict such flows, and to ensure the full
and sustained functioning of all Yemeni ports and the
Sana'a airport.

Poland also underscores the obligation of all parties
to the conflict in Yemen to respect the principles
of international humanitarian law and to ensure the
protection of civilians. We urge them to cease all
indiscriminate use of weapons in populated areas and
attacks against the civilian population, including air
strikes and ballistic missile attacks, and to end the
use of civilian infrastructure for military purposes.
The parties must at all times respect the principles
of proportionality and distinction, taking all feasible
precautions to avoid harm to civilians, civilian facilities
and critical infrastructure. We also underscore the need
for independent, credible and timely investigations into
alleged violations of international humanitarian law
and for those found responsible to be held accountable.

Finally, we would like to highlight the need to
continue political dialogue through constructive
engagement with the Special Envoy and the next round
of consultations, which are due to take place in January,
as well as the importance of ensuring the meaningful
participation in the peace processes of all the relevant
groups of Yemeni society, including women and youth.

