Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for the competent
Swedish presidency of the Security Council this month.
I would also like to thank the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Mladenov, for his
briefing on the situation in the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question.

Security and stability cannot be ensured except
by establishing peace and development, securing a
decent life for the people, uprooting terrorism and its
obscure ideology, and protecting young people, who
represent the present and the future of nations. Jordan
underscores the centrality of the Palestinian question
and the importance of achieving a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict that would ensure the rights of the Palestinian
people to liberty, dignity and an independent State
based on the two-State solution, which requires the
creation of an independent Palestinian State within the
1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital,
pursuant to international resolutions and the Arab Peace
Initiative and through direct and serious negotiations
between Israelis and Palestinians to address all issues
related to final status. We believe that it is necessary
to continue our coordination with our brothers in the
Palestinian authorities to put an end to the Israeli
occupation and respond to our brothers' aspirations to
liberty and an independent State.

The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan continues to
defend Jerusalem and its sacred Muslim and Christian
sites because we have historical guardianship over
them in East Jerusalem. We will spare no effort to
counter Israeli attempts to alter the historic and legal
status of Jerusalem.

Jordan condemns Israel's latest aggression
against the Palestinian people, in particular the forced
displacement of inhabitants of Khan Al-Ahmar and
Abu Nuwar villages, in order to expand the Israeli
settlements, which constitute a threat that undermines
peace prospects. Jordan also condemns the latest
attacks against the Palestinians in Gaza and the
excessive use of force in contravention of international
law and the United Nations resolutions. These Israeli
attacks have claimed more innocent civilian victims
in the Gaza Strip, which is suffering from a siege
that runs counter to all international humanitarian
laws. We recall the importance of General Assembly
resolution ES-10/20, adopted in June, guaranteeing
international protection for Palestinian civilians. It is
also necessary for the Secretary-General to include
practical recommendations in his future reports to be
implemented in this context.

Jordan condemns in the strongest terms the
nation-State Law adopted by Israel last week. This law
enshrines racial segregation in Israel and the occupied
territories and categorically contradicts international
law and international conventions. It will only
exacerbate acts of violence and extremism. We call on
the international community to oppose this law so as to
preserve peace and stability in the region and around
the world.

The financial situation of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East (UNRWA) is a source of concern for us.
Despite recent contributions, the dangerous shortfall in
UNRWA's finances could undermine the provision of
essential services in education, health care and social
support and have an impact on millions of refugees,
in particular young people and children caught up in
attempts to politicize this essential Agency, which is
providing vital services in the context of the ongoing
Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories and the
inability of refugees to return to their homes.

The Syrian crisis is entering its eighth year and
Jordan's borders remain open to our Syrian brothers, in
particular for the delivery of humanitarian assistance
by the United Nations under resolution 2165 (2014).
Humanitarian assistance is continuously provided to
our brothers in the south of Syria. The Kingdom hosts
1.3 million Syrian refugees, with whom we have been
sharing food, water, schools and medical care until
such time as they are able to return home.

We have also worked tirelessly to bring an end to
the crisis in the south of Syria. In recent weeks, efforts
have allowed us to encourage the parties concerned
to reach a ceasefire and achieve reconciliation in the
south-west of the country and to ensure that assistance
is provided to displaced persons near the Jordanian
border. We have made efforts to allow for the return
of these people to their villages in Syria. We hope for
a political process, under the auspices of the United
Nations, that is global and comprehensive, preserves
the territorial integrity of Syria and its citizens, and
ensures the return of refugees pursuant to resolution
2254 (2015) and Geneva agreements. The political
solution to the Syrian crisis is the only means to end
acts of killing and destruction.

More than half of the world's population is under
the age of 30, and 70 per cent of them are in regions
that are experiencing armed conflicts, namely, the
Middle East and Africa. International developments,
especially in the Middle East, have created instability
and left their impact on children and young people,
most of whom cannot gain access to education and the
vital services they need, whether due to displacement
or the decline of national economies owing to these
continued conflicts.

Once again, we call for the necessary conditions
to be provided so that a generation of young people
can contribute to the building and prosperity of the
Middle East and beyond. This generation needs to be
one that believes in rapprochement and moderation so
as to counter extremist ideology and divisions among
nations. To achieve that end, our only choice, is to take
decisive and urgent measures to rebuild confidence
and overcome divisions so as to achieve fair and
comprehensive peace that can meet the aspirations of
all the people in the region.

