Mr. Pereyra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim Rficker, for his
presentation of the report on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 1 May to 14 August of this year. I
would like to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Rucker on having taken up his new post on 1
September, and we wish him every success in his
future work.

I am grateful also for the information provided us
this morning by Ms. Sanda Raskovic-Ivic, President of
the Coordination Centre of the Republic of Serbia for
Kosovo and Metohija.

The delegation of Peru indicated earlier the vital
need to progress towards implementing all the
standards. Whatever the final status of Kosovo may be,
it must be democratic in nature. There must be respect
for civil liberties; political, religious and cultural
tolerance; respect for minorities; economic
opportunities for all; and a regular transfer of power.
The European vision for the region must take shape
there.

My delegation welcomes the positive efforts
undertaken by the authorities of Kosovo to implement
the standards. However, we deplore the fact that
obstacles still bar the way to achieving the progress
requested by the Contact Group in a number of areas.

All the parties concerned must redouble their
efforts to move forward and promote confidence
among Kosovo's communities - for example,
confidence in democratic institutions, the rule of law,
voluntary and sustainable return, community rights, the
Comprehensive Action Plan against Discrimination,
respect for cultural heritage, the Working Group on
Missing Persons and the proposal to ensure security for
minorities.

The delegation of Peru believes that building a
multi-ethnic and democratic society requires active
cooperation by all the sectors involved. Without that
basis, it will be very difficult to find a lasting solution
of regional peace and stability, even if a definition of
status is achieved.

Another aspect that my country considers
essential in standards implementation is progress in
building a viable economy with sufficient productive
capacity to ensure the economic sustainability of
democracy in Kosovo.

Peru wishes to reiterate that to move beyond this
transitional phase there must be significant progress in
rebuilding Kosovo's economy with a view to achieving
its competitive integration into the regional arena.
Recent Latin American experience clearly shows us
that a competitive market economy bolsters the rule of
law and the stability of political systems. That applies
also to Kosovo. A production and services structure
that generates opportunities for the local population is
essential to reduce crime and other social ills that
unfortunately affect Kosovo and have an impact
beyond its borders. Even the most recent incidents in
northern Kosovo can be analysed in terms of the
unemployment situation.

The delegation of Peru wishes to reaffirm its
support for the political process aimed at finding a
negotiated solution to Kosovo's future status. We hope
that the parties will not hamper the discussions to
which they have committed themselves and that they
will help in good faith to overcome any circumstances
that might prevent them from moving forward with
realism and pragmatism to achieve the well-being of
the peoples that they represent.

