Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would also like to thank
Special Representative Mr. Ould Abdallah for his
introduction of the Secretary-General's report, and his
very helpful briefing this morning.

Piracy off the coast of Somalia continues to pose
a serious threat affecting one of the most important
international transport routes. Japan is deeply
concerned about the loss of lives and assets owing to
the sharp increase of piracy over the past year, despite
our best efforts. While incidents in the Gulf of Aden
have recently declined, they have moved further south
and attacks in the Western Indian Ocean, closer to the
Seychelles, have significantly increased. We should not
tolerate piracy trying to disrupt essential United
Nations activities such as the delivery of food
assistance by the World Food Programme and the
logistical support to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

The fragile security situation in Somalia produces
fertile ground for piracy, and instability caused by
piracy, in turn, affects the situation on land. In order to
achieve stability in Somalia as a whole, international
efforts and assistance must be directed towards dealing
with the unstable conditions in south-central Somalia,
in particular Mogadishu, and assisting counter-piracy
activities along the coastline.

Given the broad scope of the negative effects of
piracy, and in order to protect the vital sea route, a
multifaceted and coordinated approach must be
pursued at three levels: international, regional and
national.

The adoption of Security Council resolution 1851
(2008) led to the establishment of the Contact Group
on Piracy Off the Coast of Somalia, which has met four
times at the plenary level. Japan welcomes the progress
the Contact Group has made and the fact that it has
now developed into a coordinating forum for various
counter-piracy activities with increased membership
along with substantive activities on the part of the
working groups.

In recent plenary meeting chaired by Japan, the
Contact Group decided to establish a new international
trust fund to assist initiatives such as the prosecution of
and judicial procedures against arrested pirates.
We are also pleased that a mechanism for
coordinating the operational aspect of counter-piracy
activities, and is known as the Shared Awareness and
Deconfliction (SHADE) mechanism, is well in place. It
comprises the operations of the European Union's
Operation Atalanta, NATO, the Combined Maritime
Forces and States such as China, India, Japan and
Russia.

The challenge now is how to enhance
coordination and more effectively share information to
counter pirates who are always changing their tactics.
In this regard, we appreciate the European Union
Naval Force Operation Atalanta for escorting the
delivery of the AMISOM. logistical support package.
For its part, Japan deploys two naval vessels and two
P-3C Orion maritime patrol aircraft which are
providing valuable information to all participating
States. It has expanded the scope of escorts to include
foreign vessels, effective June 2009.

It is also important to strengthen the capacity of
ship crews to protect themselves from piracy attacks.
To that end, we welcome the New York Declaration on
the Commitment to Best Management Practices to
Avoid, Deter or Delay Acts of Piracy, which was
originally initiated by the United States and has now
been signed by ten flag State countries, including
Japan. We urge other flag States to join the Declaration
and implement its guidelines.

Together with the global efforts, strong
engagement and coordination are also indispensable at
the regional level. In particular, efforts by the States in
the region, such as Kenya, Yemen and Seychelles, to
ensure prosecution for piracy deserve the support and
assistance of the international community. The
international trust fund to assist the activities of the
Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia must
become operational in a timely manner.

In order to increase the capacity of these States in
their anti-piracy efforts, it is also important to
implement the Djibouti Code of Conduct, which was
adopted by States of the region last January. Japan has
contributed $13.6 million to the Djibouti Code Trust
Fund of the International Maritime Organization. We
hope this support will be speedily utilized by parties
concerned to expedite the launching of regional centres
for information-sharing in Kenya, Tanzania and
Yemen, and a training centre in Djibouti.

Piracy activities are closely related to the security
situation on the land. Long-term solutions will require
restoring stability and governance in Somalia. The
Secretary-General's report emphasizes the crucial
importance of supporting Somalia's own institutional
capacity in various areas. First, it is essential to
strengthen AMISOM. and the Somali security
institutions in south-central Somalia. Secondly, as a
medium-term goal, we need to advance, stability,
capacity and socio-economic development of areas
outside of south-central Somalia, including Puntland,
which is home to many pirates. Thirdly, we would like
to see improved coordination between the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia and the
International Contact Group chaired by Mr. Ould
Abdallah. We look forward to enhanced coordination in
the next plenary meeting of the Contact Group in
January 2010.

In conclusion, the international community needs
to intensify the coordinated, multi-faceted anti-piracy
efforts at the global, regional and national levels in
order to see to it that they bear fruit. Japan will
contribute positively to the ongoing negotiations on a
draft resolution prepared by the United States for the
renewal of the Security Council authorization.

