Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We associate ourselves with the high assessment
of the activity of your predecessor, Sir, the Permanent
Representative of the United States, Mr. Richard
Holbrooke, as President of the Security Council, and we
express our warm wishes to you for success in your work
in the Security Council during the month of February.

We also wish to express our gratitude to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sergio Vieira
de Mello, for his extremely important and comprehensive
briefing.

In view of the constraints of time, I shall limit myself
to stating our general political assessment of the situation,
without going into detail on specific issues that have
already been addressed in previous statements. In our view,
the Secretary-General's report on the initial results of the
work of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) provides sufficient grounds for a
satisfactory assessment. This conclusion is based on three
fundamental factors that determine the current situation in
the Territory: a substantive improvement in the security
situation; secondly, the establishment of a mechanism
through which the East Timorese are participating in
decision-making and thanks to which, we hope, the process
of national reconciliation will be strengthened; and thirdly,
the successful establishment of a Transitional
Administration under the skilled and wide-ranging guidance
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello.

Naturally, we are only at the beginning of the lengthy
and complex path that East Timor will have to take to
achieve independence and stable political and economic
development. However, we believe a good start has been
made. At the same time, we are concerned by repeated
reports of episodes of activities of the pro-integration
militias that have led to incidents at the border between
West Timor and East Timor and to a campaign of
intimidation against East Timorese refugees. We are
counting on the fact that the relevant agreements between
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and Mr. J 0510 Tavares on disbanding
militia units will be carried out in the very near future.

Ensuring security and establishing administrative
governance are, naturally, important bases for the further
normalization of the situation in East Timor. However,
genuine stabilization is inconceivable without a normally
functioning economy. We are gratified by the fact that the
international community has responded speedily to East
Timor's needs. This is attested to by the results of the
December donors' meeting held in Tokyo. We believe
this has established a positive beginning for achieving the
objectives in the areas of civil administration,
reconstruction and development.

In conclusion, I would like once again to wish
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and all the UNTAET
personnel the greatest possible success in their work.

