Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
Allow me at the outset to thank the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Joachim
Rficker, for his presentation, and to wish him every
success in his new post at this crucial time for the
future of Kosovo. In particular, he will be responsible
for preparing for the transition from the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to the future international presence, which must be
very carefully organized.

I should like also to welcome the presence of
Ms. Raskovic-Ivic, President of the Coordination
Centre of the Republic of Serbia for Kosovo and
Metohija, as well as that of Mr. Ceku, Prime Minister
of Kosovo, as part of the delegation headed by
Mr. Rficker.

The Permanent Representative of Finland will
make a statement later on behalf of the European
Union presidency. I associate myself fully with that
statement. However, I wish to touch on several points.

First, we note that the report of the Secretary-
General highlights the progress that has been made
with regard to the implementation of standards, in
keeping with the request submitted by Council
members. This is a positive development, but it must
be further expanded. All of the standards must be
implemented rapidly, in a concrete manner, in
particular with regard to the 13 priorities identified by
UNMIK and by the Contact Group with regard to the
protection of minorities and the rule of law.

The efforts undertaken by the authorities of
Kosovo to build a multi-ethnic country will play an
important role in defining the future status of Kosovo.
Moreover, the dialogue undertaken by the provisional
authorities addressing minorities, starting with the Serb
minority, must be intensified.

No lasting stability will be possible in the
absence of reconciliation among communities.
Unacceptable acts of violence against minorities make
it clear that such a reconciliation lies far ahead in the
future. The perpetrators of such acts must be brought to
justice. However, such a necessary reconciliation will
require also the Serbian authorities to participate in full
in the Provisional Institutions, which is in their own
interest. In that respect, we share the concerns outlined
by the Secretary-General with regard to the pressure
that has been brought to bear on the Kosovo Serbs to
dissuade them doing so. The authorities in Belgrade
must encourage such participation and not seek to
impede it.

The report of the Secretary-General also
underlines the increasing tension in northern Kosovo.
Whatever the future status of Kosovo may be, we will
have to devise realistic operational arrangements that
will provide for development in northern Kosovo.
Increased decentralization must preserve the identity
and protect the rights of the various communities.

It is regrettable that several municipal assemblies
have decided to suspend cooperation with the
Provisional Institutions. Belgrade and Pristina must
work to encourage local leaders to build confidence. In
any case, we certainly would rule out any notion of
partition.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its full support
for the negotiation process that is under way under the

auspices of Mr. Ahtisaari. While the positions of the
parties remain divergent, as is underlined in the report
of the Secretary-General, it is more pressing than ever
before for the parties to become involved in a
constructive manner and to show flexibility with regard
to the status issue and also with regard to the
constituent elements of the status.

We hope that the process will result in a
negotiated settlement. In any case, it is imperative that
a solution be found by the deadline that we have set,
that is, by the end of 2006, both in order to assuage any
feelings of impatience and to prevent any further
delays in resolving a problem that threatens regional
stability.

Whatever form the future status of Kosovo may
take, it must be in keeping with the European
architecture. From that perspective, we deem
imperative progress towards achieving a multi-ethnic
and democratic society. We look to Belgrade and
Pristina to contribute actively in that respect.

