Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Mr. President, I wish to
express our appreciation to you, to your colleagues and
to your country for putting the item on the African
dimension in the work of the Security Council high on
our agenda.

Today's discussion will enrich our perspective by
enabling us to hear views from the broader
membership of the United Nations. It will allow us to
make observations and draw conclusions which will
have a positive effect on the outcome of the work of
the Council.

Greece fully aligns itself with the statement made
earlier by the Permanent Representative of
Luxembourg on behalf of the European Union.

During the month of March, as it had done
previously, the Security Council continued to discuss
many issues pertaining to peace and security in several
African countries. This shows clearly the genuine
concern that the Security Council has for Africa.

At the same time, unfortunately, it proves also
that significant parts of Africa continue to be affected
by armed conflict. In certain parts conflict has only
recently ceased, and in others the situation is so
precarious that it might lead to conflict. Africa has
indeed been at the centre of the Security Council's
attention and action.

It could be useful to describe very briefly some of
the cases in order to emphasize their common
characteristics and to draw lessons that could
contribute not only to an improvement in the work of
the Security Council, but also to a better approach to
resolving the issues.

No one should doubt the serious concern of the

members of the Security Council as regards the Sudan,
the largest country in Africa, where a two-decades-long
war has claimed the lives of more than 2 million
people. The adoption of the resolution authorizing the
deployment of a United Nations Mission of more than
10,000 people represents a positive contribution to the
effective implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement of Nairobi. It also gives rise to real hope
that this agreement will serve as a model for the
settlement of the conflict in Darfur. The continuation
of the crisis in Darfur led the Council to adopt further
measures to be taken if the parties do not comply with
the relevant Security Council resolutions. The issue of
impunity for crimes committed in Darfur is also of
paramount importance.

In the case of Ethiopia and Eritrea, the renewal of
the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia
and Eritrea (UNMEE) gave the Security Council the
opportunity to address the stalemate in the settlement
of the differences between the two countries.

In the case of Cote d'Ivoire, the Security Council
decided to reinforce the arms embargo. Individual
sanctions have not yet been put into effect, in order to
give the African Union's mediation effort time to bear
fruit. With the security situation deteriorating, there is
a strong feeling among Council members that
individual sanctions should become effective.

The Security Council earlier adopted a resolution
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo arms
embargo in order to better define and strengthen its
scope and implementation. It is unfortunate that the
embargo is systematically being violated and that there
is still no consensus with regard to the different
elements that could contribute to achieving its effective
and thorough implementation.

Most often the problems tackled by the Security
Council have regional and even global dimensions, yet
almost all of them affect Africa disproportionately.
Greece is of the opinion, therefore, that the Security
Council should continue to pay particular attention to
these issues. In trying to resolve these problems, some
common trends should be considered. The Security
Council should take into consideration those that
emerge from our work concerning Africa, which
include the following.

First, the African Union (AU) has emerged as a
reliable and active player. This is an encouraging factor
that has already proved extremely helpful in the work
of the Security Council. We commend the African
Union for its actions. It has emerged as a true partner
for peace, assuming responsibility and on numerous
occasions exercising leadership in dealing with the
many conflicts that have affected Africa.

In the context of regional organizations, I would
like to emphasize the very important role that the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) is playing in the West African region.
Equally important is the role of other regional
organizations in other parts of Africa, such as the Inter-
Government Authority on Development (IGAD) in
eastern Africa, the three regional initiatives in the
Great Lakes region, and the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in southern and
central Africa. The Security Council's cooperation with
all of the regional organizations is therefore of
paramount importance.
Sanctions are a fundamental tool available to the
Security Council in its efforts to ensure peace and
security in the world. No one should think that the
members of the Security Council are eager to impose
sanctions or that they do so easily. Such a decision
should be taken with extreme caution and
consideration for the population, whose well-being has
to be secured. Violations of sanctions are,
unfortunately, a common trend in many African
conflicts. Lack of compliance with sanctions is indeed
a problem, and the Security Council must work hard in
that respect in order to devise ways and seek methods
of making them effective, workable and just.

A great deal of discussion is taking place on the
question of impunity. It is indeed a crucial matter, not
only for reasons of principle, namely, upholding the
rule of law and justice. It also has a very powerful
practical aspect, being a strong deterrent for those who
resort to violence to promote their political agenda, and
it is a necessary element in any peace and
reconciliation effort.

No matter how hard the international community
tries, one often gets the feeling that, unless Security
Council intervention is combined with long-term
development plans, its efforts will be to no avail.

Persistent violent conflict is the cause, but also
the result, of poverty. Therefore, if we wish to be
effective in tackling either of the two, we must tackle
both. The existing institutional gap in the international
system can be bridged through the establishment of a
peacebuilding commission, as proposed by the
Secretary-General and the High-level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change. We believe that that is an idea
whose time has come.

In conclusion, the promotion of lasting peace and
security in Africa - which in turn will be conducive to
sustainable economic and social development -
constitutes one, if not the principal, major challenge
that we, as members of the Security Council, continue
to face. The year 2005 is no exception; on the contrary,
it is, as many have declared, the year of Africa. The
Security Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa, under the
chairmanship of Benin, may be very fruitful and
productive in that regard.

