Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French):
I would like to begin by thanking the Malaysian
presidency for enabling us to participate in this debate
on children and armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

In the past year we have seen horrific situations in
armed conflict in which children have been primary
targets, particularly for violent extremists, with
abductions, recruitment and the use of child soldiers in
active hostilities and the violent radicalization of youth,
as well as sexual exploitation and abuse which, as we
note with great concern and dismay, has sometimes
been perpetrated by personnel attached to peace
support operations.

The international community was horrified by Boko
Haram's abduction of 276 schoolgirls in Nigeria in the
spring of last year. Less well known but also deplorable
were the abductions by the Islamic State in Iraq and
Syria of 153 Kurdish boys in Syria and hundreds of
Yazidi children in western Iraq, as well as the case of
89 schoolboys kidnapped in South Sudan. While mass
abductions draw the media limelight, hundreds of
children have been abducted by such groups both before
and since those events. Canada strongly condemns the
abductions and calls for the immediate release of all
abducted children without delay. The international
community must work to ensure that the children
receive the support they require and are reunited with
their families immediately.

(spoke in French)

Sadly, abductions are often simply the precursors to
other grave violations such as forced recruitment, forced
conversion and sexual violence. They have especially
horrible consequences for girls, who are exposed to
sexual violence, slavery and forced marriage, as well as
forced recruitment. Furthermore, they face difficulties
once they are released, since they are often the victims
of social stigmatization that hinders their reintegration
into their communities.

We are horrified that armed groups are abducting
children from schools. When parents fear that their
children might be abducted, they are less likely to send
them to school, and the repercussions of that decision
are particularly hard on girls. This is very worrying,
given the fact that education is a very powerful tool for
ensuring the achievement of many development goals,
including improved maternal, newborn and child health
and the eradication of child, early and forced marriage.

(spoke in English)

Canada condemns the unlawful use of schools
by armed parties for military purposes. We call on
all parties to armed conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and refrain from using schools as
bases, barracks, weapons caches or detention centres.
We urge Member States to undertake preventive
measures to guard against children's abductions. We
must hold those who commit abductions to account, and
ensure safe conditions for children who are released.
We therefore welcome the adoption today of resolution
2225 (2015), on abductions, of which Canada was
honoured to be a sponsor.

Ten years ago, the international community
established the monitoring and reporting mechanism on
grave violations against children in situations of armed
conflict, designed to systematically monitor, document
and report on such violations. Canada is proud to have
supported that initiative, and while the problem is far
from solved, we have seen some small glimmers of
hope. This year saw the delisting of Chad, a decline
of violations in countries such as Cote d'Ivoire and the
release of hundreds of child soldiers.

(spoke in French)

Canada was deeply saddened to learn that many
children, both Israeli and Palestinian, were injured
and killed during the conflict that erupted in Gaza
in the summer of 2014, for which Hamas is solely
responsible. As the Secretary-General notes in his
report (S/2015/409), the indiscriminate firing ofrockets
by Palestinian armed groups from populated areas
endangered civilian populations in both Israel and Gaza
and led to deaths and injuries among children.

Canada is disappointed, however, that in his report,
rather than calling on all parties to take steps to protect
children affected by armed conflict, the Secretary-
General demonstrates an overt bias in singling out
Israel for one-sided and disproportionate criticism.
The fact that 32 paragraphs in the report are devoted
to Israel - giving it far more attention than any other
Member State, including Syria, the Central African
Republic and the Sudan - speaks to the need to provide
a more honest, impartial and balanced view of the
situation on the ground than the one in this document.
This biased View undermines the integrity of such an
important document. Moreover, the United Nations
should better address the significant underreporting of
the deaths of children in situations such as in Syria, so
that Member States can have an accurate view of the
effects on children of that deadly conflict.

(spoke in English)

Any sexual abuse or exploitation is simply
unacceptable. With regard to today's debate, however,
we would like to shine a spotlight on the heinous
practice of targeting children. Canada condemns in the
strongest terms all forms of sexual abuse or exploitation
of children by any party to a conflict. Our country is
committed to ensuring that the rights of children are
protected in all settings, particularly in situations
of armed conflict. I would like to assure the Council
that we will continue to work with all members of the
international community to ensure that all children, all
over the world, have safe spaces in which to grow and
learn. That is our duty and our responsibility.

