Mr. Petersen (Norway): Let my start by
conveying my Government's deepest condolences to
the United States and to the families of those who lost
their lives in the tragic air crash in New York this
morning.

The eleventh of September has made the threat of
international terrorism dramatically clear. It has added
a new dimension to the central role of the Security
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security.

The terrorist attacks on that day were directed
against all of us. Our thoughts and sympathy go to the
American people and to the bereaved families and
friends from many parts of the world. The international
community must stand united in condemning and
combating terrorism, as we have stood united here in
the Council and in the General Assembly.
We must maintain and strengthen the broad-based
coalition against terrorism, irrespective of race,
religion or nationality. To that end, the United Nations
is the key.

Our immediate aim is to prevent further terrorist
attacks and to bring the guilty to justice. Our actions
are directed against a group of extremists who are
exploiting a world religion for their own evil aims.
They commit their crimes under the cover of fighting
for legitimate causes.

International terrorism is complex and
multifaceted. We can defeat it only through a sustained
and comprehensive approach. At the same time, we
must do our utmost to bring humanitarian assistance to
those who are caught in the middle - those who have
long suffered at the hands of terrorists and their
supporters. We must get at the breeding grounds of
terrorism. We must employ all means at our disposal:
political and legal, military and financial.

The United Nations must take the lead in
hammering out a long-term, comprehensive strategy
for combating international terrorism. The Secretary-
General may find it useful to appoint a special
representative to support his efforts to that end.

Political leadership - our leadership - is
urgently needed in the battle against international
terrorism. We must explain to our people why there are
no easy solutions. We must explain why easing the pain
of the moment may endanger the possibility of finding
a long-term cure. We must explain that, unless we
follow our decisions and our actions through, we will
play into the hands of the terrorists.

We must also continue to demonstrate that we are
fighting terrorism on our own terms, upholding the
very values, rights and freedoms that the terrorists so
despise.

The Security Council has acted swiftly and
decisively in the face of the terrorist attacks.
Resolution 1368 (2001) made it clear that the attacks
constituted a threat to international peace and security,
and triggered the right to self-defence. The pursuit of
terrorists and their backers in Afghanistan is being
carried out in the exercise of that right. We fully
support it.

Resolution 1373 (2001) is aimed at those who
finance terrorism. In implementing the resolution, we
have already taken a number of concrete steps to
eliminate potential economic sources for the terrorists.
We are actively taking part in the work being done here
in the Security Council Counter-terrorism Committee.
We are considering how best we can support countries
that may require assistance.

Terrorism is a global threat to peace and security
and must be countered as such. That is why the
Security Council must remain at the centre of our
response. That is why this meeting is both important
and timely. That is why Norway will continue its active
role in the Council's work against international
terrorism.

