Mr. Okuda (Japan): Since we know that today,
Mr. President, marks the end of your tenure as
Permanent Representative of Turkey and your long
diplomatic career, allow me to take this opportunity to
express, on behalf of my delegation, my heartfelt
appreciation to you, Ambassador Ilkin, for your tireless
efforts to make the work of the Council as productive
and effective as possible. I am sure that we will all
remember your achievements long in the future, and
we will certainly miss you.

At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Kai Eide,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, for his comprehensive and informative
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan. I also pay
tribute to the his leadership and to the dedication of the
United Nations Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) staff, who are working under very difficult
conditions.

By adopting resolution 1868 (2009) in March, the
Security Council reaffirmed the role of the United
Nations in Afghanistan and renewed its support for the
endeavours of the Afghan people to achieve towards a
stable and prosperous future. I strongly hope that
today's meeting will be an occasion for the Council to
demonstrate solidarity in expressing its continued
commitment to the country, as well as its support for
the role of UNAMA.

Since we met in this Chamber last March, the
international commitment to Afghanistan has been
reaffirmed on various occasions. Most notable of those
was the Hague Conference, in which more than
80 countries and international organizations
participated. Most recently, the Foreign Ministers of
the G-8 gathered and had discussions with Afghanistan,
Pakistan and other partners in Trieste, Italy, and
pledged anew their steadfast support.

Individual pledges to strengthen assistance have
also been made, including through the expansion of the
deployment of both troops and civilians. Japan, for its
part, provided about $300 million in additional
assistance in March and began the dispatch of its
civilians to a Provincial Reconstruction Team in May.

All those initiatives represent positive support for
the efforts on the ground, and we welcome them. It is
important that those commitments be implemented
steadily and effectively and that they bring about actual
progress.

In that regard, I would like first of all to
emphasize the importance of ownership on the part of
the Government and people of Afghanistan. I believe
that the efforts of the Afghan Government since last
year in areas such as police and agricultural reform are
to be applauded. We hope to see further progress made
in governance and other key areas. I also wish to stress
that, in those efforts, attention should continue to be
focused on both the central and the local governments.

Secondly, the importance of UNAMA's central
coordinating role cannot be overstated. We are pleased
to note that its cooperation with the International
Security Assistance Force has increased. We also fully
support the efforts of UNAMA to help identify
priorities in reconstruction and development and to
coordinate international assistance, such as the ongoing
mapping process as part of agricultural assistance. We
urge donor countries and organizations to cooperate
with such initiatives of UNAMA, so that our assistance
can be implemented more effectively.

We are all aware of the significance of the
upcoming presidential and provincial council elections.
A huge responsibility lies on the shoulders of the
Afghan people, who are responsible for the
preparations for and conduct of the elections. We
welcome the fact that the preparations have been
brought forward thanks to the efforts of the Afghan
authorities with the assistance of the international
community. Let me reiterate that it is crucial that the
elections be free, fair, inclusive and credible.

The international community shares
responsibility, and we welcome the statements on the
elections issued in Istanbul and Trieste by the
Afghanistan-Pakistan International Support Group. The
newly formed Government must achieve legitimacy by
being elected through credible elections, so that it can
garner support domestically as well as in the
international community. Japan intends to dispatch
election observer teams to help ensure that these goals
are met.

For the elections to be credible, it must be
assured that all candidates are able to campaign on a
level playing field and that all those eligible to vote are
permitted to exercise that right. Obviously, in this
regard, security is the biggest challenge. We support
the steps to be taken by the Afghan Government and
the international partners to ensure a secure electoral
process. Japan has pledged its support for the recently
proposed plan for an interim increase in police
personnel. Our $300 million disbursement also
includes assistance equivalent to the salary of the
entire police force for half a year.

Needless to say, the United Nations plays a
significant role in the electoral process through
technical and other assistance. We particularly support
the efforts of the Special Representative to help ensure
a fair campaign. It is encouraging that the guidelines
issued by the Special Representative have been
endorsed by a number of major candidates.
In this electoral process, the candidates were
screened for eligibility through the programme to
disband illegal armed groups. Besides its significance
in the political process, the programme has contributed
to improved security by producing tangible results in

the dismantling of illegal armed groups and the
collection of weapons, which Japan, as lead country in
this area, acknowledges with satisfaction. It should
also be noted that the development of acceptance of
disbandment in the districts has made progress as well.
It is Japan's intention to continue to assist Afghan
efforts in this area, in ever-closer cooperation with
UNAMA, in order to make certain that the progress in
the disbandment process keeps pace with the capacity-
building of the Afghan police force.

We have witnessed a growing recognition of the
need to embrace a regional perspective, which we
believe is of particular importance in order for the
various initiatives in security, border control and
development in Afghanistan to be effective.
International assistance must be further coordinated
with this approach in mind. The notion was reaffirmed
at last week's G-8 meeting, which was also attended by
Afghanistan and neighbouring countries. In this
context, the initiatives of Afghanistan and its
neighbours, including the Regional Economic
Cooperation Conference, are encouraging. We also
welcome recent international support initiatives such as
the efforts of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization,
the Ankara Declaration process and the Dubai Process.
Japan also has advanced its efforts based on this
regional perspective, with undertakings including the
hosting of the Pakistan donors conference in April and
the launch of Japan-Iran Cooperation in Afghanistan
announced in May.

Before concluding, I would like to stress once
again the important role of the United Nations in
meeting all of these challenges. Expectations are high.
We are anxious to see the concrete developments that
the work of UNAMA is expected to bring about, while
understanding, at the same time, that they cannot be
achieved overnight. It was on the basis of such
expectations that the Council asked in its resolution for
benchmarks to be developed, and Japan appreciates the
Secretary-General's efforts in this regard. We also
understand the necessity of strengthening UNAMA to
meet such expectations among the people in
Afghanistan as well as the international community. I
take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan's unwavering
support for the work of UNAMA.

