I would like to thank Mr. Mark Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his briefing today. We join others in expressing our condemnation of all terrorist attacks and our sympathy to the families of the victims. We take note of the bimonthly report of the Secretary-General on the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2020/327). We remain gravely concerned about the current circumstances. The well-being of the Syrian people continues to be severely affected by the existing socioeconomic and security challenges. Moreover, the newly emerged coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic would rub salt into their wounds, targeting the most vulnerable, namely, internally displaced persons in overcrowded locations, particularly the elderly, women and children. It is worrisome to note that the need for humanitarian assistance across Syria remains overwhelming, yet the situation shows no sign of improvement as compared to the previous reporting period. In particular, the majority of internally displaced persons still struggle with food insecurity and the shortage of shelters and other basic needs in north-western Syria. The health sector in the north-east is suffering significant gaps in terms of medical supply shortage. The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbates the suffering and hardships of the people on the ground and the already- difficult conditions for humanitarian and health workers. We take this opportunity to commend the tireless efforts of humanitarian and health workers in conflict areas. We would like to stress the following points. First, full, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian access is of the utmost importance to assisting millions of people. We urge all parties in Syria to fully cooperate with United Nations and other humanitarian partners to ensure humanitarian access. We encourage the Government of Syria to further facilitate the approval process for deliveries of humanitarian aid, especially of medical supplies to the north-east. We share the view that the enhancement of the complementarity of cross-border and cross-line humanitarian operations could better respond to the major demand in all parts of Syria. Secondly, given the interconnection between the security and humanitarian situations, we would like to reiterate our full support for the calls for a nationwide ceasefire made by the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy on several occasions, most recently in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. We strongly urge all parties to heed those calls in order to facilitate the pandemic preparedness and response in Syria. We welcome the current relatively calm situation in north-western Syria and call on all parties to use it to maximize humanitarian efforts and continue to respect international humanitarian law. Last but not least, we call on the entire international community and all humanitarian partners, in working with Syria, to identify and ensure the delivery of the necessary supplies to fight the humanitarian crisis and the pandemic. That fight is crucial to the political process and the future of Syria.
