Mr. Merafhe (Botswana): I am delighted to
congratulate you, Madam President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of January. I am particularly pleased to
extend our commendation to your country, the United
Republic of Tanzania, and its people for the successful
election held during the last month of 2005.

Over the years, Tanzania has demonstrated
political vision. It led the way in the transformation of
African political systems when it ended one-party rule,
introduced multi-party elections and brought about a
constitutional provision for presidential term limitation
and the peaceful transfer of power. For the third
consecutive time, it has shown how power can be
transferred democratically, smoothly and peacefully.
We are grateful to Tanzania for its admirable and
exemplary leadership.

Recent developments in Tanzania are relevant to
the subject of this open debate on peace, security,
democracy and development in the Great Lakes region
of Africa. The right of people to exercise their
sovereign will in deciding on the nature of institutions
that govern their affairs on the basis of consent is
central to the question of peace and development. We
therefore welcome the deliberations of the Security
Council on the Great Lakes region - a region of
Africa whose people have experienced some of the
worst forms of atrocities in recent history.
This debate is taking place a few weeks after the
Peacebuilding Commission was put in place. We
welcome the establishment of the Commission and,
once again, are deeply grateful to your delegation,
Madam President, for the pivotal role it played in the
negotiations that produced a resolution that enjoyed
broad support.

We look forward to the constructive and practical
work of the Peacebuilding Commission in helping
countries emerging from conflict to manage the
difficult and painful process of reconstruction, national
reconciliation and development. It is our hope and
expectation that the Commission will adopt an
effective, timeous and action-oriented approach to
post-conflict peacebuilding. The work of the
Commission should be inclusive, transparent and
measurable; that is the only reason for its existence.

While we welcome without reservation the
establishment of the Peacebuilding Commission, let us
never forget that when the United Nations was
established 60 years ago, the founders declared their
determination to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war. Today, 191 countries have freely
committed themselves to the noble and great enterprise
of ending war. Our business as Member States is to put
the business of making war out of business by
enhancing the capacity of the United Nations to
prevent the outbreak of conflicts and to manage and
resolve disputes. It is deeply regrettable that we have
not always succeeded in doing that.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but we recognize that in the final
analysis, every State has the ultimate responsibility for
establishing institutions that can ensure peace and
stability within its borders. We have come here because
we have abiding faith in the instrumentality of the
Council to play an effective role in the search for peace
and stability in the Great Lakes region.

If the Security Council has been actively seized
of the situation in the Great Lakes region for several
years, 2006 should be the year in which we can expect
to see increased determination to move from dialogue
to action. The Dar es-Salaam Declaration of November
2004 has already established a solid foundation for
negotiations on the four themes of peace and security,
democracy and good governance, economic
development and regional integration, and
humanitarian and social issues.

The Great Lakes region is one of the African
regions that are richly endowed with natural resources,
fertile soils, good rains and, above all, industrious and
enterprising people. It is the cradle of human
civilization, and many people in Africa trace their
origins to this area, which is at the heart of the African
continent. And yet it is here that we witnessed one of
the worst forms of man's inhumanity to man. It is
therefore in the interests of the Great Lakes region,
Africa and the wider international community that this
area be helped to emerge from violent conflicts and
human suffering to embrace peace and stability and
engage in economic cooperation, regional integration
and development.

There can be no doubt that the Great Lakes
region has great potential for development and
economic prosperity if only peace can be given a
chance. The restoration of peace in the region should
also have a positive impact on the prospects for
economic growth and development in the Southern
African Development Community region and, indeed,
in Africa as a whole. It would open up greater
opportunities for the implementation of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development.

The people of the Great Lakes region expect to live
in peace. Peace is indivisible. We wish for the people of
the region the peace, stability and security that the rest
of humanity enjoys and sometimes inadvertently takes
for granted because it is as natural as breathing. It is only
under conditions of peace and stability that, together, we
can devote our resources and energies to improving the
human condition and attain the Millennium
Development Goals. The immediate beneficiaries of a
comprehensive peace agreement would be the people
of the Great Lakes region themselves, who have borne
the brunt of untold human suffering. Any further delay
in achieving durable peace in the region can only
condemn all of us in Africa to economic stagnation and
the vicious circle of violence and crises.

There can be no doubt that the people of this area
have a common history and a shared future. It is in that
context that we call upon the militia groups that have
so far refused to join the peace process and continued
to be a source of instability and mayhem to voluntarily
disarm and join the movement towards peace. That
they can do by agreeing to live under and participate in
an alternative order based on tolerance, consensus,
compromise and democracy.

The time has come for the Security Council to
send a clear message to the militias that it can no
longer tolerate continued defiance of the collective will
of the international community. In that regard, we
commend the recent joint military action by the
Government and the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
disarm militias in that country.

The international community has a crucial role to
play in facilitating the development of the will to peace
in order to help usher in a new political dispensation in
this troubled area. Given the area's violent history, the
people of the Great Lakes need assurances that entering
into agreements on the governance issues outlined in
the Dar es-Salaam Declaration would not be
tantamount to surrendering their own security and that
of generations yet unborn. They should be encouraged
to see these governance issues as underpinning durable
peace, embracing good-neighbourliness and peaceful
coexistence in exchange for a larger share of expanded
opportunities in a larger region.

The international community must demonstrate a
readiness to support a comprehensive peace agreement
by providing resources to underpin such an agreement.
That means providing financial, material and technical
resources for the resettlement of returning refugees and
internally displaced persons, the reintegration of
former combatants and the provision of education,
health care, potable water and, above all, assistance in
building and strengthening institutions.

Consistent and assured support in the
rehabilitation of infrastructure and the reactivation of
the economies of the region's countries should go a
long way towards reinforcing the process of economic
cooperation and regional integration. A comprehensive
package of assistance would be the greatest peace
dividend that the international community could
provide to assist in consolidating a lasting political
settlement. In helping the countries of the Great Lakes
region, the international community would be helping
countries such as my own, Botswana. Our prosperity
depends on the prosperity of our neighbours and of
Africa.

We encourage the countries of Africa's Great
Lakes region to begin the new year with a sense of
hope and determination to work towards ensuring that
peace is possible and achievable in our lifetime. We
have witnessed a period of Violent conflicts, and never
again should our continent and people be subjected to
the same painful slaughter of the innocent: men,
women and children.

The mandate of the newly established
Peacebuilding Commission and today's Council
meeting at the initiative of our industrious Tanzanian
brothers and sisters should serve as challenges to the
countries of the Great Lakes to play their part, to make
the transition to peace, tolerance and inclusiveness.
This conference presents a great opportunity. This is
the African and universal human way: a culture of
botho, which in my language means a culture rooted in
the strong belief that one is human because of the
humanity of others.

We therefore urge the Security Council to call
upon Member States participating in the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region to approach
the negotiations constructively and with a spirit of
compromise and moderation so that reason and
common sense can prevail.

The second International Conference should be
held as early as possible, because progress on the
regional dimensions of the peace process would have a
salutary effect on the gains attained at the country
level. A democratically elected Government has been
installed in the Republic of Burundi. In the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Congolese approved a
national Constitution in a referendum held in
December 2005. Preparations for national elections are
in progress. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo deserves the support of the
international community to ensure that the elections are
held as scheduled.

The success of the elections would be another
historic milestone in the democratic process. It would
be deeply regrettable if the militia marauding in the
region were to endanger a climate conducive to free
and fair elections and thus have an adverse impact on
the gains made on the road to peace. The international
community should not allow this to happen, because it
would be tantamount to abandoning the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is for these
reasons that the second International Conference must
be convened as a matter of urgency, so that we can not
only build on the achievements made at the country
level, but also reinforce such gains at the regional
level. It would be highly regrettable if countries
making progress in building peace and strengthening
national and democratic institutions were to relapse
into conflict because of slow movement or a lack of
progress in tackling the regional dimensions of the
peace process.

Let me conclude by stating that a number of
resolutions have been adopted by the Security Council
on peace and security in the Great Lakes region. Those
decisions should be implemented. Chapter V, Article
25, of the United Nations Charter states:

"The Members of the United Nations agree
to accept and carry out the decisions of the
Security Council".

Let us implement these decisions as a matter of
urgency, in order to give peace a chance.

