Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by
extending the appreciation of my delegation to you,
Mr. President, and to the members of the Council for
convening this open debate on such an important issue.
We also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-General for
Political Affairs Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
of the Non-Aligned Movement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt, and the statement of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference to delivered by
the representative of Tajikistan.

This meeting of the Security Council has been
convened at a time of great anxiety in the Middle East,
following the convening last month of direct talks
between the Palestinians and the Israelis. Regrettably,
those talks are now in danger, as Israel did not extend
the moratorium on settlement construction on the West
Bank that expired on 26 September.

As one of the core issues, settlements remain the
biggest obstacle to peace, as we have seen since the
return to direct negotiations on 2 September. Israel's
settlement policies and practices - which have been
aimed at altering the demographic composition,
physical character and status of Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem - are nothing but a blatant
violation of international law. The transfer of civilians
to occupied areas, whether or not in settlements that
are under military control, is contrary to article 49 of
the Fourth Geneva Convention, which clearly states
that the occupying Power shall not deport or transfer
parts of its own civilian population into the territory it
occupies.

Back in 1980 - 30 years ago - in paragraph 6
of resolution 465 (1980), the Security Council called
on Israel "to dismantle the existing settlements and in
particular to cease, on an urgent basis, the
establishment, construction and planning of settlements
in the Arab territories occupied since 1967, including
Jerusalem".

We therefore believe that the Council could take a
similar step by pronouncing itself collectively, and
with a single voice, to urgently demand that Israel
dismantle the existing settlements and cease the
construction and planning of settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territory. If Israel has a genuine
commitment to peace, and not propaganda about peace,
it must stop all settlement construction, expansion and
planning in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built there, in compliance with
international law and the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council.

The conflict in the Middle East has indeed been
going on for far too long. For 60 years, the illegal
Israeli occupation has made the region a theatre of
tension and violence. On the Palestinian part, the
nation has been facing hardship and surviving without
a State. The list of suffering of the Palestinian people
caused by the Israeli action is long and continues to
grow by the day, week and year.

There is no doubt that Israel's illegal occupation
since 1967, its excessive and disproportionate use of
force and its policy of collective punishment are crimes
against all we stand for: the values of humanity and the
values of respecting the sanctity of the Charter. That is
a clear violation of international law and international
humanitarian law.

For many years, Indonesia has joined the
international community in drawing attention to the
consequences of Israel's continued illegal activity in
occupied Arab territories. We therefore support the
current surge in diplomacy aimed at relaunching
negotiations and jump-starting a comprehensive peace
process, as illustrated by ongoing efforts, in particular
by the United States. On its part, the Security Council
must, and indeed can, exert a positive influence on the
Middle East peace process. Not least, that would send a
signal that the Council is once again shouldering its
Charter-mandated responsibilities.

In response to a suggestion by President Abbas
during his recent visit to Indonesia, we recently
convened an informal ministerial consultative forum on
Palestine here in New York, which was attended by
Palestine, Indonesia, Brazil, India and South Africa.
All of them agreed to hold consultations on a regular
basis and to assist the cause of Palestine in every forum
possible. For the immediate future, we will calibrate
our course of action in consultation with Palestine,
depending on the direction the direct talks are taking.

There is perhaps no international issue more
important to Indonesia, and closer to our hearts, than
the effort to find a peaceful, just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict in order to bring to an end the illegal Israeli
occupation that began in 1967. Therefore, the
commitment of Indonesia to an independent, viable and
democratic Palestine living side by side in peace and
security with its neighbour is absolute.

