Mr. Pressman (United States of America): I wish
to thank High Representative Inzko for his leadership
of the Office of the High Representative and his crucial
efforts on behalf of the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We again reiterate our strong
support for his mandate under the Dayton Agreement
as the final authority regarding the interpretation of the
civilian implementation of the Peace Agreement.

The United States joins members of the Council
and the European Union Foreign Affairs Council
in our continued support for the European Union
peacekeeping force (EUFOR) mandate and would also
like to commend the continuing work done by NATO
through NATO headquarters Sarajevo.

The United States fully backs the EUFOR Althea
mission, and we are pleased that today the Security
Council has adopted resolution 2247 (2015), which
renews all authorities, each and every one, and carries
forward all prior Council actions on EUFOR, the Office
of the High Representative and NATO.

We know that many in Bosnia and Herzegovina
depend on the Dayton institutions and the Peace
Agreement to ensure that their rights are protected. The
presence of EUFOR, as well as the Office of the High
Representative and NATO, provides reassurances that
this trust is well founded and has the backing of the
international community.

We look forward to the day when Bosnia and
Herzegovina meets the objectives and conditions
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of the High Representative, but
that day has not arrived. Again, that day has not come
and the Security Council has reaffirmed that today. We
encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina's leaders and all
members of the international community to support the
actions and reforms necessary to reach that milestone.

As the High Representative has noted, the adoption
of the reform agenda in Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
good step towards that future; it must not be allowed
to falter. The United States strongly supports the
European Union's initiative to advance quickly those
important economic and social reforms. We also
continue to support Euro-Atlantic integration, as it is
a cornerstone for security and stability in a previously
troubled region.

This year we marked 20 years since approximately
8,000 people were slaughtered in the mountains of
eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those who perpetrated
that genocide must be held accountable. We continue
to be disturbed by statements made by some political
leaders and groups that deny that a genocide ever took
place.

But let us be very clear: the escalating and divisive
rhetoric coming out of the Republika Srpska, and in
particular from Republika Srpska President Dodik. It
threatens both the Dayton Agreement and the stability
of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In recent months, words
and rhetoric have regrettably turned into action with
the passage in the Republika Srpska National Assembly
of a referendum law directly challenging the Office of
the High Representative and State-level institutions. As
the High Representative warned the Security Council
in his September letter (S/2015/84l, annex) and again
in his briefing to us just this morning, the proposed
referendum may represent the most serious challenge to
the Peace Agreement in the last 20 years. It threatens to
disrupt the achievements of the international community
and of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina since
the end of the war. The referendum is dangerous, it is
anti-Dayton and it must not go forward.

We hope that constructive dialogue will prevail,
including through the structured dialogue on justice.
But no one should harbour any doubt as to the United
States commitment and dedication to both Dayton and
a Bosnia and Herzegovina that is whole and at peace.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is at a critical juncture.
Twenty years after the signing ofthe Dayton Agreement,
Bosnia and Herzegovina has transitioned from war to
peace. But we all know that peace is fragile and must
be constantly nurtured by all who participate in the
democratic sphere.

Two paths lay before the country, one of stagnation
and division and one of prosperity and greater
integration with Europe. The international community
must support Bosnia and Herzegovina as it pursues the
reforms necessary for a successful and stable future.

