Mrs. Ramirez (Argentina) (interpretation from Spanish): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir,
on your election and to wish you, on behalf of my
delegation, every success in your work, which we are
convinced will be characterized by efficiency and
transparency.

We also congratulate the Permanent Representative of
Italy for his outstanding and well-appreciated work in
December and for all the efforts made by his delegation.

I wish to refer to the Agreement on a Firm and
Lasting Peace that was signed at Guatemala City on 29
December 1996 between the Government of Guatemala and
the Unidad Revolucionaria Nacional Guatemalteca (URNG),
ending a conflict that for decades affected an important
country of Central America. We have no doubt that the
Agreement will make it possible to reverse the political,
institutional, economic and social consequences of the
conflict.

Furthermore, the implementation of the Guatemalan
peace Agreement will make it possible to consolidate and
stabilize democracy in the region, laying the foundations for
a society in which peace, freedom, the rule of law, respect
for human rights, justice and sustained economic
development will prevail.

All of this joint effort of the Guatemalan people, the
political leadership involved in the peace negotiations, the
United Nations, the Group of Friends of the Secretary-
General and the officials who have been in charge of this
arduous task now makes it possible for the international
community to express its gratification at the conclusion of
this stage.

The process is not complete, however, since there is
a need to follow up the agreements reached. In this
framework, the follow-up action of the United Nations is
significant. Thus, the task of monitoring the ceasefire,
separating the forces and disarming and demobilizing the
URNG combatants are the challenges that lie ahead.

In order to meet these challenges successfully, we
fully support the Secretary-General's proposal, formulated
in his report of 17 December, for the establishment of a
military component of the United Nations Mission for the
Verification of Human Rights and of Compliance with the
Commitments of the Comprehensive Agreement on Human
Rights in Guatemala. We believe that the proposals and
plans of the Secretary-General for this mission are wise and
that they are appropriately reflected in the draft resolution
before us. The adoption of the draft resolution would
show that the understandable difficulties and concerns had
been overcome.

Argentina is a sponsor of the draft resolution
because we fully support the Guatemalan efforts to
achieve peace. We are prepared to continue to support
these efforts through practical action. The presence of
civilian police, which my Government has been sending
since 1995, is evidence of our commitment to this cause.

