Sir Jeremy Greenstock: It was a great privilege
to lead the Security Council mission to West Africa.
All 15 members of the Council came. I think we had an
extremely interesting experience. All members of the
mission contributed to that experience.

We worked on five principal themes: the specific
issues of Guinea-Bissau, Cote d'Ivoire and Liberia; and
we also had a very close look at the progress of the
post-conflict situation in Sierra Leone. But throughout
the trip we were following a fifth theme: the condition
of West Africa as a whole and the need for the
international community and the whole family of
United Nations institutions, funds, agencies and
programmes to generate a new momentum of support,
assistance and partnership with West Africa to begin
now to bring it up from the lowest levels of the human
development list.

We are issuing today a detailed report on our
visit, with a number of recommendations across these
five themes. I hope that this report and its
recommendations will be taken very seriously by the
Security Council, by the United Nations as a whole and
by the international community, because there are
recommendations that have implications that go
beyond the United Nations family itself. The report is
in its final stages of preparation. There are one or two
editorial changes to be made, so the version we have in
document 5/2003/688 is virtually the final report but
for a few letters to be changed. Members can certainly
work on that basis.

Members will recall that the timing of the mission
changed from late May to the end of June. That
postponement was discussed at the time and we knew
the reasons for it. I regret that it was necessary, but I do
not think - and I do not think any other members of
the mission felt - that the changed timing had an effect
on what we were able to achieve. On the contrary, I
think that, in coinciding with the beginnings of the
climax of the Liberia story and with developments,
especially, in Guinea-Bissau and Cote d'Ivoire, we
were able to have an effect on the revised timing that
may have been a bit greater than the effect we would
have had on the late-May timing.

Not least, we have come back to New York as the
President of the United States is paying an historic visit
to Africa. The momentum generated by what we did
and what we are reporting - and especially by the
significance of that American presidential visit - I
hope will combine, as the African Union summit also
takes place in Maputo, to deliver a new stage of
effective action on African development which will
pay dividends in the months and years to come.

On Guinea-Bissau, I have pleasure in passing that
particular buck to my friend and colleague,
Ambassador Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, whose constructive
support and whose firm, clear messages in the meetings
we had in West Africa were a considerable asset to the
mission. We will wait and hear his report on our
conclusions on Guinea-Bissau.

On C6te d'Ivoire, we delivered an unmistakable
message that the implementation of the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement has got to be the basis of the
next stage of national conciliation and new impetus for
development in that country. Both the Government and
the Forces nouvelles, I think, understood that we had
that simple, forceful message and it was delivered by a
united mission in all our meetings with the players in
Cote d'Ivoire.

We arrived at a time of some disturbance,
particularly in Abidjan. The Forces nouvelles had
issued a communique the day before the mission
arrived calling off their participation in disarmament
and recalling Forces nouvelles ministers to base, but
they did not carry out those threats. They met with us
and they continued their discussions with
representatives of the Government. Their ministers
stayed in Abidjan and met the mission, as did their
military leaders.

Since our visit, President Gbagbo has speeded up
the steps to pass the amnesty law. It went through the
Cabinet on 4 July, and we hope it will go through the
Assembly this week.

We succeeded in encouraging closer dialogue
between the Forces armees nationals de Cote d'Ivoire
(FANCI) and the Forces nouvelles. Military leaders of
FANCI and the Forces nouvelles continued their
dialogue after they met the mission together on 1 July.
It is very welcome news that FANCI and the Forces
nouvelles have issued a declaration of a permanent end
to hostilities and a pledge to implement the Linas-
Marcoussis Agreement. All members of the Council
will have noted the significant event in Abidjan over
the weekend, where the President led a gathering that
gave further impetus to the implementation of that
Agreement.

As for Liberia, the mission was careful not to get
involved in any of the details of the negotiations led by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). We consulted closely with ECOWAS
leaders in Abuja and in Accra before we met with all
the Liberian parties and with members of civil society
in two visits to Accra. In those meetings, we put across
very strongly to the parties that they must all respect
the ceasefire, negotiate in good faith, respect the rights
of the Liberian people and, for once, put the condition
of the Liberian people ahead of any factional priority.
There are questions here - of human rights,
humanitarian law, humanitarian access, refugees and
displaced persons, women and children and of the
recruitment of child soldiers - that we asked every
party to address with urgency, because the condition of
Liberian civilians is one of the worst in any conflict
situation in the world today.

We hope that those messages will have had some
impact. The talks between the parties resumed in Accra
on 7 July, and they are continuing at a level lower than
head of delegation because some senior people have
been called to Maputo to talk to African heads of State
or Government at the African Union summit. But there
is movement there. General Abubakar himself, the
facilitator, has gone to Maputo. He and the Ghanaian
Foreign Minister, Mr. Akufo-Addo, were certainly very
appreciative of the work we did to encourage
momentum between the parties and support for General
Abubakar's facilitation.

I think we were particularly struck by the unity
and fervour of the call from civil society groups and
political parties present in Accra for international
involvement in Liberia. I also think that all members of
the mission came away hoping that the United Nations
system and interested Member States, not least
ECOWAS, can respond rapidly to that call. We hope
that that will include help to any ECOWAS force that is
now decided upon by West African leaders, and we
hope that there will be broader international support as
well. But, clearly, ceasefire implementation and the
basics of a peace agreement between the parties are
going to be necessary prerequisites for successful
deployment of an international force. We hope that
progress is made swiftly in those areas.

Of course, we were frequently questioned about
President Taylor himself, after the indictment by the
Special Court. The mission made clear its basic
approach in that respect: that we supported the Court
and that we unequivocally supported the principle of
no impunity for those indicted for gross abuses of
human rights law and humanitarian law. We also made
that clear when we visited the Special Court in Sierra
Leone. President Obasanjo told us of his intention to
offer to receive President Taylor in Nigeria, but we
made it clear that it was not for the mission - and
probably not for the Security Council - to get
involved in specific political decisions in the region.

When we went to Sierra Leone, we congratulated
President Kabbah and members of his Government on
the progress that had been made since we last visited as
a mission, in October 2000. But we all noted, and we
were so briefed by the excellent United Nations
Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) team under the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Adeniji, that there was a long way to go in Sierra
Leone before there could be self-sustained stability,
peace and a basis for new development in that country.
There is work to do in the areas of diamonds and the
training and deployment of new police and military
forces. The Council will need to take careful decisions
on the drawdown of UNAMSIL and calibrate that with
the progress being made by the Sierra Leoneans
themselves on developing their own institutions and
making their own progress.

With regard to the West African region as a
whole, which I hope will receive sustained attention
from the Council and from other parts of the United
Nations as a result of our mission and our report, the
subregional problems are huge, and we have listed
them in our report. We saw considerable resolve among
Governments and in ECOWAS to tackle those
problems. But their ability to do so is undoubtedly
constrained by the shortage of resources. In the View of
the mission, the international community has to do
better at helping them. We cannot ask West Africa to
take the lead in sorting out its own problems and then
expect them to pay for it all. For instance, if there were
a United Nations peacekeeping operation in C6te
d'Ivoire, as opposed to the efforts being made by
Ivorians themselves, we would all be paying for it. No
one is obliged to pay for the ECOWAS Mission in C6te
d'Ivoire (ECOMICI) but if there are no voluntary
contributions made to it, it will run out of funding by
the end of September. Similar difficulties could affect
any ECOWAS force in Liberia.

Likewise, if we want ECOWAS to develop its
capacity and become a more effective institution for
dealing with subregional problems - many of which,
such as the problems of disarmament, mercenaries and
small arms and light weapons, require primary
leadership from the subregion even if it has United
Nations backup - we need to give them more support:
funding for the ECOWAS secretariat, better liaison and
coordination with the United Nations offices,
particularly the Office of the Special Representative for
West Africa, closer links with the Security Council and
regular information exchanges. The mission has
suggested that Special Representative Ould-Abdallah
should do a study to identify precisely what support is
needed in those areas.

We believe that United Nations coordination in
the region is steadily improving. We made a good start
when the Secretary-General appointed a Deputy
Special Representative in Sierra Leone, Alan Doss, to
combine the role of Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Governance and Stabilization
and Resident Representative of the United Nations
Development Programme. But that lesson needs to be
spread more widely, and communication between
United Nations missions and the West Africa Office
needs to be improved to produce a coherent approach
to subregional problems. Our report brings out a
number of recommendations in that respect, and I hope
that they will be followed up.

Finally, since this was my seventh and last
mission, a word about Security Council missions. On
this mission, we were again very pleased to be working
closely with the Economic and Social Council with
respect to our leg in Guinea-Bissau. It was right and
good to have angles of that Council properly integrated
with the message of our Council's mission,
highlighting the link that exists between security and
development - a link which both Councils need to
work on further.

I believe that our missions have a real impact. I
was particularly pleased that, in June, the two missions
to Africa - to the Great Lakes region and to West
Africa - were led by France and by the United
Kingdom. I believe that our cooperation is right and
good for Africa. Ambassador De La Sabliere and I are
very pleased that, in a week's time, our Foreign
Ministers will be visiting the Great Lakes region
jointly and will be taking forward Anglo-French
cooperation on the continent.

I believe that our meetings with African
Presidents are appreciated and have an effect. We need
to be careful about numbers on these missions; the
Council has heard me speak to this theme. I think it is
excellent when the whole Council is represented, but
sometimes we need to break down into smaller
numbers so that we can engage in genuine confidential
negotiation with very senior people and deliver frank
and direct messages. I hope that the Council will
always retain flexibility in that respect, and
understanding for those members who are not always
included in certain meetings.

On this mission, all its members played their part
in making it a success, and I would like to thank them
all. It was hard work; I was unrelenting in that respect.
But I think that our serious dedication to the objectives
of the mission - and to the development of West
Africa - came through, and I think that that was the
primary success of the mission. My warm thanks go
also to the Secretariat. In addition, we express our
thanks for all the support that we had on this mission
from the United Nations family and from Governments
and our own embassies on the ground. It was a huge
team effort. It went almost without a hitch, and I
apologize again to the representative of Bulgaria for
that hitch.

