Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The report
before the Council is damning for two reasons. First, it
describes in the harshest terms the sorry tale of years
of corruption and abuse on the part of former President
Yanukovych and his predatory and criminal team. Is it
any wonder that the Ukrainian population, exasperated
by years of incompetence and corruption, rose up in
protest? There was no foreign involvement there. The
report also describes how the regime responded to
legitimate, peaceful demonstrations with the use of
force.

The titanic task of restoring trust of all Ukrainians
in their institutions lies with the new Ukrainian
Adminstration. The report underscores that since
the very first measures were undertaken by the new
Administration, calm has returned to Kyiv. On the
issue of languages and regional status, we encourage
the Kyiv authorities to pursue their efforts to promote
a return to reason, launch constructive and inclusive
dialogue, and reassure the people regarding their place
in Ukraine. The acting President has refused to repeal
the law on official languages. This symbolic decision
demonstates the will of the Ukrainian authorities to
strive for the country's reconciliation. Ukraine can
preserve the diversity that constitutes its richness and
uniqueness.

To that end, Ukraine needs our support. The
first stage - the holding of the presidential election
on 25 May - is key. We must support the Ukrainian
authorities in order for the election to be held in the best
possible conditions and ensure the representation of all.
We must move towards a free and transparent election,
guaranteed by the presence of international observers.
It would be unacceptable for the activities of violent
groups to threaten the holding of that democratic step,
which is essential to the country's future. We will not
accept the result of that vote, the harbinger of great
hope for the entire country, being disputed as result of
any event devised from outside.

I now come to my second point. The report draws
a bleak picture of the impact of Russia's actions on
the situation inside Ukraine. It describes the chain of
events that led to the annexation of Crimea. It once
again underscores that there was no threat to the
Russian-speaking population of Crimea, a defence
that is nevertheless upheld by Russia to justify its
intervention. Quite the opposite, the report underscores
that the risk of human rights violations now threatens
the Ukrainian and Tartar populations. The United
Nations must continue to take note of the human rights
situation in Crimea, which is an integral part okaraine,
as the General Assembly recalled by an overwhelming
majority.

The report also underscores that the deteriorating
conditions and human rights violations that preceded
the holding of the referendum in Crimea on 16 March
were the result of deliberate acts. The presence of
soldiers in uniform without insignia, the seizure of
public buildings, intimidation ofthe civilian population,
journalists and human rights activists, the presence
of foreign voters and the violent propaganda against
Kyiv broadcast on Russian television channels were
all coordinated and orchestrated acts. They served as a
prelude to an annexation unprecedented in the twenty-
first century. Today, we are seeing a similar scenario in
eastern Ukraine.

In that regard, I believe that all Council members
and all my colleagues here in the Chamber read the
excellent article in this morning's New York Times,
which describes how Russia has established its own
virtual reality, which bears no relation to the real
situation. My Russian friend's statement today shows,
I believe, just how accurate and how true to the reality
that article is. Let us recall the past. Participants will
perhaps recall being told of 600,000 refugeees fleeing
the Ukrainian terror, who seem to have disappeared
from one day to the next. We were told that there were
no Russian soldiers in Crimea, while on YouTube we
could see lorries with Russian army number plates.

Today, the same disinformation continues. We are
told of peaceful protesters, while again on the Internet
one can see that they are heavily armed militia. We are
told that there is no Russian intervention, while again
on the Internet one can see soldiers without insignia,
flaunting weapons with which only the Russian army
is equipped. We are told that a fascist terror prevails
in Kyiv, while we know very well that if we were to
go to Kyiv we would see that calm prevails. We are
told that Jews in Ukraine are threatened, while the two
Ukrainian Jewish organizations themselves say that
they are not threatened. I could mention many more
examples, but never was a statement clearly so far from
the reality that, thanks to the Internet, we all can see on
the computer.

Ukraine is cornered and under attack. On Sunday,
right here, it was ordered not to react. One cannot
imagine that it would suffer without reacting to the
aggression to which it was first subjected a month ago,
condemned by the General Assembly in resolution
68/262, and which it is again experiencing in the east of
the country. We welcome the restraint of the Ukrainian
security forces, who seek to respond in a proportional
way to the unprecedented destabilizing actions against
them, organized from abroad.

We call on Russia to commit to de-escalation and
to condemning, together with the rest of the Council,
the attempts at destabilization in eastern Ukraine.
Furthermore, we call on Russia to stop trapping itself
in a spiral to extremes that can lead only to tragedy.
It must withdraw its troops from the border. It must
cease its destabilizing activities. It must stop shouting
about an immiment civil war. No one is deceived by
the scenario of the arsonist firefighter - an unsubtle
picture and not even a real semblance of credibility.

The situation is now extremely serious. A meeting
that will bring together Russia, the United States, the
European Union and Ukraine will be held in Geneva
tomorrow. That event is crucial, and we call on parties
to remain calm and to exercise restraint. In the case of
failure or if Russia were to seek to avoid that meeting,
new sanctions would be inevitable. That is not our
preferred path. We will be firm. Fully legitimate
authorities must be established in Kyiv. Elections must
be held on 25 May, and we will not allow Russia either
to prevent them from taking place or to discredit them.

