Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I should like to warmly thank our briefers,
beginning with the Under-Secretary-General for
Counter-Terrorism, Mr. Vladimir Voronkov. We
have already had the opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Voronkov and to offer him France's fully support
for his initiatives, but today I once again reiterate
our most sincere wishes of success, as this is his first
briefing before the Security Council.

I would also like to thank Ambassador Amr
Aboulatta for his briefing and for the leadership shown
by his country at the helm of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC).

Finally, I wish to express France's gratitude to
Mr. David Scharia for his briefing on the outstanding
action led by the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED), and to take this
opportunity to emphasize that France eagerly looks
forward to the arrival in New York of the new Executive
Director, Ms. Michele Coninsx.

Terrorism currently is one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security. Naturally, the fight
against terrorism is at the heart of the Security Council's
work. It requires an organized, firm and united
response on the part of States and the international
community as a whole. Today, I will focus on two main
observations - first, on the essential role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism, and secondly, on
the role of the Executive Directorate and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, in particular.

While it is primarily up to States to adopt the
measures and mechanisms necessary to combat
terrorism, the United Nations also has a major and
growing role to play. Terrorism is one of those global
threats that require a global response, and the United
Nations therefore has as an invaluable mission in that
regard. The United Nations is not working from a blank
page. To date, it has fulfilled three key functions in the
fight against terrorism.

First, standards and obligations must be developed
to allow States to establish robust counter-terrorism
mechanisms. A number of important thematic Security
Council resolutions have been adopted since 2001
to that end, particularly over the past three years,
covering many aspects of counter-terrorism, such as
financing, anti-propaganda campaigns and foreign
terrorist fighters.

Secondly, the adoption of sanctions aimed at
depriving terrorist groups of the means to commit
attacks, such as the regime pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999). The United Nations has developed important
know-how in that field.

Lastly, the strengthening of international
cooperation and dialogue to encourage States to
work together more effectively and to exchange good
practices is obviously an essential point and a key
priority for all of us.

With the rise of Da'esh in 2014, the terrorist threat
has significantly evolved. The phenomenon of foreign
terrorist fighters and the wide scale use of the Internet
and social networks for recruitment, funding and calls
to action have given a new dimension to the threat,
which is now truly global. Combating terrorism has
therefore become a new frontier for the United Nations
among other major global challenges, such as climate
change and migration. The United Nations therefore
has both the obligation and the responsibility to
ensure that its response is well adapted to the threat.
In that regard, the establishment of the United Nations
Office of Counter-Terrorism and the appointment of an
Under-Secretary-General at its head, dedicated to this
issue, represent a real breakthrough. France welcomes
that development and hopes that it will improve the
coherence of the United Nations work in this area and
increase its visibility.

I turn now to my second comment, which concerns
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its
Executive Directorate, as the concept note encourages
us to lend closer attention to resolution 1373 (2001).
At the core of the new counter-terrorism architecture,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee must continue to
fulfil two essential functions both of which are equally
important. The first involves raising States' awareness
of developments with regard to the terrorist threat.
The Committee can carry out that work only with the
support of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which has considerable expertise in that
area at its disposal. I would like to commend today
the excellent work that the CTED teams are carrying
out. The issues on which it is working are very much
in line with France's priorities, including countering
terrorist propaganda, especially on the Internet, and the
financing of terrorism, among others.

Through President Macron's commitment, France
is playing a major role in addressing those two
issues. In that regard, France, along with the United
Kingdom and Italy, organized on the sidelines of the
General Assembly a high-level meeting on the use of
the Internet by terrorists groups. The first of its kind,
that meeting allowed us to strengthen dialogue with
Internet companies. As President Macron underscored,
that represented a major step, but we must go even
further. He also announced that France will hold an
international conference on the financing of terrorism
in early 2018. We, of course, also encourage CTED to
pursue its work in both of those areas.

The second function of the Committee as
implemented by CTED is to assess how the States
implement the relevant resolutions. That type of
assessment is essential. France encourages all States to
accept visits by the Executive Directorate so that it can
audit their counter-terrorism systems and come up with
optimum recommendations. For its part, France received
its last Visit by CTED in 2015 and drew important
lessons. Since that time, numerous administrative
and legislative measures have been adopted so as to
strengthen our counter-terrorism systems. Moreover,
it is essential that, based on those assessments and
recommendations, technical assistance programmes
can subsequently be designed and implemented by
the relevant United Nations entities. In that particular
regard, close cooperation between CTED and the new
Office of Counter-Terrorism will be crucial.

Terrorism is now one ofthe major global challenges
that States can no longer face alone. As President
Macron reminded us at the General Assembly last week
(see A/72/PV.4), France believes that multilateralism is
not only the right way to react in terms of legitimacy,
but also in terms of effectiveness, so as to respond to
those challenges.

