At the outset, we would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this crucial debate on the multidimensional global challenge that is climate change and on its impact on international peace and security. We also thank the briefers for their valuable and comprehensive presentations. Today's meeting is taking place in unprecedented circumstances, namely, the extraordinary challenges posed by the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has significant implications for livelihoods, and the increased risks associated with climate change, with the attendant effects on food security, large-scale human displacement as a result of drought, frequent natural disasters and a scarcity of resources, all of which help to spark or prolong conflicts. While no country has been spared the adverse effects of climate change, which is by now a concern shared by the entire international community, those effects are felt most acutely by people living in fragile situations, whether because of geographic circumstances, poverty or some other factor, as in the case of small island developing States and least developed countries. In addition to having a significant impact on the capacity to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and uphold human rights, climate change is increasingly linked to international peace and security. The Security Council now addresses that link in its work; several resolutions take note of the impact of climate change on peace and stability. However, an integrated approach is still needed to better understand and assess climate-related security risks, their effect on conflicts and the need for early warning that would enable the Council to respond effectively and appropriately to these risks, prevent conflicts and maintain peace. Efforts by Qatar to combat climate change have not been limited to the national level; the State of Qatar has had a direct, leading role at the international level. Given the urgent need to address the negative consequences of climate change, an effort that will require effective international cooperation and response, Qatar has continued to be an active partner in the international community. Qatar played a trailblazing role in organizing the Climate Action Summit, which was held in September 2019 and led by His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad AI-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, together with France and Jamaica. Those three countries form the Coalition on Climate Finance and Carbon Pricing. The Emir of Qatar contributed $100 million to support efforts by small island developing States and least developed countries to address climate change. In doing so, he showed just how seriously Qatar takes its own role and that of the international community in tackling the issue, and underscored the importance of intensifying and accelerating collective action within the United Nations international framework in order to address it in a systematic manner. The Qatar Fund for Development is working to finalize the disbursement mechanism in order to fulfil that pledge. Three levels of work have been identified to establish a basis for the mechanism, namely, funding, policy support and capacity building and international advocacy. A multisectoral approach to development cooperation will be adopted, taking into account three priority sectors: education as a key pillar of the global response to climate change, economic development and health, given the impact of climate change on health-care programmes and systems. In view of the need for integrated cooperation and action, the strategy is aimed at sup-porting small island developing States and least developed countries in their effort to achieve the ambitious goals set forth in the Paris Agreement on Climate Change and make long-term gains through broad-based, sustainable and effective development efforts conducive to peace and security. Qatar is well-known for its commitment to international cooperation in tackling common challenges. Desertification in particular has a catastrophic impact on affected States. Accordingly, the Emir of Qatar has launched an initiative to establish the Global Drylands Alliance, a mechanism to achieve food security in drought-stricken countries and thereby help strengthen international peace and security. The agreement establishing the Alliance was concluded in Doha in 2017 and entered into force after being ratified by States parties, in accordance with its provisions. Environmental development is one of the cornerstones of the Qatar National Vision 2030. Qatar has adopted several plans and programmes aimed at addressing climate change and achieving environmental sustainability, notably, by promoting clean energy and energy efficiency. One such project entails a shift to 20 per cent reliance on solar energy by 2030. The Qatar Investment Authority is investing in climate financing projects and is a founding member of the One Planet Sovereign Wealth Fund, established at the One Planet Summit held in Paris in 2017, with a view to increasing efficiency in the allocation of global capital and facilitating a smooth transition to a more sustainable, low-carbon economy. My country's commitment to global efforts to combat climate change is nothing new: in 2012 Qatar hosted the eighteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. We will spare no effort in working to fulfil our commitments under the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In conclusion, in the context of multilateral action, Qatar will continue to partner with the international community to tackle climate change, one of the most significant challenges facing humankind.
