Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Nordic countries Denmark, Finland,
Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
We thank the Secretary-General for his important
statement and welcome this opportunity to discuss
new trends and challenges to peacekeeping. Forward-
leaning action at the political, strategic and operational
levels will be needed to make modern United Nations
peacekeeping fit for purpose. Peacekeeping activities
should be designed not only to keep the peace, but also
to facilitate post-conflict peacebuilding, help prevent
relapses into conflict and assist in progress towards
sustainable peace and development.

At the outset, allow me to pay tribute to all troop-
and police-contributing countries that, through their
commitment to international peace and security, readily
put their personnel in harm's way, often in hostile
environments in countries suffering from conflict. In
so doing, they form the backbone of United Nations
peacekeeping, and we should all be grateful for their
commitment and sacrifice.

I would like to acknowledge the important progress
made by African States within the framework of the
African Peace and Security Architecture. The Nordic
countries stand ready to continue to support a further
enhanced African ability to deal with peace and security
challenges on African soil.
The Nordic countries have a long-standing tradition
of participating and cooperating in United Nations
peacekeeping. That engagement continues and is being
strengthened. Several Nordic countries are participating
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). Sweden
will soon make a substantial contribution consisting of
an intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance unit,
which will support the All Sources Information Fusion
Unit of MINUSMA.

The conditions facing peacekeeping today pose
new challenges to the security of peacekeepers and the
protection of civilians, which is one of the key tasks
of United Nations peacekeeping missions. We believe
that new technology, in addition to providing enhanced
force protection, will strengthen the ability to protect
civilians. It also has the potential of improving the
operational effect - and thus efficiency - of missions
in carrying out their mandates. We look forward
to contributing to the development of a conceptual
approach for the use of information and analysis units
and unarmed unmanned aerial vehicles within United
Nations missions.

New operational methods and technologies also
require new working methods. At the operational level,
it is essential that appropriate systems be developed
for a relevant level of information security and the use
of secure communications. At the strategic level, the
increased use of new technologies needs to be reflected
in United Nations policy and regulatory documents.

That is vital, not only for the sake of efficiency, but also
for the legitimacy of United Nations peacekeeping.

The further development ofthe use ofinter-mission
cooperation, including through the use of military
reserve forces, could be another way to enhance the
efficiency of peacekeeping operations. Mobile reaction
forces within missions or in regional arrangements
involving more than one mission would offer a higher
degree of flexibility and sustainability for missions
than we see today.

A more complex reality for United Nations
peacekeeping also requires more efforts to provide
appropriate training to police and military personnel
operating in United Nations missions. Priority should
be given to developing standards within the rule
of law context, with an emphasis on the role of the
police in peacekeeping. Furthermore, the capacity
of peacekeepers to create an enabling environment
for peacebuilding activities in critical areas such as
security sector reform, rule of law and human rights
should be strengthened. In the context of training, we
continue to emphasize the importance of ensuring that
the provisions of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security are reflected in all activities relating
to peacekeeping.

The Nordic countries also welcome the ongoing
trend of the systematic integration of human rights
components into peacekeeping operations. It is our
long-standing position that respect for human rights
is a central aspect of all peace operations. Preventing
impunity is a key element in creating sustainable
peace. While prevention is crucial in trying to avoid
conflict, lasting peace requires a sustainable presence
by the international community throughout the whole
conflict cycle. It is necessary to support peacebuilding
in order to prevent relapses into conflict. The transition
of responsibility from full-fledged peacekeeping
operations to political missions, United Nations country
teams, host country authorities and national actors
requires careful stewardship.

The cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations and
actors needs to be strengthened to reinforce such
efforts. We acknowledge resolution 2086 (2013) on
multidimensional peacekeeping, which highlights
the importance of coherence between peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development. The
2015 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, which should be comprehensive in scope,
may help us improve our ability to provide coordinated
support - a United Nations delivering as one i to
countries emerging from conflict by linking security
with development more closely and ensuring seamless
transitions between missions and United Nations
country teams.

Finally, United Nations peacekeeping missions
also need to minimize the environmental impact of
their presence, in order to not adversely affect local
communities and their livelihoods. We need to "green
the Blue". The Nordic countries stand ready to engage
in a discussion on how to best address that issue in a
broader peacekeeping context.

