Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): The
Palestinian question is a recurring item on the
agenda of the Security Council, and has been since
the establishment of the Organization following the
Second World War. Today, we are discussing this item
once again following the tragic events in the Gaza Strip
last summer, in which a large part of the Palestinian
State was involved and which proved to everyone that
the failure to reach a lasting and just settlement of the
Palestinian question remains a threat to international
and regional peace and security. The events in Gaza
have revealed a few realities that we should highlight
today.

First, the solution to the Palestinian question is
well known and has been unanimously welcomed at
the international level - the establishment of a viable,
independent Palestinian State within the pre-1967
borders, with Jerusalem as its capital. That vision
remains elusive, primarily owing to the ongoing Israeli
occupation and the other illegitimate expansionary
practices, which flagrantly violate resolution 242
(1967).

Secondly, and in that respect, I would like to stress
Egypt's total rejection of the recent Israeli decision to
seize Palestinian territory in the West Bank.

Thirdly, the pretexts and justifications for the war
in Gaza - the right to legitimate self-defence and the
need for a deterrant factor - do not hold water, as
evidenced by the three wars waged against Gaza in the
past decade. Those wars refute the allegations that a
blockade of Gaza could ever achieve security for the
Israeli State, as does the significant humanitarian cost
to the people that those conflicts entailed.

Fourthly, since the 1990s the Palestinians have
opted for the political path, which is the only viable
way to settle the Palestinian issue and which must lead
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State. However, the difficulties that this process has
encountered, including the continued illegitimate and
illegal practices aimed at establishing new settlements
and a new reality in occupied Palestinian land over a
fairly short period of time, has placed the Palestinian
leadership in a very difficult situation when it comes to
its own people.

The Palestinian people place great hopes in their
leaders' ability to secure their freedom and dignity
and the establishment of an independent State on their
behalf, especially since the uninterrupted expansion
of settlements threatens to dismember the Palestinian
State's territory by undermining in practice the two-
State solution that was agreed on internationally. That
has led the Palestinian leadership to request a timeline
for an end to the occupation in order to preserve the
rights of the Palestinian people. In that respect, I wish
to quote the words of the President of the Arab Republic
of Egypt during the International Conference on the
reconstruction of Gaza on 12 October:

"Egypt, on the basis of its historic and
regional role and its vision, which stems from
its longstanding principles and values, calls for
an end to this conflict and the achievement of a
comprehensive and just settlement. I launch this
appeal not only to heads of State, but to the peoples
of the entire region, peoples who have suffered from
the throes of war and who continue to be wounded
by this war. I launch a vibrant appeal to the people
and Government of Israel. It is high time to put an
end to this conflict as soon as possible in order to
respect people's rights and restore security."

Egypt, on the basis of its historic responsibility with
respect to the Palestinian question, has consistently
supported the aspirations of the Palestinian people
in order to enable the Palestinian Authority, under
the leadership of Mahmoud Abbas, to achieve its
aspirations. In that respect, I would like to stress the
important achievements that have taken place since
the Cairo Conference. Through that Conference, under
the joint chairmanship of Norway and Egypt, the
international community was able to provide assistance
that would allow the Government of national consensus
to rebuild Gaza. I would like to pay tribute to all of
the States that made a commitment to provide generous
assistance to the reconstruction of Gaza.

Egypt has contributed to understandings that
allowed for the formation of a Government of national
consensus in Palestine. Egypt calls upon the Security
Council and its member States to fully shoulder their
responsibilities through effective action that is free of
any consideration other than maintaining international
peace and security by taking the measures that are
necessary to bring an end to the occupation as a prelude
to the establishment of an independent Palestinian

State.

