Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I thank the Egyptian
presidency for organizing this open debate on the
theme "United Nations peacekeeping operations:
their potential contribution to the overarching goal of
sustaining peace". That is a very important theme that
has not been seriously explored, and we express our
appreciation to Egypt for taking this initiative.

We thank Deputy Secretary-General Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her comprehensive briefing. We also
appreciate the remarks made by Mr. Youssef Mahmoud
and Ambassador Gert Rosenthal. The briefings of
all three speakers were very rich and, frankly, very
comprehensive. What I am going to say might therefore
sound rather superfluous after their words. I must thank
all three speakers again for their masterful performance.

Peacekeeping is indeed one of the most important
tools of the United Nations for the promotion and
the maintenance of international peace and security.
However, peacekeeping missions can have a meaningful
impact only if they are guided by a clear political
strategy attuned to the specific conflict situations that
the missions are designed to address. They should also
have, as we all agree now, an exit strategy. We should be
guided by the specific context in which such missions
are operating and have a specific strategic end in mind,
so as to allow for a proper transition from conflict to
sustainable peace.

That has been made abundantly clear by the three
major peace-and-security reviews conducted in 2015. It
is only through the entire continuum of peace-oriented
activities, ranging from prevention and resolution to
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, that conflicts can be
effectively addressed and sustainable peace ultimately
achieved. Implementing that in practice may not be
easy, but that does not make the approach less valid.
It has a lot of implications for the work that we do
here in the Council in terms of mandate design, the
implementation and review of peacekeeping operations
and the development of an exit strategy with the
goal of enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and realizing the overarching
goal of sustaining peace. That means that peacekeeping
operations must have clear, realistic and up-to-date
mandates from the Council, with well-identified
priorities, adequate sequencing and flexibility, so that
they can evolve over time, as the Secretary-General
indicated to us last April. Of course, the peacekeeping
reviews have stressed that very point.

This new approach to peacekeeping and sustaining
peace has certainly introduced a paradigm shift in the
manner in which the United Nations deals with the
difficult and complex peace and security challenges of
our time. That has been widely recognized by Member
States and enshrined in the concurrent resolutions
adopted by the Security Council and the General
Assembly (Security Council resolution 2282 (2016) and
General Assembly resolution 70/262). What matters at
this stage is the need for a change in the mindset of the
entire United Nations system with a view to reforming
United Nations peacekeeping and reorienting it
towards the goal of sustaining peace. That requires
better and more coordinated planning, leadership,
better strategies, as well as better coordination among
the various departments and agencies. We are well
aware of what the Secretary-General is trying to do
in seeking to advance the reform of the peace and
security architecture. We look forward to engaging
with him on that issue next month as he embarks on
consultations with the Council and the wider United
Nations membership.

Finally, we wish to highlight, in the areas of
peacekeeping and sustaining peace, the significance
of global and regional partnerships in enhancing the
effectiveness of the international response as part of
the entire peace continuum, including peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. Regional organizations such as the
African Union have demonstrated their capacity to
immediately respond to conflicts and crises, as they
arise, by deploying forces on the ground to stabilize the
situation, while the United Nations and its agencies are
in a better position to help consolidate peace at a later
stage. Therefore, if that kind of division of labour is
properly sequenced and employed, we will have a better
chance of achieving the desired result.

In that context, we want to see greater cooperation
and partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union. We very much hope that the eleventh
joint annual consultation between the United Nations
Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council will afford us the opportunity to
explore possibilities for further enhancing cooperation
in peacekeeping and sustaining peace.

