Ithank Under-Secretaries-General Lacroix and DiCarlo for their joint briefing. Estonia fully supports the efforts of Prime Minister Hamdok and his Government to bring peace to the country, lead a successful transition to democracy and revive the economy. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is putting a serious strain on an already fragile situation. Therefore, it is all the more important that the Security Council do everything in its power to support the Sudan at this historic crossroads. We welcome the positive response by the Government of the Sudan and the armed movements to the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. Estonia commends the parties for finding alternative ways to continue the peace talks amid the COVID-19 pandemic. We encourage all sides to continue in good faith and hope they can reach a timely agreement. We welcome the joint special report of the Chairman of the African Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the United Nations on the African Union- United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2020/202), which lays out recommendations for the follow-on mechanism. Estonia also appreciates the Sudan's commitment to holding a dialogue with the Security Council on planning the follow-on mechanism. We are looking forward to the establishment of a new United Nations mission that supports the Sudan in bringing democracy, peace and prosperity to the country. It is important that the follow-on mechanism equally address the hopes of the Sudanese people as well as their concerns, including those related to the drawdown of UNAMID, such as widespread intercommunal conflict and sexual- and gender-based violence. The violent clashes in Darfur, including the incident in El Geneina in January, underline the ongoing fragility of the situation. In that connection, it is crucial that we ensure sufficient protection-of-civilians capacity where necessary, based on a realistic risk assessment on the ground, not as a punitive measure but, on the contrary, as a way to help the Government successfully take full responsibility for security. Putting too much pressure on the Sudan at once has a high risk of endangering the progress already achieved. The cost of relapse into conflict is too high, not only for the Sudan but for the entire region. Despite the COVID-19 pandemic and possible delays in drawdown schedules, we have to move on with replacing UNAMID with a new United Nations mission that is even better equipped to meet the current needs of the Sudan. Estonia hopes that the Council will have the necessary unity of purpose to ensure the best possible support for the Sudan during its historic transition. There cannot be any cutting of corners on the political, security or humanitarian fronts. We owe it to the people of the Sudan.
