The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Council in the month of November, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Le Luong Minh, the
Permanent Representative of Viet Nam, for his service
as President of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am sure I speak for all members of the
Council in expressing deep appreciation to Ambassador
Minh and his delegation for the great diplomatic skill
with which he and they conducted the Council's
business last month and were able to move the
Council's work forward on a number of very important
issues.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Guinea-Bissau

Report of the Secretary-General on
developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding
Support Office in that country (S/2009/552)

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
Permanent Representative of Guinea-Bissau, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cabral
(Guinea-Bissau) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Joseph Mutaboba,
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in
Guinea-Bissau.
It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

It is so decided.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Her
Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Permanent
Representative of Brazil, in her capacity as
Chairperson of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

It is so decided.


The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 4 November
2009 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to
the United Nations, in which he requests that the
Acting Permanent Observer of the African Union to the
United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio, be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda in accordance with rule 39 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/552, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on developments in Guinea-Bissau
and on the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in that country.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Joseph Mutaboba, Mr. Antonio Maria
Costa, Her Excellency Mrs. Maria Luiza Ribeiro Viotti
and His Excellency Mr. Tete Antonio. I now give
Mr. Mutaboba the floor.


