Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): The
United States welcomes the adoption of resolution
1803 (2008). Iran's violations of Security Council
resolutions not only continue, but are deepening.
Instead of suspending its enrichment and reprocessing
activities as required by the Council, Iran chose to
expand dramatically its number of operating
centrifuges and to develop a new generation of
centrifuges, testing one of them with nuclear fuel. Iran
continues to construct its heavy water research reactor

at Arak, a potential source of weapons-useable
plutonium, and still has not implemented the
Additional Protocol.

Once again, Iran has not made the choice the
world had hoped for; once again, the Security Council
has no choice but to act. At stake is the security of a
vital region of the world and the credibility of the
Security Council and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) as they seek to hold Iran to its nuclear
non-proliferation commitments.

The latest IAEA report states that Iran has not
met its obligation to fully disclose its past nuclear
weapons programme. On the core issue of whether
Iran's nuclear programme is strictly peaceful, the
report showed no serious progress. The IAEA
presented Iran with documents assembled over a period
of years from multiple Member States and the
Agency's own investigations. The documents detailed
Iran's efforts to develop a nuclear warhead, including
designs for a missile re-entry vehicle, and showed
other possible undeclared activities with nuclear
material. Iran dismissed these documents as baseless
and fabricated, but the IAEA does not share that
conclusion.

Instead of slogans and obfuscations, the
international community needs answers from Iran. For
our part, I want to ask the Iranian authorities: "Why
were you secretly working on designs for a nuclear
warhead and its miniaturization to fit on a missile -
all in violation of your obligations under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT)?
Why not tell the IAEA what happened and why?" On a
matter of such global importance, the international
community must be able to believe Iran's declarations
that its nuclear programme is for exclusively peaceful
purposes. Iranian leaders must, as a first step, cease
enrichment and reprocessing activities and make a full
disclosure of all Iran's weapons-related work. We agree
with the IAEA that, until Iran declares all of its nuclear
activities and ceases its weapons-related work, Iran's
nuclear activities cannot be verified as peaceful.

Iran has still not fully implemented the
Additional Protocol, which the IAEA requires to
determine what other undeclared activities are taking
place. I want to ask the Iranian leaders: why are you
not fully implementing the additional safeguards?
What are you hiding? As long as the Iranian
Government continues to be secretive about its nuclear
activities, refusing to implement the Additional
Protocol, we must inevitably conclude that Iran is
hiding weapons work and thereby preserving or
establishing options for a nuclear weapons programme.
Iran wants us to believe that its nuclear programme is
peaceful, but it must be transparent with IAEA
inspectors. It should implement the Additional
Protocol, as the Council and the IAEA have repeatedly
called for.

The latest IAEA report states that Iran is not
suspending its sensitive nuclear activities. For almost
two years now, this Council has required Iran to
suspend all of its enrichment-related, reprocessing and
heavy-water-related activities. To increase Iran's
incentives to cooperate with the Council, we have
imposed sanctions, to which the Council has added
once again today. I want to ask the Iranian leaders: if
your goal is to generate nuclear power for peaceful
purposes, why do you court increasing international
isolation, economic pressure and more, for a purported
goal more easily and inexpensively obtained with the
diplomatic solution we and others offer?

The Iranian ambassador did not answer the
questions I have raised. He devoted his remarks to
distorting the official record of the IAEA. He stated
explicitly that Iran will not comply with the Council's
demand to suspend enrichment. Iran continues to make
the wrong choice, to choose the path of defiance and to
divert attention from its nuclear programme by
exploiting the plight of innocent Palestinians and
bashing Israel.

I want the Iranian people and others around the
world to know that the United States recognizes Iran's
right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
They should know that the five permanent members of
the Security Council and Germany have offered to help
Iran develop civil nuclear power, if it complies with
the Security Council's demand - a very reasonable
demand - to suspend enrichment. They should know
that the so-called P5+1 package of incentives includes
active international support to build state-of-the-art
light-water reactors and reliable access to nuclear fuel.

The United States also supports Russia's supply
of fuel for Iran's nuclear power plant in Bushehr. The
delivery of that fuel exposes Iran's false claim that it
needs to enrich uranium for civil nuclear power. A total
of 17 countries generating nuclear power today
purchase their fuel on the international market rather
than enrich uranium themselves. The Russian offer
would provide fuel to Iran in a reliable way and would
not contribute to proliferation.

Iran should do what other States have done to
eliminate any doubts that their nuclear programme is
peaceful. Many States have made the decision to
abandon programmes to produce a nuclear weapon;
two of them sit on the Security Council today as my
colleagues: South Africa and Libya. Other countries
that have stepped away from past nuclear weapon
aspirations include Brazil, Argentina, Romania,
Ukraine and Kazakhstan. Those countries did not see
their security diminished as a result of their decisions
- indeed, one could easily say that their security has
been enhanced - nor did they lose their right to
develop nuclear energy. We urge Iran to take the same
path that those countries have chosen.

The international community has good reason to
be concerned about Iran's activities to acquire a
nuclear weapons capability. The present Iranian
regime, armed with nuclear weapons, would pose a
greater potential danger to the region and to the world.
The Iranian Government has been a destabilizing force
in the broader Middle East and beyond. Contrary to its
statements, Iran has been funding and supporting
terrorists and militants for operations in Lebanon, the
Palestinian territories, Iraq and Afghanistan. Its
assistance has killed countless innocent civilians. The
President of Iran has made many reprehensible
statements embracing the objective of destroying a
Member State of the United Nations.

Because of those factors, the international
community cannot allow Iran to develop nuclear
weapons. If Iran continues down its current path, it
would likely fuel proliferation activities in the region,
which, in turn, could cause the demise of the NPT
regime itself.

The ministerial statement agreed to by the
permanent five members of the Council and Germany
shows that we remain committed to a diplomatic
solution. If Iran shares that commitment, it will
suspend its enrichment and reprocessing activities and
allow diplomacy to succeed. It gives us no pleasure,
but rather regret, to have to pass another sanctions
resolution. But our vote today demonstrates that the
Council will act when countries violate their
international obligations. We hope Iran will engage in
constructive negotiations over the future of its nuclear
programme. Such negotiations, if successful, would
have profound benefits for Iran and the Iranian people.

I want to close with a message to the people of
Iran. America respects you and your great country. We
want your country to be a full partner in the
international community. As President Bush has said, if
Iran respects its international obligations, it will have
no better partner than the United States of America.

