Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing. We deeply appreciate the
valuable work being done by the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) under his
leadership.
The Central African subregion stands at a
crossroads today, facing many emerging challenges to
its security and stability. The region has been coping
with the negative consequences of the fragile security
situation in the Sahel, the proliferation of weapons and
terrorism, cross-border organized crime, piracy and
the threat posed for several years now by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA).

The principal threat to the peace and stability of the
entire subregion emanates from the fast-deteriorating
security and humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic. The near-total collapse of State
institutions in the Central African Republic, with the
resulting security vacuum, the perpetual and widening
cycles of reprisaIs and increasingly ethnic and religious
violence, has led to disastrous repercussions for the
country and its neighbours.

The serious problems in the Central African
Republic require a unified and well-coordinated
regional and international response in order to neutralize
the immediate security threats and build the capacity of
State institutions. UNOCA has an important role to play
in coordinating such regional and international efforts.
The Office should evolve with the changing situation in
the region. UNOCA's vital role in preventive diplomacy
and mediation needs to be strengthened.

There has been a degradation ofthe LRA as a result
of the successful operations conducted by the African
Union Regional Task Force, but the fight against
the LRA is far from over, as the group continues to
brutalize and kill civilians in many areas. It is important
that the momentum against the LRA be maintained
through sustained political and operational support
to the Regional Task Force and through a broader
international strategy.

The Regional Task Force continues to lack the
critical resources and enablers needed to sustain
pressure against the LRA. Those deficits must be
redressed as a matter of priority. The implementation
of the United Nations regional strategy to address the
threat and impact of the activities of the LRA will also
require more concerted efforts for resource mobilization
and coordination at the regional and subregional levels.
The international community also needs to step up
efforts to address the humanitarian situation in the
LRA-affected areas.

The primary responsibility for protecting civilians
against the threat posed by the LRA lies with the
regional States themselves. All international efforts are
meant to support their efforts and help them build State
security institutions.
Addressing the scourge of the LRA requires a
comprehensive approach to eliminating and bringing to
justice the remaining LRA leadership. In that regard,
it is important to continue to build the capacity of
the political institutions and judicial systems in the
States and areas within those States targeted by the
LRA. Political stability and strong national security
institutions in the LRA-affected region will prevent the
group from taking advantage of the security vacuum, as
demonstrated by the recent crisis in the Central African
Republic.

Pakistan remains strongly committed to the peace,
prosperity and long-term stability of the Central African
subregion. We hope that the region will continue to
receive the full political support and attention of the
international community to address the numerous
existing and emerging challenges in the region.

