Mr. Hoang Chi Trung (Viet Nam): First and
foremost, I wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
and the United Kingdom for assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I would also
like to congratulate South Africa for having
accomplished its presidency in an excellent manner.

My delegation welcomes this open debate of the
Council, which provides an opportunity for the Chairs
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) to brief the Council and the larger United
Nations membership on their work since their last joint
briefing in November 2007. We take this opportunity to
thank the three Committees, under the able leadership
of their Chairmen, and the expert bodies - the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED), the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
and the expert group of the 1540 Committee - for
their great efforts in discharging their respective
mandates.

Allow me to begin by reiterating my country's
unwavering position that international terrorism and
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
constitute serious threats to international peace and
security. Viet Nam has always been committed to the
implementation of its obligations under the
international treaties to which it is a party and Security
Council resolutions in those areas. Since Viet Nam
became a member of the Council, it has made
constructive contributions to the work of those
Committees, including through its assumption of the
vice-chairmanship of the CTC.

My delegation shares the assessment of the three
Committees Chairmen on the achievements made in
the past six months. We would like to underline the
activities of the 1267 Committee aimed at improving
the effectiveness and the full and fair implementation
of the sanctions regime under resolution 1267 (1999),
in particular through improving the quality of the
consolidated list, holding discussions to reach a
consensus understanding among the members of the
Committee on the three sanctions measures, and
exploring ways to further improve the Committee's
procedures.

For its part, the CTC has adjusted the
organization and methods of work of CTED to improve
the quality and consistency of its technical judgments
and dialogue with Member States. We support the CTC
efforts in considering the preliminary implementation
assessments, which serve as a tool to intensify dialogue
with every Member State on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001). In that regard, my delegation
wishes to express its special thanks to members of the
Committee, especially those of sub-Committee C,
CTED experts and the Committee's secretariat, for
their cooperation. We will continue to participate in the
discussion of the survey on the implementation of
resolution 1373 (2001) by Member States, considering
that document as providing a global picture of counter-
terrorism efforts and identifying areas for further
international cooperation to improve existing efforts.

My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the
1540 Committee during the past six months, including
those to encourage States to meet the reporting
requirements, its various outreach activities to promote
full implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and its
work to coordinate the assistance to implement the
resolution. We welcome the adoption of resolution
1810 (2008), which extended the mandate of the
Committee until April 2011. In that regard, we wish to
reiterate that the Committee's work should be in
accordance with its mandate, international law and the
Charter of the United Nations, thus actively
contributing to the cooperation of the international
community in counter-terrorism and non-proliferation.

With regard to the cooperation between the three
Committees through their expert groups, my delegation
takes note of the activities as presented in the joint
statement. We look forward to seeing concrete
cooperative actions undertaken by the three expert
groups within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, in the context of the implementation of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

My delegation wishes to promote the
Committees' work in the coming months and takes this
opportunity to highlight the following points.

First, the quality of the Committees' work
depends very much on the cooperation of Member
States in providing updated information on their
implementation of the related obligations. The Council
should continue to encourage the three Committees to
work out further innovative ways to improve
meaningful dialogues with Member States and enhance
their support for the work of the Committees.

Secondly, the principal mandate of the
Committees is to monitor the implementation of the
relevant Council resolutions. The Committees should
continue their efforts in trying to get as detailed and
correct a picture as possible of the efforts made by
Member States, understanding the difficulties and
challenges they face and engaging them in finding
appropriate measures to improve implementation.

Thirdly, while further efforts could be sought to
define possible areas of common interest to improve
coordination among the three Committees and their
expert groups, that should be done with a very clear
understanding of the different mandate of each body as
laid out by the Council.

In conclusion, my delegation registers its

continued commitment and cooperation for further
success in the work of the three Committees.

