Mr. Sarki (Nigeria): My delegation thanks Deputy
Secretary-General Eliasson and Assistant Secretary-
General Simonovie for their updates on the recent
developments in Ukraine. From the outset, we with to
reiterate the Deputy Secretary-General's observation
that the door for dialogue to resolve the crisis in Ukraine
is still open, not closed. We hope that all of the parties
involved and concerned will take advantage of that.

This is the eighth time in three weeks that the
Security Council has met on the situation in Ukraine.
This underscores the seriousness with which the
Council views the matter and its commitment to
addressing issues related to international peace and
security. Nigeria has consistently highlighted and
stressed the need for dialogue, especially between the
parties directly concerned, and for mediation by the
rest of the international community to ensure that the
situation in Ukraine is resolved peacefully.

We reaffirm our earlier warning that the world has
too many challenges to international peace and security
to contemplate adding another layer to existing ones.
All peaceful means, including mediation, arbitration
and dialogue, must be explored and used to the hilt
by the parties concerned. Further escalation of the
situation with hurtful rhetoric would only leave to
grave consequences, including military confrontation,
which the world can ill afford, especially when nuclear-
weapon States are involved. The world would therefore
not want to see any further deterioration in the situation
as this could have grave implications, not just for
Ukraine, but for the entire region and beyond. The
Deputy Secretary-General's report was clear on that
point.

With regard to the human rights situation in
Ukraine, we welcome the deployment by Assistant
Secretary-General Simonovie of a United Nations
monitoring team throughout the country to establish the
truth or otherwise or alleged human rights violations.
Nigeria once again urges all parties to embrace dialogue
and negotiation, and to seek a peaceful resolution
to the crisis. We call on all concerned to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
Ukraine, in line with the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations.

