Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria and
Mr. Markram for their briefings. I also thank all the
United Nations teams on the ground for the important
and incredibly difficult work they do.

As Staffan de Mistura said, this is an important
Security Council meeting. My Government shares the
outrage that other colleagues have eloquently described
today. It is truly horrific to think ofvictims and families
sheltered underground when the chlorine found them.

This is the third time in five days that the Council
has convened to discuss chemical weapons. This is
dreadful in the true sense of that word. The Council
should dread what we risk happening - for chemical
weapons to become a routine part of fighting. As one
of the five permanent members of the Council (P-S),
the United Kingdom believes that we have a particular
responsibility to uphold the worldwide prohibition on
the use of weapons of mass destruction (WMDs). We
agree with the Netherlands Ambassador that the P-5 has
specific responsibilities. I believe that four members of
the P-S do believe that, but there is one that does not.
The Russian Ambassador referred to a resurgence of
the Cold War. This is not the Cold War. In the Cold War
there was not this flagrant disregard for the prohibitions
that are universal on the use of WMDs.

The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General also referred to the risks of escalation, and to
international peace and security more broadly. We share
his fears, but it is the Syrian Government and its backers,
Iran and Russia, who are prolonging the fighting and
risking regional and wider instability. There are real
questions about what is happening in the T-4 airbase,
with its foreign fighters and its mercenaries.

We have been challenged today by our Russian
colleague to say why we believe the attack was carried
out by Syria and why we believe, further, that chemical
weapons were used. The reasons are as follows. The
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW)-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
found six uses of chemical weapons between 2014 and
2017. Two it ascribed to Da'esh for the use of mustard
gas, three it ascribed to the regime for the use of chlorine
and one further use it ascribed to the Syrian regime for
the use of sarin. That is the attacks that we talked about
in the Council just last week at Khan Sheykhoun, which
led to the United States strike - which we support - on
Al-Shayrat. In addition, as the French Ambassador has
said, we had reports of Russian and Syrian warnings
before the chemical-weapon attack took place and of a
pattern of Mi-8 Hip helicopters flying overhead. Those
reports have come from the ground.

I listened carefully to the Russian Ambassador's
argument. As I have just set out, we, as the United
Kingdom believe that the Syrian regime is responsible
for these latest attacks. But there is one way to settle
this - to have an independent fact-finding mission
followed by an independent investigation - as we all
know that fact-finding missions are there to determine
whether chemical weapons have been used and, ifthey
have been used, what sort ofchemical weapons. But only
an investigation can determine who is responsible for
their use, and therefore start the path to accountability.

I was very interested to hear the Russian offer that
an OPCW fact-finding mission could visit and would
have the protection of Russian forces. I believe that
this is an offer worth pursuing, but it would, of course,
be necessary for the OPCW mission to have complete
freedom of action and freedom of access. That still
leaves us with the question of who committed these
atrocities. That is why we support the United States
text for a draft resolution and we believe that there is no
legitimate reason not to support the call for the Council
to set up an independent investigative mechanism. As
I said before, we have nothing to hide, but it appears
that Russia, Syria and their supporters, Iran, do have
something to fear.

The Russian Ambassador singled out the
United Kingdom, the United States and France for
criticism. I would like, ifI may, to turn to that. The
responsibility for the cruelty in Syria belongs to Syria
and its backers - Russia and Iran. The use of chemical
weapons is an escalatory and diabolical act. It strikes
me that what Russia is trying to do is to turn the debate
in the Council away from the discussion of the use of
chemical weapons into a dispute between East and West,
presenting itself as the victim. It is far too important to
play games with the politics between East and West in
respect of chemical weapons. Russia's crocodile tears
for the people of eastern Ghouta has an easy answer.
It is to join us in the non-political attempt to get in
humanitarian and protection workers from the United
Nations to do their job of looking after and mitigating
the risk to civilians. Russia's concern about attribution
for the use of chemical weapons also has an easy
answer. It is to join us in allowing the United Nations
to set up an international investigative mechanism to
pursue the responsible parties. I repeat here the two
demands of my French colleague, and I hope we will be
able to make progress.

I had not intended to address the Skripal case in
Salisbury, but since my Russian colleague has done so,
I will address it today. He asked what the similarities
were between Salisbury and Syria. I think it is
important that I point out that the cases are different
in the following respects. First, there is a thorough
investigation under way in Salisbury. As we have
heard, there is no investigation under way in Syria. The
British Government in Salisbury is seeking to protect
its people, as is its duty. The Syrian Government, on
the contrary, as we have heard today, attacks and gasses
its people. I am sorry to say that what the two do have
in common though, is Russia's refusal to assume P-5
responsibilities to prevent the use of WMDs and its
reckless support for the use of WMDs by its agents and
by its allies.

It is not we who want to alienate Russia. It alienates
herself by not joining in the vast majority of the
Council who wish to find a non-polemical way through
and to address the use of chemical weapons against
civilians in Syria. The Russian Ambassador mentioned
friends of the United States. My Government and its
people are proud to be a friend of the United States.
We stand with everyone on the Council who wants to
find a way through the chemical weapons problem, to
have a proper fact-finding mission and to have a proper
investigation as the first step to bringing this dreadful
conflict to a close.

