Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his briefing and for his reflections.
I wish also to thank the Permanent Representative of
Israel, who was here with us in the Chamber until just
a few minutes ago, and the Permanent Observer of the
State of Palestine for their statements.

There is broad agreement among the international
community on the fact that the coming months will be
decisive in terms ofreviving the peace process between
Israel and Palestine. There is also a general and shared
acknowledgment of the fact that lack of progress or a
fresh failure in this undertaking could seriously harm
the two-State solution. There is no doubt that the current
window of opportunity noted by Mr. Feltman to attain
the two-State solution cannot withstand further delay.
Time is pressing, and the moment is now. It is urgent
because it is possible. The international community
believes that it will be possible to breathe new life into
the peace process.

We know, however, that the situation on the ground
continues to present immense challenges, both long-
standing and new. In spite of the repeated calls made
by the international community, there are no signs that
Israel plans to modify or curb its current settlement
policy, which is a real, concrete and tangible obstacle
in the way of peace. Nor does it appear that there is
to be a just and favourable solution to the problem of
Palestinian prisoners being held in Israeli custody,
which has recently intensified.

In that context, resolving the case of Samer Issawi
is pivotal in order to preserve stability in the West Bank.
We therefore welcomed the news of a legal decision
indicating that Mr. Issawi will now be able to exercise
his right of return to Jerusalem in order to complete his
sentence there and end his hunger strike.

In addition, the rocket attacks targeting Israeli
territory that have occurred in recent weeks deserve to
be roundly condemned and demonstrate the fragility of
the ceasefire reached last November. In that context,
a number of positive signs allow us to believe, with
cautious optimism, that there exist real possibilities of
overcoming the current impasse. We would like also to
acknowledge President Obama's recent trip to the region
as well as the rapid follow-up visits paid by Secretary of
State Kerry, which undoubtedly are significant events
in that regard.

We know that the success ofthese new undertakings
will hinge largely on the extent to which this renewed
commitment leads to a credible and comprehensive
proposal for the resumption of talks, which must include
the actors in the region and beyond who have declared
their intention to move forward in a coordinated
manner. We believe also that the Security Council can
play an important and constructive role in that regard
by reaffirming the framework for the peace process and
ensuring that the parties do not engage in blameworthy
or unlawful conduct, which would exacerbate the
situation and undermine mutual trust.

We also welcome the announcement of plans to
promote economic and social development in Palestine
and all measures aimed at promoting institution-building
and the fiscal sustainability of the Palestinian Authority.
However, Argentina is convinced, and knows from
experience, that the economy, economic development
and social cohesion as objectives - not only in the
case of Palestine but anywhere in the world - are not
separate or independent from political decisions.

That is why the long-term strengthening of
the economy and of social cohesion as well as the
consolidation of Palestinian institutions will be possible
only if there is a political horizon in place for ending
the occupation.

Furthermore, the alleviation of the humanitarian
situation - in addition to being a legal, social and
political imperative - must also be central to actions
aimed at creating a favourable environment for the
resumption of the talks. In Gaza in particular, is a
well-established fact that the extension of fishing
limits to 12 nautical miles would have a significant and
beneficial impact on the living conditions of more than
3,000 families that depend on fishery resources, and
that the lifting of restrictions on the entry of building
materials and on the entry and egress of goods would
lead to an immediate improvement in the situation of
the most vulnerable sectors of the population. Those
are measures that can and should be taken quickly and
in full and must not be delayed, undermined or ignored.

Finally, we welcome the fact that the registration
of Palestinian voters has been completed. That is
a significant technical step on the road towards
establishing a unity Government, and we are also aware
that substantial problems remain to be resolved in order
toprogress towards thenecessaryreconciliationbetween
Fatah and Hamas, in the context of the commitments
made by the Palestine Liberation Organization.

Finding a rapid solution to the Syrian crisis appears
to be an increasingly complex, controversial and
difficult process. The signs of openness to dialogue
that were noted some three months ago did not develop
sufficiently. Indeed, the serious incidents that have
occurred in recent weeks on the border between
Lebanon and Syria and the allegations regarding the use
of Chemical weapons suggest that the conflict continues
its downward spiral of violence and has now entered a
stage that is cause for the utmost concern.

We reiterate our conviction that the only possible
solution to the crisis is a political one. In spite of that,
rather than witnessing coordinated efforts on the part of
those with influence on the parties aimed at convincing
them to take a place at the negotiating table, we continue
daily to receive reports of the increased military
assistance that external actors continue to provide to
both sides, thereby enabling them to continue with their
mutual destruction and that of the rest of the country.

The continued provision of weapons to both sides
in this dispute has been instrumental to the escalating
militarization of the conflict. I recall that Argentina
urged the Council in January to adopt appropriate
and just measures aimed at putting an end to the
uninterrupted supply of arms and the subsequent spiral
of violence.

The fact that the Security Council was able, a few
days ago, to speak unanimously on the humanitarian
situation in Syria (see S/PV.6949) shows not only that
we can end the status quo of intolerable silence, but
also that the solution in Syria is and must be a political
one. Similarly, the Security Council must overcome its
differences, which is not only a political decision but
also a moral duty.

We have made clear that we support and
fully endorse the principles outlined by Special
Representative Brahimi. We did so not only last January
but also reaffirmed that view only a few days ago, both
our confidence in Joint Special Representative Brahimi
and the criteria of the Geneva communique (S/2012/523, annex). I hope that that will not be a mere mechanical or
rhetorical repetition, but a decision by us as a Council
to contribute to a political solution for our brothers and
sisters in Syria through a frank and inclusive dialogue,
which our fellow delegations must not impede, hamper
or prevent from taking place.

Finally, with regard to Lebanon, we certainly
remain concerned at the impact of the Syrian crisis on
that country. As High Commissioner Guterres said in
this Chamber, the crisis has become an existential threat
to the survival of many and to the future prospects of
others in Lebanon. We support once again the policy of
disassociation adopted by the Government of Lebanon
and reiterate how important it is that all political sectors
in Lebanon respect that policy as a key element for
preserving the stability of the country.

Despite the change and upheaval rippling across
the Middle East, we must not lose sight of the central
importance of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in our
deliberations on peace in the region. Peace and security
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question,
have been on the agenda of the United Nations almost
since the very inception of the Organization. Time,
hope, resources and efforts of all kinds have been
devoted, at best, to providing a space to manage the
crisis, but not to resolving it.

In that regard, we have a normative framework
with the criteria and principles for a lasting solution,
which enjoy broad international acceptance. Together
we must continue to consider what our shortcomings
have been and how we can implement that framework
for the benefit not only of the parties, Palestine and
Israel, but also the region and the world.

We hope that the strong support of the international
community for the two-State solution will give rise
to concrete efforts on the part of both sides, and of
relevant international actors, aimed at relaunching
the peace process without delay and at creating an
environment conducive to the resumption of direct
negotiations in order to attain a comprehensive solution
based on a vision of the region whereby the two States,
Israel and Palestine, live side by side, within secure and
recognized borders. Argentina will continue to actively
support all initiatives towards that end.

