Mr. Benmehidi (Algeria) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this public meeting. I would also
like to thank Mr. Arnault for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2005/525), as well as for the
comprehensive and useful briefing that he gave us on
the current situation.

Afghanistan has made great progress and
achieved remarkable results in implementing the Bonn
Agreement. The peace process has been moving
steadily forward and the country is committed to the
path of stability. The legislative and provincial
elections scheduled for 18 September, which will mark
the completion of the Bonn process, are an essential
step in establishing democracy in Afghanistan. In this
regard, we pay tribute to the efforts of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in assisting
the Afghan Government.

Preparations for the elections have been
successfully carried out, despite the worsening security
situation, particularly in the south and parts of the east
of the country. More than 5,000 candidates have
presented themselves, and 1.5 million new voters have
been registered. Those are positive steps in the
electoral process. Now the Afghan Government, with
the assistance of the international community, needs to
take the necessary steps to ensure that the elections are
successful.

We have noted a disquieting deterioration of the
security situation in recent months as a result of the
resurgence of acts of violence of terrorist and criminal
origin. The worsening security situation risks negating
the efforts to rebuild the country. That is why, as the
Secretary-General notes in his report, international
assistance in the area of security is essential for
Afghanistan. It is also important that the Afghan
Government and the International Security Assistance
Force tackle the violence and its underlying causes.

The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process, which is essential for the establishment of
lasting stability in Afghanistan, will allow for the
holding of free and fair elections throughout the
country and strengthen the authority of the central
Government. In that regard, we welcome the
completion of the process of the disarmament and
demobilization of former soldiers and officers of the
Afghan armed forces and the progress made with
respect to the cantonment of heavy weapons.

It must be acknowledged that drug production
and drug trafficking have prospered. In the long term,
that will pose a threat to the stability of the country and
its economic reconstruction, and it must therefore be
combated. The measures taken by the Afghan
Government and by other partners to curb this evil are
welcome and must plainly be dovetailed with
strengthened controls and with poverty eradication
programmes. It is also essential that cooperation and
dialogue between the Government of Afghanistan and
neighbouring countries continue.

If the peace process is to be irreversible, the
international community must continue its efforts to
build peace and stability in Afghanistan, which will
continue to need external assistance following the
transition, which will be complete when the legislative
and local elections have taken place.

Lastly, Mr. President, I would like to lend my
delegation's support to the draft statement that you
have been kind enough to present.

