Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
is deeply concerned over the increasingly challenging
situation in Syria. We oppose terrorism and violence in
all their forms and strongly condemn the recent killing
of civilians and the bomb attack in Damascus on 18 July.

The top priority of the international community
now is to fully support and cooperate with Joint
Special Envoy Annan's mediation, and to promote
the implementation of the final communique of the
Action Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), adopted at
its meeting of Foreign Ministers held in Geneva, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and Mr. Annan's
six-point plan. The international community should urge
an immediate ceasefire and cessation of all violence and
establish the necessary conditions to resolve the crisis.

To that end, the United Nations Supervision Mission
in the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) has played
an important and exceptional role. China therefore
supports the extension of the UNSMIS mandate and
endorses Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's proposal to
adjust its tasks accordingly. China calls on the Security
Council to send a clear signal in support of Mr. Annan's
mediation and promotion of a political settlement
to the Syrian crisis. We have vigorously pushed for
consensus among Security Council members through
consultations. However, draft resolution S/2012/538
submitted by the United Kingdom, the United States
and France completely contradicts such aims.

First, the draft resolution is seriously flawed, and
its unbalanced content seeks to put pressure on only
one party. Experience has shown that such a practice
would not help resolve the Syrian issue, but would only
derail the matter from the political track. It would not
only further aggravate the turmoil, but also cause it
to spread to other countries of the region, undermine
regional peace and stability, and ultimately harm the
interests of the people of Syria and other regional
countries.

Secondly, the draft resolution would seriously
erode international trust and cooperation on the issue
of Syria. Mr. Annan's mediation is an important and
realistic way forward towards a political solution
of the Syrian issue. It is an important tool. Not long
ago, thanks to the efforts of all parties, the ministerial
meeting of the Action Group for Syria, initiated by Joint
Special Envoy Annan, adopted a final communique
that forged consensus among the major parties and
opened a new window of opportunity for an appropriate
settlement of the Syrian crisis. At present, Mr. Annan's
efforts to implement the outcome of that meeting are
at a critical juncture. However, the draft resolution
essentially undermined the consensus reached at the
Geneva meeting and seriously disrupted the new round
of mediation efforts undertaken by Joint Special Envoy
Annan.

Thirdly, sovereign equality and non-interference in
the internal affairs of other countries are the basic norms
governing inter-State relations enshrined in the Charter
of the United Nations. China has no self-interest in the
Syrian issue. We have consistently maintained that
the future and fate of Syria should be independently
decided by the Syrian people, rather than imposed by
outside forces. We believe that the Syrian issue must
be resolved through political means and that military
means would achieve nothing.

That is China's consistent position on international
affairs. It is not targeted at any specific incident or
moment. Our purpose is to safeguard the interests of
the Syrian people and Arab countries, and the interests
of all countries - small and medium-sized countries
in particular - and to protect the role and authority of
the United Nations and the Security Council, as well as
the basic standards that govern international relations.

Fourthly, the draft resolution jeopardizes the unity
of the Security Council. The Council was unanimous
in adopting resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012),
displaying a hard-won spirit of unity and cooperation.
During consultations on today's draft resolution, the
sponsoring countries failed to show any political will or
cooperativeness, adopting a rigid and arrogant approach
to the reasonable basic concerns of other concerned
countries and refusing to make revisions. It is even more
regrettable that, in circumstances where the parties
were still seriously divided and there was still time
for continued consultations, the sponsoring countries
refused to heed the calls for further consultation made
by China, some other Council members and Joint
Special Envoy Annan - until an approach acceptable
to all parties could be reached - and pressed for a vote
on the draft resolution. China is strongly opposed to
such practices.

For the aforementioned reasons, China could not
accept today's draft resolution and voted against it.
This morning, various countries made statements
that confused right and wrong and made unfounded
accusations against China. They are completely
mistaken and are based on ulterior motives. China
is firmly opposed to such behaviour. We have
participated in all of the Council's consultations on
resolutions concerning Syria in a positive, responsible
and constructive manner, with a view to pushing for a
ceasefire and a halt to all violence in Syria, as well as
for implementation of the communique from the Geneva
meeting (S/2021/523, annex), of resolutions 2042 (2012)
and 2043 (2012) and of the Annan six-point plan.
China has been committed to reaching a consensus,
worked hard for a smooth extension of the mandate of
UNSMIS and supported Mr. Annan's mediation efforts.
In contrast, a few countries have been eager to interfere
in the internal affairs of other countries, to fuel the
flames and to sow discord in complete disregard of
the possible consequences. From the very beginning,
they have shown a negative attitude to Mr. Annan's
mediation efforts and to the deployment of UNSMIS
over the past few months, proclaiming the futility and
failure of those efforts.

This time they have repeated their old trick of
setting preconditions as obstacles to the extension of
UNSMIS's mandate and have accompanied that with an
invocation of Chapter VII of the Charter and the threat
of sanctions, in an attempt to change or even repudiate
the hard-won consensus reached by the action group
during the Geneva meeting. They have shown only
arrogance, not sincerity, during the consultations.
We cannot help questioning their willingness to see
UNSMIS's mandate extended and a speedy settlement
of the Syrian crisis through a Syrian-led political
process. We urge those countries to reflect earnestly on
their policy and behaviour and to return immediately to
the right road.

At present, some time still remains before the
mandate ofUNSMIS expires. We hope that the sponsors
will change their minds and call on them to do so, in a
positive response to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Joint Special Envoy Kofi Annan's proposals, by
supporting the extension of the UNSMIS mandate with
a view to arriving at a political solution to the Syrian
question and protecting the fundamental interests of
the people of Syria and other countries in the region,
as well as to safeguarding the credibility, authority and
unity of the Security Council.

China supports Pakistan and South Africa's
proposal to adopt a draft resolution on a technical
roll-over of the UNSMIS mandate, and hopes that
Security Council members can reach a consensus on
that proposal as soon as possible.

