Mr. Tang (Turkey): First of all, Sir, I should like to
express our appreciation at seeing you preside over the
proceedings of the Council during this month, and my
delegation would like also to thank the Permanent
Representative of Gabon for presiding over the Council's
work last month.

Turkey is gravely concerned at the situation in
Kosovo and the wider implications it may have for peace,
security and stability in the region and beyond. Unless
appropriate measures are taken in time, the conflict in
Kosovo will intensify and may drag the Balkans into
serious turmoil. The tragic consequences of the
international community's not having shown a sufficient
and timely response to such a crisis were witnessed in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

The dangers inherent in the situation in Kosovo have
been visible since at least 1989, when the acquired rights
of autonomy and self-administration of the people of
Kosovo were suddenly abrogated. Moreover, the
economic hardships and deprivation faced by the people
of Kosovo following the disintegration of the Socialist
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia put unbearable strain on
their endurance. The restrictions on the right of education
also added fuel to the feeling of deep resentment, as, over
the years, children have been deprived of adequate
education.

Consequently, as a reaction, the desire for
independence in Kosovo has grown. And the new Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), instead
of reinstating the rights of the people of Kosovo, has
resorted to repression and agitation. The reaction of the
Kosovar Albanians to all this has reached the point of
explosion.

The rights taken away from the people of Kosovo
should be restored to them urgently. Unless an agreed
solution is found, the explosion in Kosovo may shake all
the neighbouring countries, including all the Balkan
countries, and lead to a wider international crisis.

The democratic and pluralistic nature of Kosovo is
of the utmost importance. The presence of a Turkish
community in Kosovo, the large number of Turkish
citizens of Balkan origin and Turkey's geographic location
will further explain our close attention to this crisis.
Turkey is keenly interested in the finding of a satisfactory
solution to the plight of the people of Kosovo and in the
protection of their acquired and human rights.

In this context, since tensions escalated in the
Kosovo region and violence broke out on 28 February,

 

resulting in loss of life, Turkey has been in contact with
many concerned parties and with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities with a view to seeing an end to the
Violence and the commencement of a political process. The
Turkish Minister for Foreign Affairs visited Belgrade on 7
and 8 March. We participated in the adoption of the
declaration of the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of countries
of South-Eastern Europe, which set out the elements of a
political process. We support the efforts of the Contact
Group, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC).

My Government has formulated the following
proposals towards finding a concrete solution to the Kosovo
problem.

A solution to the dispute must be found through
comprehensive dialogue between the parties and within the
framework of the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro). Any
resort to acts of terrorism or violence must be avoided.

It should be possible for a third party, which will be
decided on by the two sides, to assume a function that
would facilitate reaching a settlement.

The dialogue aimed at reinstating all the rights of all
the ethnic minorities in Kosovo should begin immediately.
These minorities, including the Turkish community, should
be represented in the talks concerning the future of Kosovo.
The solution to be found should guarantee the rights of all
the ethnic minority groups, together with the Albanian
majority.

Effective measures against the possibility of violence
and repression in Kosovo should be taken with the
participation of the international community, which should
also contribute to meeting the urgent economic and
humanitarian needs of the people of Kosovo and displaced
persons.

The gravity of the situation is of such dimensions as
to warrant the urgent action taken by the Security Council.
We hope that the determined efforts of the international
community will not only help resolve this problem through
peaceful means but also set a lasting precedent both for the
region and beyond.

