Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to thank the three Committee Chairmen for their
briefings and for their joint statement on the
cooperation among the three Security Council
Committees that deal with the issues of terrorism and
non-proliferation. The Chairmen's dedicated leadership
is central to the effectiveness of those three subsidiary
bodies, and we commend them for that leadership.

Since this is Ambassador Verbeke's last briefing
on this matter, I would like to thank him for his service
to the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). He served with
distinction, and we will miss his leadership in that
Committee. I also would like to extend our
appreciation to the experts groups of the three
Committees for their invaluable support to the
Committees.

Today's briefing is timely, given the recent
renewal of the mandates of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and the
upcoming consideration of the mandate of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1267 (1999). All three are now well
established and ready to begin a new phase of their
work.

I would like to focus on several ways in which
the Committees can help counter the dual scourges of
terrorism and the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, which represent the pre-eminent threats to
international peace and security today.

We believe a concentration on capacity-building
is essential. Reports have been received and analysed.
It is time to act on the findings of those evaluations.
Resolution 1805 (2008) rightly stresses the important
mandate of the CTC in that area. We welcome the new
tools the CTC has developed, such as the technical
assistance matrix and directory of assistance on the
CTC website. We urge the CTC to continue its
coordination with the G8 Counter-Terrorism Action
Group and to organize regional meetings for States
seeking and offering assistance. The 1267 Committee
also has a key role in that area. To that end, it should
continue to share with the CTC information concerning
States' technical assistance needs.

The 1540 Committee should work with States as
an effective clearinghouse, using the information it has
collected from States. It should then set about the work
of building capacity. The Committee should proceed
with its efforts to post its implementation matrices for
resolution 1540 (2004) on its website, subject to States'
consent. By doing so, the Committee can help States
seeking to provide assistance to plan and execute
assistance programmes. We also hope that States will
use the new technical assistance template of the 1540
Committee to submit requests to the Committee. States
should also submit action plans to the Committee, as
my Government has done, so the Committee can use
those plans to match requests with offers of assistance.

The United States is pleased to play its part in
addressing States' technical assistance needs. Last year,
for example, the United States Antiterrorism Assistance
Program (ATA) trained over 4,500 participants from 64
countries. ATA's courses emphasize law enforcement
under the rule of law and respect for human rights. In
an effort to address the conditions that terrorists exploit
for recruitment and ideological purposes, United States
assistance programmes administered through the
United States Agency for International Development
and other agencies are increasing access to education,
improving health care and focusing on democratic and
economic reform. To support the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), the United States has provided
over $2 billion annually for assistance or other
programmes.

We look forward to the completion of specific
projects mentioned in the briefings. In particular, as
Chairman Verbeke indicated, the 1267 Committee must
continue to give priority to updating the consolidated
list to ensure that it accurately reflects the current
threat posed by Al-Qaida and the Taliban. We
encourage other Member States to contribute to that
effort by providing information for further listings and
de-listings. The Committee should also continue its
efforts to update the Taliban portion of the list by
designating new Taliban who are responsible for the
upsurge in violence in Afghanistan. Similarly, the
Committee should de-list former Taliban who have
severed their ties to the organization, and add new and
updated biographical information to the list so that
States can better enforce the sanctions.
The Committees have accomplished much.
United Nations Member States have frozen
$150 million in terrorist assets by implementing the
sanctions under resolution 1267 (1999). But we must
not lose sight of the remaining challenges. Al-Qaida
has expanded its operations and the Taliban are
resurgent.

Finally, the prospect of terrorists gaining access
to weapons of mass destruction remains the gravest
threat imaginable. To counter terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the
Committees must continue to focus on practical and
concrete activities that can promote the capacity of
States to implement the respective resolutions. We
pledge our support in that essential fight.

