Mr. Fowler: I join virtually every other speaker in
expressing my thanks to you, Mr. President, and to our
colleagues in the Council for agreeing to give the
representatives of countries accused of sanctions busting
a chance to state their case. I think it is important that we
did so, and I am glad they had that opportunity.

I reject, of course, any suggestion that my
country - very, very recently a diamond producer - is
somehow biased in its administration of Security Council
sanctions. Further, I can assure you, Mr. President, that
no Canadian participated in the leaking, cunning or
otherwise, of any documents to the press relating to the
Panel's report. Indeed, I personally deeply regret that such
leaks occurred, and I apologize for any embarrassments
such leaks caused, particularly in view of their significant
inaccuracies.

With regard to strident statements suggesting the
Panel used something less than adequate rules of
evidence, I would note that the Panel used a higher
standard - more than one witness deemed credible by
the Panel, with direct personal knowledge of specific
violations - than would apply in a court of law in most
countries in, say, a bribery case.

The 15 hours of interviews with captured or defected
UNITA officers in Luanda in early January were of
course recorded four and a half months after the Panel

 

began its investigations, and therefore were used to
corroborate, confirm or eliminate a huge volume of
evidence already received by the members of the Panel in
their extensive travels.

I appreciate that this is not a typical meeting of the
Council, nor is it easy for any country to suffer such
accusations. That said, some useful information was offered
this afternoon - particularly by Morocco and Belarus -
and I am grateful for it. After all, this is what we are about;
we are in the business of improving our database and our
information exchange, and this meeting has been useful for
that purpose.

The development of such information, and the
provision of such recommendations as we have received
from the Panel this morning, is of course precisely what we
asked the Panel of Experts to do. As I said this morning, I
believe that they have done us proud, and under extremely
difficult circumstances. I ought to have added - and I am
pleased to do so now - that the Panel did so without fear
or favour, and I think that is clear from its report.

Faced with convincing evidence of high-level
complicity, I stress that the Panel had no option but to
report it. Sanctions have been grievously flouted by
individuals, Governments and business enterprises in the
matter of arms and war materiel for nearly seven years.
Until very recently, the will of the Council with regard to
the never-ending civil war in Angola had had absolutely no
impact in terms of limiting the horror being visited upon
the people of Angola. Clearly, the Council hopes to change
that, and the Panel has offered a blueprint for change.

No change is possible, however, without radical
changes in the way we all do our business and in the
standards of compliance we require of all Member States.
For there is a massive body of evidence that the sanctions
have been consistently and grossly violated, and nobody has
agreed with that. How else has Savimbi managed to carry
on this war in the way that he has? Every Member of this
Organization knows that these sanctions are being violated,
and it cannot really be a surprise to learn how it is being
done. We look forward to cooperating closely with all
Members of the Organization, including those who took the
floor this afternoon, as we develop new standards of
sanctions discipline to deprive UNITA of its military
option.

Before I conclude, I would just like to say a word to
my colleague, Ambassador Doutriaux, further to his
intervention this morning. He asked lots of questions that
I think would take a lot longer than six months to answer,
but they are valid questions, and he has every right to ask
them. Certainly we need to know more and, as the Panel
has recommended, I hope very much we will put in place
a continuing mechanism to get the sorts of answers he has
requested and, indeed, to be able to ask more questions.
Of course, that is why I put before the Council a very
specific recommendation of the Panel to set up a
continuing mechanism that will allow the provision of
more answers and the asking of more questions in an
interactive process.

Ambassador Doutriaux himself allowed that he was
aware that certain sources of information cannot be
revealed, but others can and will be. As to his specific
queries about the provenance of specific statements and
the timeliness and the charges made by the Panel, if I
could ask him to make his questions a little bit more
precise I will ask the Panel to give what answers they can
to his specific questions, bearing in mind that the Panel
is on overtime and that they are not being paid. They are
here because they decided to join us, and maybe we had
better not impose on them until we have decided what we
are going to do in the future and whether we are going to
somehow make it possible for them, or their successors,
to continue working for this particular public good.

I wish to assure Ambassador Doutriaux that the
Panel was well aware of the specific moments at which
specific sanctions came into effect. There is no doubt that
the Panel knew that arms sanctions had been in effect
since 1993 and that travel and diplomatic sanctions had
been in force since 1997, and diamond sanctions since
1998, and those timing realities were very carefully
reflected in their findings, conclusions and
recommendations.

The delegation of France has asked whether
countries and Governments more specifically accused of
sanctions busting were consulted in advance. I think the
Ambassador of Tunisia asked somewhat the same
question. The short answer is that they were, both by the
Panel - which in a couple of instances was treated rather
shabbily when it visited certain countries and tried to
engage in an effective dialogue - but also by me in the
days that preceded the release of the Panel's report. I
wish to qualify that by noting that I did not provide
representatives of countries that were subsequently
accused of sanctions busting in the report with precise
details or conclusions of the Panel's report, which of
course I did not and could not have known until two
weeks ago. I did meet with those concerned, however, to
 

give them a very general but nevertheless clear idea of the
extent of the findings that I anticipated would be reached
by the Panel.

In conclusion, as Chairman of the Committee charged
with enforcing these measures, I hope that the Governments
that for different reasons have not cooperated or responded
specifically to specific Panel requests until now might soon
do so. If they address any such information to me as
Chairman of the Committee rather than to the Panel, which
is now defunct, I will ensure that the information is brought
to the attention of the Committee and therefore informs our
further work in this area.

I thank you, Mr. President, for this detailed day of
investigation into why sanctions against UNITA have not
worked better and on how we can make them work better
in the future.

