Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We regret the result of the vote. However, I
would like to emphasize that no one can prevent Russia,
as a permanent member of the Security Council, from
raising issues in the Council that we consider important,
and doing it under agenda items that those issues relate
to. This vote will have no effect on that, a vote in which
States that claim to have self-sufficient and independent
foreign policies, in obedience to the herd instinct and
their fear of their Big Brothers in Washington, come out
in support a scenario that is contrary to the principles
of the Security Council and its rules of procedure.

Now they are more concerned about which agenda
item to hold today's meeting under than about how
to solve the problem. Frankly, this is reminiscent of
playground arguments and these members are now
bringing discredit on the Security Council in the same
way that the Ukrainians' provocative actions bring
discredit on the General Assembly. And yesterday,
after Russia asked that this Security Council meeting
be convened, our Western partners tried to present the
whole thing as if it was Ukraine that had requested
it rather than Russia. That is pettiness, gentlemen,
pettiness on a pitiful scale.

Since they have prioritized procedural issues over
the interests of the matter at hand, I will confine myself
to this statement in explanation of vote and will not
make a statement in the meeting convened under the
Ukrainian letter, which is an agenda item that is not
appropriate to our discussion.

On 25 November, three Ukrainian naval vessels
illegally crossed Russia's State border, bound for the
Kerch Strait. They did not respond to the legal demands
of the ships and patrol boats of Russia's FSB border
guards and Black Sea fleet and conducted a dangerous
manoeuvre that created a threat to the normal movement
of vessels in those waters. As I said, these actions
violated the Charter of the United Nations, the norms
of international law, including articles 19 and 21 of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
1982, which determine the right of coastal States to
ensure safety in the maritime space, as well as the rules
of peaceful passage through the territorial waters ofthe
Russian Federation in the Black Sea. We regard those
actions as a violation of Russia's sovereignty.

Those illegal actions forced Russian border guards
to use force. Thanks to their restraint and high degree
of professionalism, fatalities were avoided. The three
Ukrainian servicemen injured in the incident were
given the necessary medical assistance, and their lives
were not threatened. The responsibility for the incident
belongs to those who gave the vessels their criminal
order to proceed. The ships that committed the violation
have been detained at a Russian port, and criminal

proceedings have been initiated.

Of late Kyiv has refrained from using military
means to openly violate Russia's national borders. We
had bilateral agreements in the Sea of Azov, which is
an inland waterway for both Russia and Ukraine, to
which Kyiv adhered with no problems of any kind.
After construction finished on the Crimean bridge in
September, literally two months ago, Ukrainian naval
vessels passed freely under the bridge from Odessa
to Berdyansk with the help of Russian pilots. In other
words, the Ukrainians are well aware of the procedure
for passage through the Kerch Strait and had abided by
it until now. The control procedure takes no more than
three hours and is part of Russian border guards' legal
right to ensure security in Russia's territorial waters,
including - and I want to emphasize this - because
of an ongoing situation created by threats on the part of
Ukrainian radicals who have publicly promised to blow
up the Crimean bridge.

What changed yesterday? Why did three Ukrainian
vessels illegally invade Russia's sovereign waters in
order to be detained? This provocation was planned
in advance, right before our eyes, and with the full
connivance of Western States, which in practice long
ago gave their Kyiv clients carte blanche for any act.
In August, Mr. Yelchenko, Ukraine's representative
to the United Nations, who is here today, announced
preparations of what he called "unpleasant surprises"
for Russia. At the beginning ofNovember his delegation
submitted a draft resolution on the Sea of Azov to the
General Assembly that included accusations about
Russia's militarization of the region, an anti-Russian
document for which they had previously launched an
advance campaign to win support. And in order to
make sure that their propaganda really succeeds, they
have now decided to bring in the Security Council. On
top of that, in the past few months, with support from
Washington, Kyiv has been aggressively fanning the
flames of this subject of the so-called militarization
of the Azov Sea, and all of this despite the fact that
Russia has no plans to establish a new naval base
there. The military forces and facilities there are
commensurate with the task of providing security for
the Crimean bridge.

The Kyiv authorities certainly do not need all these
manipulations of international organizations to solve
their country's problems. On 21 November, those who
follow the rapidly evolving tragedy of Ukraine marked
that sad date, the fifth anniversary of the beginning
of the so-called Maidan protests. It is obvious to all
today that the Ukrainians have lost whatever remained
of their trust in those who pushed them into the so-
called revolution of dignity. Over the past five years,
everything that our neighbours were proud of has
vanished. Everything - the economy, industry, the
social arena - is ruined.

Throughout those five years, and contrary to the
interests of Ukrainians, the West, and the United States
of America above all, has been stubbornly pushing
through its geopolitical project in Ukraine in various
ways, from distributing cookies to pouring billions of
dollars into facilities for its own benefit. Its main mission
was to bring fratricidal internal strife to a traditionally
peaceful Ukraine and foment a quarrel between two
fraternal peoples, Russians and Ukrainians, thereby
weakening Russia. However, it is already obvious that
those plans have failed to be fully realized and that
those who participated in them have lost all authority
in the eyes of the Ukrainian people. The best proof of
that is President Poroshenko's extremely low popularity
ratings, which anyone would be embarrassed to head
into elections with. And those elections are just around
the corner, four months away.

So then how does one hold on to power? Simple. By
organizing an act of provocation and once again blaming
Russia for everything. By inflating one's ratings, by
once again presenting oneself to voters as the nation's
saviour from that mythical Russian aggression, and by
imposing martial law. That is what the Kyiv authorities
are doing right now. And we all understand the reason
for this martial law and its predictable continuation
perfectly well. It is in order to cancel the elections,
whatever Mr. Poroshenko may say to the contrary.

In the past five years, through brainwashing and
total anti-Russian propaganda, they have succeeded in
sowing enmity and hatred for Russia in some parts of
Ukrainian society, using undemocratic methods very
actively to impose their opinion on the passive majority.
However, during that time, what those here have never
managed to do is to sow hostility to Ukrainians on the
part of my compatriots. We still love them, believe in
their wisdom and take them in willingly. We listen to
their stories of the suffering, misery and wrongdoings
that are happening in that once rich and successful
country, from which people today are scattering in every
direction in the realization that this ship is sinking.
Yes, gentlemen, that five-year anti-Russian political
project - one might as well call it Anti-Russia - is
a fiasco for all to see, and everyone here knows very
well what the real pace - as opposed to the declared
one - is of the so-called Maidan reforms and other
dangerous and destructive processes that are pushing
Ukraine ever closer to the abyss.
In such circumstances, there is one reliable
method, well-known to every barely literate political
technologist, that bankrupt politicians clinging to
power all over the world resort to - war. That is why
it has been impossible to put out the flames of the
fratricidal war in the Donbas, and why it has nothing
to do with that mythical Russian aggression. It is
because the people in this room are extinguishing those
flames by dousing them with petrol made of Ukrainian
nationalism and Russophobia. And that is despite the
fact that a plan for combating that destructive fire - the
Minsk agreements - was developed and approved,
including by the Security Council, long ago. It is no
secret that if it wanted to, Washington could resolve
the so-called conflict in eastern Ukraine in 10 minutes
simply by giving the appropriate command to its clients
in Kyiv.

And now, as the March elections are approaching,
the bankrupt Maidan team is in dire need of a serious
worsening of the situation, and ideally a full-on war.
Without that, it has no hope of remaining in power.
It needs another shot of anti-Russian dope so that the
people who have been mired in poverty for the past five
years will once again believe that all their troubles are
due not to their rulers and their Western puppeteers,
but to Russia.

Unlike others, we in Russia are not afraid to call
things by their proper names. We do not lower our eyes
in shame, as our Polish colleagues do, for example, as
they see how people in their neighbouring State glorify
those who during the Second World War exterminated
hundreds ofthousands ofPoles, Jews and Russians in the
most cruel way. Today, the Ukrainian clients of some of
our colleagues daily discredit the very universal values
that they so loudly promote and, incidentally, that we in
Russia sincerely believe in. We introduce and develop
them ourselves, without any decrees or fanfare.

As far as Russia's State borders are concerned,
there is no need to worry. Our country has never struck
the first blow, but we do know how to stand up for
ourselves. The people of Crimea, like Russia's other
regions, are well protected.

We know that the delegations that initiated today's
vote are waiting to state their opinions at the next
meeting, and we know that they will repeat their well-
known mantra of what they call aggression, annexation
and occupation. But we also know what they will not
say, about the fact that the regime in Kyiv does not need
peace. It is not trying to create a decent life for its people
and it is not interested in a dialogue with its own people
in the east. It is not interested in the so-called European
values that it is forever touting. The only thing that the
Kyiv politicians are interested in is maintaining their
own power and justifying their failures as the result of
acts of so-called Russian aggression. And the only thing

that the Western sponsors of that regime are interested

in is maintaining their dominance by undermining

good-neighbourly relations among the fraternal peoples

of Europe, Asia, Africa and the rest ofthe world through

the ancient Roman principle of divide and rule.

Instead of repeating the past, we should learn
from its mistakes and build a new world based on
multilateralism, mutual respect and indivisible security.
We urge everyone to do so alongside us.

The meeting rose at11.30 am.
