Mr. Brown (Liberia): My delegation thanks you,
Madam President, for convening this open debate on
children and armed conflict; welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/465) and thanks the other
speakers and contributors for their valuable insights.

We have joined other members in support of
strengthening the children and armed conflict agenda
through co-sponsoring resolution 2427 (2018), because
Liberia believes in the connection between conflict
prevention and the protection of children.
Earlier this morning, at the opening of a high-
level political forum on sustainable development at
the Economic and Social Council, Professor Jeffrey
Sachs rightly reminded us that the children are our
future - there can be no future without them. And
yet, as we debate today, the uncomfortable truth about
our future looms over this Chamber: children are still
being used as weapons and soldiers of wars. Their
future - our future - is being blighted. The innocence
of their childhood is being stolen and the process of
their growth is perhaps forever violated. We agree
with the Secretary-General that this is unacceptable.
We acknowledge the reported progress in a number
of countries, but the general trend continues to pose a
threat to our collective future. Too many of the world's
children, by no fault of their own, are being left too
far behind.

Twenty years ago, the report prepared by Graca
Machel on the impact of armed conflict on children
concluded that "the most effective way to protect
children is to prevent the outbreak of armed conflicts"
(A/51/306, para. 253). This conclusion is as true
today as it was then. As we work to promote the new
paradigm of preventing conflict and sustaining peace,
it is also imperative that the Security Council and all
Member States commit to working creatively, selflessly
and aggressively to ensure the protection of children
suffering as a result of current armed conflicts. They
are, in truth, innocent victims of our inability to act.

What is also true is that the most vulnerable to
conscription are poor children, especially those who
have little or no access to education, as they have
a greater chance of being conscripted for service
in armed forces. Hence it is important to elevate the
interlinks between child protection, the rights of the
child and conflict prevention in our national action
plans to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.

When we claim protection for the rights of
children, we must do so with the provision of conducive
environments to learn and grow. Important as they are,
conducive environments are more than school buildings,
desks and chairs. They are also about the families
and societies in which they live. Do they possess the
means and systems to live in peace with each other,
sustainably? We have repeatedly seen that where they
do not, school buildings, rather than being centres for
moulding minds, are converted into military barracks,
dedicated to fashioning our children into instruments
of war.

Liberia welcomes and supports the children and
armed conflict agenda, not only as a tool to ensure
that children are protected and perpetrators held
accountable, but also as a moral imperative - as if
we needed one - to act with singularity of purpose
and unwavering determination, including here in this
Chamber, to decidedly end the ongoing conflicts. It is
all too obvious: where conflict exists, poor children and
their families will remain at high risk of having their
lives - and our future - ruined, perhaps forever. It is
also true that we must act with equal commitment and
decisiveness to prevent conflict and sustain peace.

Accordingly, where State institutions have clearly
collapsed under the weight of ongoing armed conflict,
perhaps it is time to extend the duty to protect and the
duty to actually end ongoing conflicts to the regions
where conflicts are taking place, as well as to other,
external actors who have vested interests in the
continuation of the conflicts. It is time we truly held
each other duly accountable for ending conflicts as well
as preventing them.

Liberia knows a thing or two about child soldiers.
We commend the work of Special Representative
Gamba and UNICEF in this regard, as well as the work
of many local local actors, including non-governmental
organizations and faith-based groups. Despite having
little or no means, they gave willingly of themselves
and their organizations to advance, in whatever way
they could, not only the process of reintegration but
also disarmament and demobilization.

However, it is also true that these institutions - both
local and international - lack the necessary funding
and donor support for the proper reintegration of
children recruited as soldiers, many of whom have
been exposed to the worst forms of inhumanity and
drugs. And yet, rather than being treated as Victims,
they are treated as drags on the society,:ostracized and
vilified, sometimes by their own families and certainly
by their communities.

Even as we have urged them to move along in their
own development, in the case of the few who make
it through the reintegration programme - which in
Liberia consists of three months of skills training and
three years of formal education, regardless ofthe child's
starting level - there is no post-process follow up. If we
talk about pulling yourselfup by the bootstraps - these
children, deprived of their innocence and having their
mentality defiled, they have no boots, let alone straps.

Although the reintegration process is essential,
it is the least supported of efforts to return countries
to peace, despite the fact that - again, in the case of
Liberia * there is an overwhelming eagerness among
child soldiers to be disarmed. Therefore, a sizeable
element of a post-conflict country's future - its
energetic youth - lies in waste in the streets of cities,
destined for a life of drugs and crime and doomed to a
fate via a path they did not help to create and as such
await the next opportunity to become killing machines.
Having spent the formative years of their lives living by
the gun and in disregard of democratic rules and norms
of society, many of these child combatants are ignorant
of the experience and values of living under peaceful
conditions. We throw them a bucket, a cutlass and
maybe $75 and ask them to reintegrate. We ask them
to forget their past - the only thing they really know.

Of course we can do better than this; we can
support sustained reintegration processes because these
stand among the best guarantees to prevent conflict
and sustain peace. We may not be able to change what
happened to our children in the past, but we can more
meaningfully affect what could happen for them in the
future - our future.

As I conclude, permit me to emphasize that, while
reintegration is a good process to help former child
soldiers regain a sense of normality, our primary
objective should first focus on innovative ways to
mitigate the recruitment of children in armed conflicts.
This should be our social and moral responsibility. We
cannot afford to castigate or isolate them. They are not
to be blamed for their circumstances; they must be seen
as innocent victims standing in need of our support.

UNICEF should be applauded for its initiatives, in
close collaboration with Governments and communities,
to protect and rehabilitate children affected by armed
conflict. We should endeavour to ensure that the
conventions and treaties governing children's rights are
fully upheld and implemented.

Finally, there are no short cuts to rehabilitation
and reintegration, nor can we afford to invent any.
Rehabilitation and reintegration require long-term
strategies. They require resources that the most affected
and needful countries sadly do not have and cannot
afford to be without in consolidating the foundations of
and sustaining their peace. For post-conflict countries,
rehabilitation and reintegration are an important way
to sustain peace and avoid the slippery slope back into
conflict. When we give each other a chance to be better,
and when we give children a better chance at a better
life, we do not necessarily help the other person - we
actually help ourselves.

