Mr. Buffa (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for me to make this statement on behalf of the
States members of the Common Market of the South
(MERCOSUR) and associated States i Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru,
Uruguay, Venezuela and my country, Paraguay.

The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States express their gratitude to the Security
Council for the timely and necessary convening of this
open debate to hear the viewpoints and appeals of
Member States on the regrettable situation in the Gaza
Strip. Similarly, as they publicly stated at the beginning
of this conflict, they would like to reiterate before this
body their deep concern at the current tragic situation
in the Gaza Strip, whose high toll in loss of civilian life
and casualties is regrettable.

The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States condemn Israel's land incursion into
the Gaza Strip and that country's disproportionate use
of force. Similarly, they reiterate their condemnation of
the launching of rockets by Palestinian groups against
Israeli territory.

In that context, the States members of
MERCOSUR and associated States also vehemently
condemn the Israeli attacks against schools operated by
the United Nations in the Gaza Strip, as a result of
which over 40 innocent civilians have died. The States
members of MERCOSUR and associated States extend
their most heartfelt condolences to all family members
of the victims of that conflict.
Amid this regrettable situation, we join the whole
international community in calling for an immediate
cessation of all hostilities. We urge both parties to
resume the dialogue interrupted by the violence, so as
to achieve the complete restoration of peace in the
region, which does not deserve to live constantly
punished by violence.

The States members of MERCOSUR and
associated States want that dialogue to contribute to
achieving a peaceful and lasting solution to the
conflict, with strict adherence to international law and
the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and
full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law.

The Security Council is the United Nations organ
with the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. For that reason, we
urge the Council, which acts through the mandate of
Member States, not to remain indifferent to its
responsibility and to adopt urgent and categorical
measures to remedy this appalling situation.
18

Similarly, we request the international community
and the parties to the conflict to guarantee, for
humanitarian reasons, the permanent reopening of
border crossings with Gaza to ensure the provision of
food, supplies and medicines, facilitating the
evacuation of the wounded and free access for
humanitarian assistance, in coordination with the
United Nations, to help alleviate the precarious
humanitarian situation in Gaza.

Lastly, we appeal for a continued belief in the
peace. We support all constructive efforts aimed at
bringing an immediate end to the violence and call for
the resumption of peace negotiations between the
parties involved as soon as possible, so as to establish
an independent Palestinian State, living side by side
with Israel, which would create the necessary stability
in the region.

