Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): In
the framework of the tenth anniversary of resolution
1612 (2005), next July, we would like to thank France
for having convened this open debate. We would also
highlight the leadership of Malaysia in the informal
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.

We appreciate the briefings by the Secretary-
General and invited participants, especially civil
society and Junior Nzita. The encourage us to continue
to work decisively for girls and boys in conflict
and post-conflict situations. We thank the Special
Representative, Leila Zerrougui, for her work in this
area and her call to prevent and eradicate the brutal
actions of non-State actors against children, which we
strongly condemn.

My delegation endorses the statement to be made
later by the Austrian delegation on behalf ofthe Human
Security Network, to which my country belongs.

Chile, in its capacity as a State party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its Optional
Protocols, and Convention 182 of the International
Labour Organization, and a signatory to the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated with
Armed Forces or Armed Groups, believes that focusing
on non-State actors, as we are doing here today,
should not delay the efforts being deployed through
the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign to prevent
and eradicate the recruitment and use of children by
Government armed forces by 2016.

States have the primary responsibility to
combat impunity and bring to justice and punish the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes committed
against children. If States do not have the capacity or
are unwilling to do so, it will be up to the International
Criminal Court to address those crimes that are
covered under the Rome Statute. The recent ruling of
the Court's Appeals Chamber in the case of Thomas
Lubanga, which touches on reparations and the role of
the Trust Fund for Victims, is a specific example in that
respect. International commissions of inquiry should
also address this issue and redouble their efforts to
preserve evidence of these most serious of crimes.

Chile reiterates its condemnation of the six
categories of the most serious violations identified
by the Council and of all of the other violations and
abuses committed against children affected by armed
conflicts. We therefore condemn in the strongest of
terms the abduction of girls and boys and their use
as suicide bombers or sex slaves by extremist armed
groups. No religion or ideology can justify these
actions, which must be firmly condemned, prevented
and eradicated by all actors that participate in conflicts
and by the international community as a whole.

We encourage cooperation in formulating strategies
aimed at preventing and eradicating violent extremism
and the abduction and recruitment of children by armed
groups. In this regard, we hope that the Council will
soon address the issue ofthe abduction of girls and boys
in conflict and post-conflict situations. Likewise, we
vehemently condemn the use of children by non-State
actors in the exploitation and trafficking of natural
resources, which is used, inter alia, to acquire weapons.

Cooperation by Governments, non-governmental
organizations or other parties with non-State armed
groups that recruit and use children for any purpose
should be punished, even when such groups do not
intend to Violate the rights of children. The system
can play a role in this regard through the sanctions
Committees and peacekeeping missions. The work of
the Office of the Special Representative, UNICEF, the
human rights and child protection sections of those
missions, and the groups of experts of the sanctions
Committees is crucial to information-sharing and a full
listing of non-State groups that use children and the
organizations and individuals that are cooperating with
these armed groups.

We hope that resolutions concerning new
committees or the renewal of mandates will address
this issue, and we appreciate any recommendations
that the groups of experts of the sanctions Committees,
among others, might make with regard to controlling
small arms and light weapons.

Chile reiterates the need to promote effective and
inclusive processes of disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration for children associated with armed
forces or armed groups, with the effective participation
of those affected and local communities, thereby
promoting social cohesion among the traumatized
social groups.

In order for resolution 2143 (2014), of which Chile
was a sponsor, to be effectively implemented, we
stress the importance of respecting the civilian nature
of schools and condemn all attacks and threats of
attacks against them, which contravene international
humanitarian law and the right to education. We call
on the parties to armed conflict to refrain from such
actions and hope that the Secretary-General will
continue to follow up and report, among other things, on
the military use of schools and hospitals. In this regard,
we view positively the preparation and implementation
of the Lucens Guidelines, aimed at preventing the
military use of schools and universities during armed
conflicts. We also believe that the issue ofthe protection
of education and educational establishments should be
addressed in ceasefire agreements and post-conflict
agendas.

Finally, given the transnational character of many
non-State armed groups, collective action is imperative
so that the multilateral system can deal effectively with
the threats facing children in armed conflict. This must
lead to a strengthening of cooperation and coordination
among regional and subregional organizations,
information-sharing, joint regional actions and
regional policies for the prevention and protection of
children, including the special needs of girls, as was
highlighted during the open debate held on 30 January
(see S/PV.7374).

