Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to commend Mr. Geir Pedersen,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for
the quality of his first briefing of the Council in a public
meeting, and to wish him every success in carrying out
his mission.

Cote d'Ivoire has noted with concern the violations
of the agreement reached between Russia and Turkey
on 17 September 2018 establishing a de-escalation
zone in Idlib governorate, particularly by the jihadist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham, which has strengthened
its control over more than 90 per cent of the area.
The violation of that agreement undermines efforts
to stabilize the situation in the Idlib de-escalation
zone and could jeopardize the smooth running of the
political process expected to lead to the formation of
the constitutional committee.

My country is also concerned about the military
escalation in the Hajin region, in south-east Deir ez-
Zor governorate, where military operations against the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant have continued
and affected nearly 25,000 displaced persons from that
region. In that adverse context, Cote d'Ivoire urges the
parties to the conflict to cease hostilities and favour
the path of dialogue to ensure lasting peace in the
Syrian Arab Republic. It wishes to remind the warring
parties of their obligation to respect human rights and
international humanitarian law, whose violations shall
not go unpunished, whoever the perpetrators may be.

My country therefore calls on all actors in the Syrian
conflict, civil society and the international community
to cooperate fully with the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. In that
regard, my delegation welcomes the recognition of
the authority of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons to identify the perpetrators of
chemical-weapons use in Syria, which occurred at the
end of the fourth special session of the Conference of
the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
held in The Hague on 27 June 2018.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes all initiatives aimed at the
political settlement of the Syrian crisis, including the
holding of the tripartite summit on 14 February 2019,
held in Sochi, and it takes note of the resulting final
communique. Similarly, my country welcomes the
progress made within the pilot project of the working
group established by the Astana process and the United
Nations to investigate the fate of missing persons and
release detainees. That progress, as demonstrated by
prisoner exchanges between the Syrian Government
and armed groups between 24 November 2018 and
12 February 2019, contributes to building trust between
the parties to the conflict and creating the necessary
conditions for the continuation of the political process.

In conclusion, my country reiterates its full
support for the efforts of Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General, and calls on the
Syrian parties to strengthen their cooperation with him
in order to stimulate new momentum in the political
process, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). It
also encourages the guarantors of the complementary
processes in Astana and Sochi to continue their efforts
towards a definitive and lasting solution to the crisis
in Syria.

Lastly, it urges the parties to the conflict to agree
on the effective establishment of the constitutional
committee to draft the new constitution with a view
to holding free and impartial elections under the
supervision of the United Nations.

