Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Council for the month of April. We trust your
leadership and we are confident in your wisdom. I
would also like to thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for his
comprehensive briefing.

Let me first assure you that Lebanon remains
totally committed to the full implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006) and, in this regard, commends
the role of United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

As for the situation in Syria, Lebanon continues
to stand by its principled position of support for Syria's
unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity and for the
right of its people to live in freedom, safety and
security. Accordingly, Lebanon has been supportive of
the mission entrusted to the League of Arab Nations
and United Nations Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi
Annan.

Turning to the Arab-Israeli conflict now, let me
underline that, in spite of its shortcomings, which are
numerous, the latest Quartet statement issued 11 April
(see SG/2182) should be commended for having
reminded both parties of their obligations under the
Road Map. However, since the statement did not spell
out what those obligations are, let me recall that, with
regard to settlements, the Road Map provides that the
"Government of Israel immediately dismantles
settlement outposts erected since March 2001" and that
"consistent with the Mitchell report, the Government
of Israel freezes all settlement activity, including the
natural growth of settlements". Furthermore, in its
latest statement, and in line with its 23 September
statement, the Quartet called upon the parties to refrain
from provocative actions, if negotiations are to be
effective.

I shall not go over the long list of newly erected
so-called outposts, or of ongoing settlement activities.
However, let me draw the Council's attention to the
latest facts. On 4 April, Israel issued tenders for the
construction of 1,121 new settlement units in occupied
Arab lands: 872 new houses in Jabal Abu Ghneim,
renamed now Har Homa, in East Jerusalem; 180 in
Givat Zeev, just to the north of Jerusalem in the West
Bank; and 69 in Katzrin, in the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights.

As for outposts, according to the Israeli daily
Haaretz of this past Thursday, 19 April, Israeli settlers
have built 20 new houses on privately owned
Palestinian land, in the outpost known as Ulpana in
Beit El settlement. In addition, despite orders from the
Civil Administration of the Israeli Defense Ministry
issued in 2011 to stop construction in the Mitspeh
Kramim outpost, new houses have been completed and
are now occupied by Israeli settlers. The settlers simply
ignore the order, and the Israeli army obviously
ignored the ongoing construction. Haaretz also
reported that following the recommendation of
Defence Minister Barak, the Israeli Prime Minister,
Mr. Netanyahu, will be asking his Cabinet to vote on a
plan to "legalize" the status of three West Bank
outposts - Bruchin, Sansana and Rechalim.

Allow me to repeat the two questions I asked
during our last open debate on the Middle East (see S/PV.6706). Are not such activities clearly inconsistent
with the road map obligations? Are they not clearly
provocative? These are not rhetorical questions. In fact,
we strongly believe that the Council should respond to
those questions. By not doing so the Council will
regrettably yet again fail to stand up to its obligation to
meet its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace
and security in our part of the world.

I also draw attention to the latest report, issued a
month ago on 12 March by the United Nations Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
in the occupied Palestinian territory under the title
"How Dispossession Happens." In addressing the
humanitarian impact of the takeover of Palestinian
water springs by Israeli settlers, the report shows how
in recent years a growing number of springs in the

vicinity of Israeli settlements throughout the West
Bank have become targets of settler activities, which
has eliminated or put at risk access to the springs and
their use by Palestinians.

A survey carried out by OCHA in the course of
2011 identified a total of 56 such springs, the large
majority of which are located in Area C, on land
parcels recorded by the Israeli Civil Administration as
privately owned by Palestinians. According to the
report, 30 of the springs were found to be under full
settler control, with no Palestinian access to them. In
22 of the 30 cases, Palestinians have been deterred
from accessing the springs by acts of intimidation,
threats and violence perpetrated by Israeli settlers. As
for the remaining eight springs under full settler
control, Palestinian access has, in four cases, been
prevented by physical obstacles, including fencing off
the spring areas, leading to a de facto annexation to the
settlement, and in the other four by isolating the areas
from the rest of the West Bank by the wall and their
subsequent designation as closed military zones.

According to the OCHA report, the other 26
springs are at risk of settler takeover, including regular
patrolling by the security coordinators of settlements.
Some springs have been turned into tourist attractions
for settlers. The OCHA report leaves no doubt about
how

"the takeover and development of springs by
settlers have multiple ramifications on the daily
lives of Palestinians living in affected areas,
including the erosion of their agricultural
livelihoods".

The report adds that, despite their declining yield,

"the springs have remained the single largest
water source for irrigation and a significant
source for watering livestock. Albeit to a lesser
extent, springs are also a source of water for
domestic consumption. Households not connected
to the water network, or those supplied on an
irregular basis, rely on them as a coping
mechanism to meet domestic needs, particularly
during the summer."

Such Israeli practices are in clear violation of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international human rights law. In that regard, I need
not remind the Council of General Assembly resolution
64/292, on the human right to water and sanitation. In
paragraph 1, the resolution "recognizes the right to safe
and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human
right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and
all human rights".

The Security Council should condemn in the
strongest terms such Israeli practices and uphold the
indisputable right of the Palestinians to the water in
their own land. By not doing so the Council will
regrettably also fail to stand up for its obligation to
meet its responsibilities in the maintenance of peace
and security in our part of the world.

Let me conclude by saying that inasmuch as we
consider the road map statement commendable in
calling for all parties to abide by their road map
obligations, we also find it profoundly inappropriate
that it uses such a term as "a future Palestinian State".
The State of Palestine is not an entity to come into
being in the future. It exists at the present time. As a
matter of fact, the State of Palestine has been
recognized as such by a large majority of the States
Members of the United Nations. As a State it is a full
member of UNESCO. But the State of Palestine is an
occupied State. Hence it would not be enough for the
Council to recommend to the General Assembly the
admission of the State of Palestine to the United
Nations. It is also the Council's duty to ensure an end
to the occupation of the State of Palestine.

Accordingly, the question of Palestinian
statehood can in no way be subjected to the outcome of
negotiations between the Palestinians and the Israelis.
Otherwise, Israel, the occupying Power, would be
granted a right of veto over the right to self-
determination of the Palestinian people - a right that
was recognized by the General Assembly as inalienable
in 1974 in its resolution 3236 (XXXIX).

We all know that, ever since the idea of an
inalienable right made its first appearance in a political
document - none other than the 4 July 1776
Declaration of Independence of the United States of
America - it has been clear that what is meant by an
inalienable right is a right that can be neither
surrendered nor negotiated. In line with the words of
the chief author of the Declaration of Independence,
Thomas Jefferson, who wrote that nothing is
unchangeable but the inherent and inalienable rights of
man, we can safely assert that, in the case of Palestinian
self-determination, nothing is non-negotiable except
their inherent and inalienable right to a State.
