Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Polish presidency for organizing
today's meeting on the problem of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, a very important issue that
we should be addressing. We would also like to thank
Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Yves Daccord,
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, and Ms. Hanaa Edwar for their contributions
to our discussion.

We share the Secretary-General's desire to see us
unite our efforts to prevent conflict and protect civilians.
It is support for the central role played by the United
Nations, international law and traditional spiritual
and moral values that will enable us to make progress
on a unified agenda and overcome our differences.
However, to our great regret, today we are seeing an
extremely damaging trend towards an unprecedented
politicization of the humanitarian arena in international
relations. Despite all our efforts, thousands of civilians
continue to die during conflicts. The fact that a large
percentage of the victims are women, children and the
elderly, medical workers, journalists and humanitarian
personnel is especially worrying. These people's grief
instantly becomes a backdrop for political strategy
games in which constructive dialogue is subsumed
in a flood of unverified news items and primitive
judgments. Accusations appear and the guilty are
instantly designated. Some do not hesitate to support
their accusations with blatant misinformation from
dubious sources such as the notorious White Helmets,
for example. Hordes of so-called investigators appear
from somewhere with vague mandates from various
bodies, in most cases conducting their investigations
from a distance and on the basis of reports from
specially selected mass media and information from the
Internet. It is the rule for such so-called investigators
to have their own so-called top-secret informants and
sources who under no circumstances can be revealed.
We are simply asked to believe them. Unfortunately,
these games, which we have frequently been compelled
to witness even inside our Organization, contribute
nothing to achieving the noble goals of preventing and
minimizing the suffering of civilians. Such double
standards, alas, have been clearly evident in the
information disseminated about the military campaigns
in Syria, Iraq, Yemen, Afghanistan and other countries.

What is going on right now in Ukraine is
particularly painful for us. We will talk about that in
more detail on 29 May, when the Polish presidency is
planning a special briefing on Ukraine. But given the
topic of today's debate, I cannot omit to cite the tragic
numbers of civilian casualties, which Poland's Minister
for Foreign Affairs has also mentioned. As a result of
the armed conflict unleashed by Kyiv against its own
population in south-east Ukraine since April 2014,
more than 2,500 civilians have perished, 105 of whom
died in 2017 and 10 so far this year. As many as 9,000
people have been injured, and hundreds are missing
without trace. There are at least 138 children among
the dead, 109 of whom died in Donetsk and Luhansk.
The intensity of Kyiv's shelling of residential areas
has noticeably increased lately. A number of Western
countries have played a not insignificant part in this
through their open connivance in Kyiv's violations of
the Minsk agreements, which are the only legal basis
for a settlement of the situation in eastern Ukraine.

The activities of humanitarian agencies are an
important factor in the protection of civilians. Their
work should be founded on the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic humanitarian principles and
should supplement efforts to political solutions to
conflicts. In that context, two of the fundamental
principles at issue are respect for the sovereignty of
States and non-interference in their internal affairs. We
continue to be seriously concerned about attempts to
freely interpret the norms of international humanitarian
law with regard to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict, as well as their association with all kinds of
concepts. Just recently, one delegation on the Security
Council pulled the concept of so-called humanitarian
intervention out of thin air. A missile attack on the
territory of another State was explained by humanitarian
considerations, clearly out of concern for those being
shelled, of course. I would therefore like to reaffirm our
position that using any means of response with the aim
of protecting civilians, particular any means involving
the use of force, is possible only if it is sanctioned by
the Security Council and is in strict accordance with
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.

IfI may, I would also like to comment on what the
Polish Foreign Minister said regarding the proposed
initiative to voluntarily give up the right of veto in the
case of atrocities and the most serious crimes. As the
Council is aware, the institution of the veto is a very
important component of the system of checks and
balances in the United Nations, and a core element
of our mechanism for collective decision-making that
encourages Council members to seek compromises. For
those who possess it, the permanent members of the
Council, having the right ofveto is notjust a prerogative,
it is also a great obligation and responsibility. The use of
the veto has more than once spared the United Nations
from an association with dubious ventures that resulted
in the suffering of civilians. The world frequently still
feels the consequences of such ventures.

