Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jeremie, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and thank him for his statement. I
also thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/514). I would like to express our appreciation
to Acting Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Farid Zarif for his briefing and to Mr. Hoxhaj
for his remarks.

Brazil also takes this opportunity to convey our
gratitude to Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his competent
work as Special Representative for Kosovo and wish
him success in his new activities.

We are pleased with the intensification of the
discussions between Belgrade and Pristina and their
willingness to bring about concrete results. Progress in
the areas of civil registry, freedom of movement and
academic certification, among others, is commendable
and can provide tangible improvements to the daily
lives of the population in Kosovo. These agreements
have the potential to pave the way for the discussion of
outstanding political issues that need to be addressed.
Dialogue is the only way to create peace, security and
stability in the region.

Notwithstanding these positive developments, we
are concerned about the increasing tension in northern
Kosovo. All stakeholders must be extremely careful at
this stage to avoid any unnecessary aggravation of the
situation. We are also worried about the increase in the
number of incidents involving minority communities
and international personnel throughout the region. The
relevant authorities must do everything in their power
to discourage these actions.

Regarding humanitarian and human rights issues,
we welcome the resumption of the activities of the
Working Group on Missing Persons on an issue that is
so important to the local population. On the other hand,
we share the Secretary-General's concern over the low
number of voluntary returns to the region, despite
efforts in that regard.

Brazil remains concerned about the allegations of
inhuman treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. We are encouraged by the

willingness of the parties to cooperate in the
investigation of these cases, which must be subject to
independent and credible scrutiny. In that regard, we
remain open to the possibility of exploring options that
take into account the need to involve various
jurisdictions and the importance of ensuring
consistency with resolution 1244 (1999).

Brazil reaffirms its belief that resolution 1244
(1999) offers the appropriate framework for a
negotiated settlement that can address tensions in the
region. We are confident that a fair and legitimate
solution can be reached under the auspices of the
Security Council through the support of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and regional organizations. The work of
UNMIK is crucial to the stability of the region. The
Mission must have complete safety to carry out its
important functions.

The Council should continue to keep political
developments in Kosovo under close review and
encourage further dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina. The long-term benefits of this dialogue must
be made evident to all stakeholders, regardless of
discussions on yet unresolved political issues.

