Mr. Trelawny: The Secretary-General of the
International Maritime Organization (IMO), Mr. Kitack
Lim, thanks the President of the Security Council and the
Government of Ukraine for the invitation to participate
in this high-level open debate on the protection of
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. He very
much regrets that he is unable to be here in person, but
has asked me to deliver his statement.

IMO is a specialized agency of the United Nations
responsible for the safety, security and efficiency of
international maritime transport and the protection of
the marine environment. Within the legal framework
for the protection of critical infrastructure, IMO is
the responsible organization for the Convention on
Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic; the
International Convention for the Safety of Life at
Sea, including the associated International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code; and the 1988 and 2005
Conventions for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts
against the Safety of Maritime Navigation, and their
associated Protocols for the Suppression of Unlawful
Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms located on
the Continental Shelf. Together, these international
instruments provide a firm legal basis, both for
allowing Parties to bring perpetrators of incidents to
justice and for IMO activities in the field of maritime
security, including active collaboration with the work
of the Security Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and the General Assembly's
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force.

In the context of security, IMO focuses on what
the civil maritime industry - that is, both the shipping
and port sectors - and the offshore sector can do
to protect themselves and others against possible
maritime security threats, including acts of terrorism,
and to assist Governments through the implementation
of appropriate security measures to protect global
maritime trade. The main focus is on preventive security
through a continuous risk-management process, which
includes procedures for deterrence and threat transfer,
rather than countering terrorism per se.

The special measures to enhance maritime security,
detailed in chapter XI-2 of the International Convention
for the Safety of Life at Sea and the International Ship
and Port Facility Security Code, provide a practical,
risk-based framework not only for maritime security,
but also for wider application. Although the Convention
addresses the safety of life at sea and thereby provides
jurisdictional challenges ashore, where most of the
preventative security measures are applied, IMO
addressed this by leaving it to Member States to define
the geographical limits oftheir port facilities, including
their application to offshore installations. IMO also
cooperated with the International Labour Organization
(ILO) to develop a Code of Practice on Security in Ports,
which effectively extended the International Ship and
Port Facility Security Code into the wider port area;
and with the World Customs Organization on container
security, which led to the development and adoption
in June 2005 of the SAFE Framework of Standards to
Secure and Facilitate Global Trade.

In terms of the practical implementation of
chapter Xl-2 of the International Convention and the
International Ship and Port Facility SecurityCode, it
would be fair to say that the main challenges are in the
port facilities. Unlike on ships, where an existing safety
culture was relatively easy to evolve into a security
culture, the security structure in ports is generally far
more complex, involving many players from different
governmental, law enforcement and private entities.
Many countries view ports as critical infrastructure
and their security as a facet of national security.
However, without clear national and local legislation,
policies and direction coordinating the activities of all
key stakeholders, security responses in ports are, at
best, fragmented.

Critical to the success of port and port facility
security regimes, be they for protecting port
infrastructure against terrorist attack, countering theft
and other criminal activity, or preventing access to ships
by terrorists, drug smugglers or stowaways, is a well-
coordinated, risk-based preventive strategy. Although
IMO has no mandate to assess the compliance of port
facilities with chapter Xl-2 of the Convention and the
International Ship and Port Facility Security Code per
se, it is readily apparent that the absence of port and
port facility security committees is an indicator of a
lack of inter-agency cooperation and thus of poor port
facility security. The promotion of such coordination
mechanisms, consistent with the ILO/IMO Code of
Practice and other guidance issued by IMO, forms the
cornerstone of the organization's work on promoting
better compliance with chapter X1-2 and the Code.

In fact, since 2001 IMO has developed a range
of guidance, self-assessment tools and training
materials for the protection of ports, ships and offshore
installations. These include model courses for port
facility security officers; guidelines on training
and certification for port facility security officers;
guidance on voluntary self-assessment by Convention
Contracting Governments and by port facilities; and
consolidated guidance in the form of the Guide to
Maritime Security and the Code, published in 2012.
IMO has also developed a number of training packages
on ship and port security, including the conduct of
drills and exercises and the development of maritime
security legislation, which are delivered upon request
from member Governments. We also have a vibrant
programme of technical cooperation activities to assist
Member States to develop capacity and capability to
deter, prevent, detect and respond to security threats,
which complements our 2017 World Maritime Day
theme, "IMO: Connecting ships, ports and people".

The world has changed since the introduction of the
special measures to enhance maritime security. Ongoing
threats to the port, shipping and offshore sectors and
related infrastructure continue to evolve. The responses
to these challenges have also changed. The Millennium
Development Goals for developing countries have
been replaced by the Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs) for global application. In this context, IMO
actively assists States to address SDG 9 with respect
to improving the resilience of infrastructure and other
key SDGs. The focus on reactive efforts to counter
terrorism have been replaced by a focus on proactive
measures to prevent terrorism in the first place.

There is also a need to focus on the opportunities
offered by the shipping sector. That involves looking at
ports and shipping as wealth-creators within the context
of economic development. In this regard, efficient
and effective port safety and security is becoming
increasingly important and marketable.

One of the biggest challenges to effective
implementation of maritime security and maritime
law enforcement measures is that they are seen as
departmental issues - issues for the navy, coast guard,
police, port authority, maritime authority, or customs
and border control - with those agencies competing
for scarce resources, rather than being part of a
national, multi-agency response to developing the port
and maritime sector.

Through our programme of capacity-building
initiatives to enhance maritime security, IMO's aim is
to work with developed and developing countries, the
shipping industry and public and private ports with a
view to promoting best practices and building bridges
between the diverse actors. At the national level,
these include enhancing the efficiency of the whole
maritime sector by improving cooperation between
ports and ships and developing a closer partnership
between the two sectors; raising global standards and
setting norms for the safety, security and efficiency
of ports and port and coastal State authorities; and
improving standardization of port procedures through
identifying and developing best practice guidance and
training materials.

For the longer- term development of the whole
maritime sector, IMO programmes - such as our
support to the Yaounde' process in West and Central
Africa, pursuant to resolutions 2018 (2011) and 2039
(2012), and the Jeddah Amendment to the Djibouti
Code of Conduct 2017, adopted in January - focus on
challenging sea-blindness and encouraging investment
in the whole of the maritime sector. This includes
encouraging national authorities to break down silos
and switch from a departmental focus to a national
focus and to engage with the private sector. We need
not only to encourage the port sector input to national
maritime business plans and national and regional
maritime and maritime security strategies, but to
promote the concept of the port as a service-provider to
ships, addressing the us-and-them attitude.

In order to do that, it is vital that national
Governments assure their national oversight capability
for safety and security and promote the application of
the Code and the ILO/IMO Code of Practice in Ports
and Offshore Installations. That includes promoting
the establishment of port security and facilitation
advisory committees as a vehicle for inter-agency
cooperation for wider security that addresses all
security-related threats, including theft, drugs, illegal
wildlife, stowaways, migrant smuggling and terrorism,
with Government oversight ensuring effectiveness,
an approach that lends itself to the protection of other
sectors' critical infrastructure.

Effective security systems require effective
procedures, appropriate equipment and, above all,
adequately trained and motivated people. At the
lowest level, that includes implementing frameworks
and developing tools for raising security awareness
among all employees. However, in order to ensure the
establishment better and more sustainable security
systems, Governments and the port sector should
develop port security as a career, not just ajob, with a
focus on developing graduated training packages and
programmes aimed at enabling personnel to progress
from patrolling and guarding to security supervisory
and management roles. There is also significant benefit
to be had from developing port-facility security-officer
networks designed to help officers exchange best
practices and learn from one another.

Although the two modes of transport differ,
there are many key similarities between aviation
and maritime security, not the least of which
are the importance of member States adopting a
multi-agency, whole-of-Government approach to the
organization of security, including the protection of
vital infrastructure; the importance of addressing the
whole security system, that is, through threat, risk and
vulnerability assessments; the selection, training and
certification of personnel; and equipment, procedures
and holistic oversight. To those can be added the need
for contingency and resilience planning, and for the
protection of transport systems and infrastructure to
be seen as an enabler of economic development, thus
helping to meet sustainable development goals and
prevent violent extremism.

As outlined, IMO's maritime security initiatives,
conducted in cooperation with the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, INTERPOL and others,
promote such approaches and, in particular, encourage
the establishment of national maritime security and
facilitation committees, national security plans and
contingency plans endorsed at the highest level, as
well as regional communication between national
focal points and more comprehensive training and
certification programmes for security personnel
working at key national points.

