Mr. Gata Mavita wa Lufuta (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): First of all, I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the accession of
your country, Sweden, to the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January 2017, and to tell you
how much my delegation and I are honoured to see you
presiding over the deliberations of the Council today. I
would next like to thank you, Sir, as well, for giving me
an opportunity to address the Council at this meeting
on the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Finally, I take this opportunity to pay tribute to
your predecessor, His Excellency Mr. Roman Oyarzun
Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain, who
managed with devotion and competence the discussions
in the Council last month.

My delegation takes note of the report (S/2016/833)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo, which is before the Council for its
consideration, and wishes to thank Mr. Herve Ladsous,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
who introduced it. While we fully appreciate the
content of the report, we feel it is important to revisit a
number of aspects that he raised in order to make a few
brief comments. I will begin by discussing the issue of
dialogue and the political agreement, developments in
the electoral process, the security situation in relation
to the presence of armed groups, and the disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement process.

Let me remind you, Mr. President, of the Council's
visit to Kinshasa in November, during which its
members conferred with various Congolese political
actors. During the meeting that the Council held with
the highest authority in my country, His Excellency
Mr. Joseph Kabila Kabange, President of the Republic,
the President told members about the 18 October 2016
political agreement signed by the parties to the national
dialogue, which took place at Cite de l'Union Africaine,
noting that the agreement was open for accession to all
Congolese political entities. With the aim of perfecting
the agreement by seeking greater inclusiveness, the
President granted a mission of good offices to the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO).

The signing of the political agreement, on
31 December 2016, among the Majorite' presidentielle,
the opposition having participated in the dialogue at the
Cite de l'Union Africaine and the opposition regrouped
under the banner of the so-called Rassemblement et
allies, marks an important step for my country towards
consensus on the organization of the elections and
the management of the transition of the country in a
calm climate. In order to facilitate its implementation,
as Council members know, the President renewed
his confidence in CENCO and asked it to continue
consultations with the political class as a whole to
define the practical modalities for the implementation
of the agreement.

With regard to the elections, in his address to the
nation on 31 December 2016, the President expressed,
on the basis of the CENCO political agreement, his
determination to continue without delay the process
already under way for the organization of timely
elections, in accordance with the timetable to be set
by the National Independent Electoral Commission
(CENI). In that context, the process of revising the
electoral rolls, begun in July 2016, is continuing
throughout the various provinces of the country. As
previously reported to the Council (see S/PV.7826), 12
of the country's 26 provinces are already covered by
enrolment operations. My Government wishes to thank
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
for the continued substantial logistical support it has
provided the CENI as part of those efforts.

On the security front, the report under review
highlights the continuing presence in the east of our
country of foreign residual negative forces, such
as terrorists from the Allied Democratic Forces,
the Forces democratiques de libe'ration du Rwanda
(FDLR), the Lord's Resistance Army and some national
armed groups. The Forces armees de la Republique
democratique du Congo (FARDC), with the assistance
of MONUSCO, has made considerable efforts against
those negative forces and armed groups. As the report
points out, our army has made many sacrifices in
this struggle. Nevertheless, it remains determined to
continue the fight until complete eradication to allow
our citizens residing in that part of the country to live
in peace in a sustainable way.

To achieve that objective, we believe that together
we must review our working methods. In order to
eradicate all of the armed groups, the Council has often
insisted on collaboration between the FARDC and
MONUSCO. It seems to us that, despite the resumption
of collaboration, the results are falling short of what
we expected. We believe that the transformation of the
force engaged in MONUSCO, notably the replacement
of the Intervention Brigade with the rapidly deployable
battalions, has not been effective in this struggle.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo, my
country, wishes to live in peace and to safeguard its
good relations with all neighbouring States. In this
perspective, you will agree with us, Mr. President,
that, while my country is working hard to eradicate
the foreign negative forces mentioned previously, it is
not normal that, because of the forces that have come
to assist it to bring home peace, its territory has once
again become a sanctuary for armed combatants from
a neighbouring country. Indeed, as Council members
know, South Sudanese fighters are now on Congolese
territory. By a letter of9 January 2017, we informed the
Council of the conditions under which those combatants
arrived. Without going into detail on the matter, my
Government would be grateful to the Council, taking
into account the responsibility of the United Nations in
this situation to take all the measures deemed necessary,
as has already been communicated to MONUSCO in the
note verbale sent to it on 1 October 2016, to evacuate
those fighters from our territory.

The disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and resettlement process is at the heart of peacekeeping
activities, not only to achieve stability in the sectors
affected by the conflict, but also to eliminate the threat
posed by armed groups. To that end, as Ijust said, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot continue to
be an oasis for foreign armed groups. Neighbouring
countries must adopt policies that encourage the return
of their nationals living in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, which will reduce tension and remove
suspicion and thereby restore confidence in the region
and peace in the eastern part ofthe Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The policy of the voluntary surrender of foreign
armed groups applied to date has shown its limits.
We need to examine and see how fast the repatriation
process can be accelerated. In that context, the process
of repatriating the FDLR and their families in the
transit camps in Kanyabayonga, North Kivu, Walungu,
South Kivu, and in Kisangani in Tshopo, must also be
accelerated. My Government cannot understand the
fact that the appeals launched some years ago to the
international community for the repatriation of those
combatants have not yet received a favourable reply. In
the same vein, my Government wishes to put an end to
the case of the Mouvement du 23 mars in Uganda and
Rwanda, and calls on these two neighbouring States,
which continue to accommodate them, to facilitate
their repatriation.

I cannot end my remarks without once again
expressing to the Council the gratitude of the people
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the efforts made by the United Nations
to preserve the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
our country and to guarantee its peace and stability.
Finally, on the threshold of this new year, my delegation
wishes to express to all the members of the Council its
best wishes for 2017.

