The Secretary-General: Thank you for the
opportunity to address the Council on this pressing
challenge.

The situation in Somalia remains fragile, but
there are glimmers of hope. Notwithstanding recent
internal divisions, the Transitional Federal Government
(TFG) remains committed to peace and reconciliation.
The President has appointed a new Prime Minister, and
I urge the Parliament to endorse him, so as to allow a
new Government to come into place without delay.

The Government is also developing its security
sector institutions. It is carrying out an offensive
against the insurgents, and has taken over some main
cities previously occupied by them. Reports of
residents taking down the Al Shabaab flags that had
been flying in the town of Belet Hawo, and hoisting the
Somali national flag instead, are a sign of the Somali
people's yearning for peace and security.

These actions - some concrete, others more
symbolic, including the resumption of broadcasting by
Radio Mogadishu and the rehabilitation of some key
buildings - demonstrate the Government's resolve to
meet those aspirations, in partnership with the
international community.

At the same time, the obstacles are well known.
Two million people, including 1.4 million who have
been displaced internally since 2007, need emergency
aid. Continuing insecurity and conflict in parts of the
country are attracting foreign extremist elements. This
poses a threat not only to Somalia, but to the region,
the continent and beyond. We have all seen what can
happen when terrorists and others take advantage of a
country's fragility to establish a haven.

Support to the TFG, its reconciliation efforts and
its fight against extremism will go a long way, but the
international community must act now if it is to make a
difference. The United Nations will continue to work
towards achieving the political objectives of the
Djibouti peace process in the following four key areas.

First, it must support the outreach and
reconciliation efforts of the TFG with those outside the
peace process. To sustain these efforts, my Special
Representative, Augustine Mahiga, has been making
regular visits to Mogadishu and States in the region.
Under his leadership, the United Nations Political
Office for Somalia (UNPOS) is encouraging dialogue
10-59578
with entities that renounce violence and are still out of
the Djibouti political process.

Secondly, it must support the TFG in completing
the priority tasks outlined in the Transitional Federal
Charter, in particular consultations on the constitutions.
As recommended at the International Contact Group
meeting in Madrid on 27 September, the TFG has
agreed to prepare a road map with a prioritized
comprehensive strategy, political objectives and
timelines for the remainder of the transition. UNPOS
will facilitate this process.

Thirdly, it must advance the implementation of
agreements between the TFG and other regional
authorities. In order to be effective in ensuring that this
process happens, we are beefing up our political
presence in Puntland and Somaliland.

Fourthly, it must develop functioning State
institutions. In addition to holding more meetings of
the High-Level Committee and the Joint Security
Committee inside Somalia, UNPOS and the country
team will focus on strengthening the capacities of the
various ministries.

In each of these areas, the United Nations will
continue its light footprint approach in order to be
closer to the Somali people and authorities. We will
also ensure that United Nations efforts are well
coordinated, in line with my policy of integrating
United Nations operations. As I indicated in my most
recent report to the Security Council (S/2010/447), in
the coming months I intend to submit for the Council's
consideration proposals for an integrated United
Nations presence.

I commend the African Union (AU) and its
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for their efforts in
assisting the TFG in its security and military efforts.
The United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. has
been providing critical logistics support to AMISOM,
making it a better-equipped military force. As we will
hear shortly from Commissioner Lamamra, AMISOM's
military strategy aims at assisting the TFG in
establishing professional security sector institutions,
implementing its agreements with other groups and
authorities, creating humanitarian space and delivering
basic services to the people. This strategy fully
supports and complements the overall political strategy
for Somalia.
10-59578

However, if AMISOM. is to be enabled to be an
ever more effective partner, further international help
will be needed. In my most recent report to the
Council, I expressed concern about the substantial
resource gaps that continue to have an adverse impact
on the Mission. Extensive consultations have taken
place - notably last month's informal meeting of
members of the Security Council, major donors and
other partners, jointly convened by the Under-
Secretaries-General for Political Affairs and Field
Support - aimed at resolving the lack of predictable
and sufficient funding. The issue of funding for
AMISOM. also featured prominently in statements
delivered at the mini-summit I convened during the
general debate of the General Assembly, and again
during the recent Council mission to Africa.

Following these consultations, the report of the
Chairperson of the Commission of the African Union is
now before the Council. The report calls for significant
additional support for AMISOM. to be funded through
the assessed contributions of States Member of the
United Nations.

I encourage the Council to take the bold and
courageous decisions necessary to enhance the capacity
of AMISOM. to deliver more effectively on its
mandate. The Security Council may wish to consider
phasing the additional support in line with the phases
outlined in Chairperson Ping's report. This approach
would allow for periodic review of the impact of the
additional United Nations support. My Special
Representative is working closely with the AU and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to ensure
coherence between their military strategy and the
international community's political objectives, as
outlined in the Djibouti Agreement.

In return, I urge the Somali authorities to
consolidate their efforts and unite against the threat of
extremism. The TFG must also start to deliver
improved services to the Somali people, pay salaries to
the security forces, and build up its security sector
institutions. The support of the international
community is critical in this regard.

In a country that has been in conflict for two
decades, peace requires sustained efforts and a long-
term strategy. I pay tribute to all those contributing to
that goal: the African Union Mission in Somalia,
countries that have contributed troops, Somalia's
neighbours, and Member States that have shown great

commitment in supporting Somalia and the peace
process.

