Mr. Yaakob (Malaysia): At the outset, I would like
to express our delegation's profound indignation at the
senseless attack in Manchester which killed at least
22 innocent people, including an 8-year-old child. We
also condemn strongly the recent attacks that caused
casualties in Jakarta and Marawi. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the victims, the families and the people
of the United Kingdom, Indonesia and the Philippines
during these trying times.

Wejoinotherspeakersinexpressingourappreciation
to the Secretary-General, the Vice-President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Deputy Executive Director for Advocacy of Human
Rights Watch for their respective briefings. Their
invaluable insights on the unpredictable risks faced
by medical personnel and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict are indeed helpful.

We continue to read frequent media reports of
callous and egregious attacks on health-care personnel
and facilities. However, we remain hopeful that
resolution 2286 (2016), adopted last May, will act as
a deterrent against such violent acts. These attacks,
deliberate or otherwise, against the wounded and sick,
medical personnel and health-care facilities across
many conflicts, reflect the current grim realities and
a total disrespect for international humanitarian law. It
would not be far-fetched to say that these attacks are
being used as a tactic of war.

This trend, which we are seeing in various
conflicts seemingly without end or without limit, is
worthy of a greater and more appropriate response,
including concrete actions that must goes further
than mere condemnation of such egregious acts. We
therefore reiterate our call on the Council to carry out
its obligation to enhance its efforts to prevent these acts
of violence, including by implementing the Secretary-
General's recommendation for a full, prompt, impartial,
independent and effective investigation into any attack
against a health-care system. My delegation is also of
the view that those with influence over conflicting
parties should use all available tools at their disposal,
through either diplomatic, political or economic
means, to leverage enhancement of the protection of
medical personnel.

We are not oblivious to the fact that most warring
parties continue to blatantly disregard international
humanitarian law, nor do they have respect for medical
neutrality. Given the bleak outlook for civilians, and
particularly children, as a result of systematic targeting
ofmedical facilities in conflict situations, accountability
is a key question that requires the urgent attention of
all stakeholders, particularly from the Council and the
international community. In addition, the establishment
of international fact-finding missions, inter alia, should
be carried out in line with the Geneva Conventions to
investigate allegations of serious violations, bring the
perpetrators to justice, enhance accountability and
address impunity.

We would like to pay our tribute to fallen medical
personnel who have lost their lives in the protection
of others. Our utmost gratitude also goes to all parties
on the ground, particularly peacekeepers and health-
care personnel stationed in conflict zones. As we seek
to shield the very persons protecting civilians at large,
protection of medical personnel and health facilities
should always remain high on the Council's agenda.
The Security Council must take timely actions in
defending and protecting all human lives in situations
of armed conflict, an undertaking that Malaysia is fully
committed to pursuing.

