Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
would like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury for

 

presenting the report of the Security Council mission to
Kosovo. Every paragraph of this report is perfect. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Chowdhury for the manner
in which he was able to convey the sentiments and message
of the Security Council with authority and force.

At the outset, I would like to raise a procedural point
that is of great importance to France. As with the 9 May
meeting on Bosnia and Herzegovina, today's meeting is also
being held without either the European Union States that
are not members of Council or the Presidency of the
European Union being able to speak. Those States have not
been able to speak to the Council about Kosovo for almost
a year - in fact, since the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999). There is no good reason for this. I repeat, there is
no good reason for this situation, given that the European
Union and its member States are by far the major
contributors to Kosovo, making an overall contribution of
8 billion euros for the years 1999-2000.

The Security Council mission to Kosovo was
necessary and useful. It was necessary because of the
considerable stakes of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for the region
and for the United Nations. As regards the mission's utility:
it allowed for the gathering, in the field, of the opinions of
UNMIK's leaders; it provided a View of the extent of the
difficulties they are dealing with every day; it provided a
means of gauging the full range of popular sentiment, the
people's suffering as well their hopes; and, finally, it
provided an opportunity to urge moderation, the
renunciation of violence and cooperation with UNMIK. The
French delegation would therefore like to join others in
congratulating Ambassador Chowdhury once again on his
leadership of the mission. We would also like to thank the
Secretariat, which enabled the report to be distributed so
quickly.

Many of the points made in this precise and detailed
report deserve to be highlighted, and I shall come back to
them later. However, it would be a pity if the necessary
consideration of specific points resulted in our failure to
comment on the overall picture provided by the mission:
the finding that remarkable progress has been made by
UNMIK in less than a year and the justified tribute paid to
Mr. Kouchner, as well as the reminder that the task
entrusted to the mission is enormous, that reconciliation
will not be achieved overnight, that the wounds will take
time to heal and that impatience is not an appropriate
response in certain areas.

There is no need for me to repeat the conclusions
and proposals of the mission. They were made public
upon the mission's return, and everyone is familiar with
them. Suffice it to say that the very positive review of
UNMIK by the mission, which did not omit discussion of
areas where progress still needs to be made, is consistent
with our assessment.

We believe that some issues deserve special
attention, and in this connection I would like to raise five
points. First, the launching of the registration campaign
and the preparations for the forthcoming elections will, as
the report notes, require strict follow-up. The municipal
elections in the autumn will probably have a strong,
positive democratic impact. However, it is essential for us
to be very precise and rigorous with respect to the process
of preparing for the ballot and to the conditions under
which it will be held. The registration has begun under
favourable conditions. Clearly, as the Council mission
indicated, the difficulty lies in the current refusal of the
Kosovar Serbs to participate in the process. It will be
essential to do everything possible at the political level, as
well as to make material preparations, to bring about Serb
participation. The integration of Serbs into political life in
Kosovo is at stake, as are the preparations for conditions
for their future within Kosovo. More generally, the
participation of all the communities in Kosovo's future is
at stake.

My second comment relates to the fact that, to date,
thanks to the tireless efforts of the Special Representative,
the Serbian officials have decided to participate as
observers in meetings of the Interim Administrative
Council and the Kosovo Transitional Council. This is an
important development in the desired direction. The
mission also noted that there has been an improvement in
relations among communities at the local level, perhaps
because discussions at that level have been less political
and more practical in nature. Gradually, therefore, within
the context of co-administration, the conditions for
associating all communities in the administrative
management of Kosovo, and the foundations for their
coexistence, are being established. It is now necessary to
reinforce this trend. The benefits of this participation must
be clearly seen in an improvement in the daily lives of
the minorities so as to strengthen the position of those
who made such a courageous choice.

Thirdly, the improvement in the daily life of the
minorities is essential to enable not only those who wish
to remain in Kosovo, but also those who wish to return
and to live there on a permanent basis, to do so. This

 

improvement in daily life can be achieved simply by
allowing the minority population to move around freely and
to have access to schools, medical care and administrative
services. Above all, it can be achieved by strengthening
security conditions and providing protection against acts of
ethnic violence and criminal activities of all kinds. The
situation has improved, but unfortunately the mission found
that UNMIK does not have the means to establish the rule
of law. Priority should be given to sending international
judges and prosecutors and to ending the culture of
impunity. This is a simple requirement, but it is essential.
Those responsible for crimes must be prosecuted, and the
right to a fair trial must be ensured.

Fourthly, lasting reconciliation will also require a
proper response to the question of detainees and missing
persons, as the recent demonstrations in Pristina showed.
The insecurity felt by families encourages mistrust and a
desire for revenge. We therefore endorse the idea of
appointing a special envoy for missing and detained
persons, and coordination with the International Committee
of the Red Cross will clearly be necessary in this regard. It
goes without saying that the mandate of the special envoy
should relate to missing and detained persons from all
communities.

My fifth and final point is that relaunching economic
activities and providing families with the prospect of
finding work and returning to normal living conditions can
have a pacifying effect. Many businesses have already
started up again, and UNMIK has already done a great deal
to establish the necessary framework for economic recovery
and a resumption of investment. This is an aspect of the
settlement that should not be neglected.

