The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
I would like to begin by thanking Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
for his update on recent developments in the Middle
East. We also thank the Permanent Observer of
Palestine for his presence and for his contribution to
our debate.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates that a
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
can be achieved only on the basis of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the
Road Map, the agreements previously reached by the
parties and the Arab Peace Initiative.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is and will remain
committed to the two-State solution, with the State of
Israel and an independent, democratic, contiguous and
viable State of Palestine living side by side in peace
and security.

We do not recognize the annexation of East
Jerusalem and underline that the status of Jerusalem is
a permanent status issue that must be resolved through
negotiations between the parties. Jerusalem, the holy
city of the three great monotheistic religions -
Christianity, Judaism and Islam - should be the
symbol of peace, freedom of religious expression and
human rights. In that regard, we express our grave
concern at the prolonged and dangerous impasse in the
Middle East peace process, which has been aggravated
by the most recent incidents on the ground.

We must underline once again that all settlement
activities on occupied land are illegal under
international law and contrary to Israel's obligations
under the Road Map. We also condemn the destruction
of the Shepherd Hotel and the planned construction of
new illegal settlements. These activities represent an
obstacle on the road to comprehensive peace. We
therefore call upon Israel to end all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including East Jerusalem.

With regard to Gaza, we note the increased flow
of food and consumer goods into Gaza. However, we
continue to call for the immediate, sustained and
unconditional opening of crossings for the flow of
humanitarian aid, commercial goods and persons to
and from Gaza, in accordance with resolution 1860
(2009). Israel's security concerns, including those of a
complete stop to all violence and arms smuggling into
Gaza, must also be addressed.
We strongly condemn recent armed attacks on
civilians and wish to underline that civilian populations
must be protected. Therefore, we reiterate our call for
an immediate end to all violence and urge all parties to
exercise restraint and make every effort to avoid
further escalation.

I take this opportunity to reiterate our strong
belief that the functioning of the national unity
Government in Lebanon is the best guarantee of
preserving stability and promoting dialogue in the
country. Hence, it is essential at this critical juncture
that Lebanese leaders do their utmost to prevent a
political crisis and find a negotiated solution to the
current situation.

As a matter of principle, we fully support the
work and independence of international criminal courts
and tribunals, including the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon. Moreover, we reiterate our call on all parties
not to interfere in the Tribunal's work and not to
prejudge its outcome.

In conclusion, we would like to once again
emphasize our concerns at the current stalemate in the
peace process, which certainly cannot bring about the
positive environment necessary for long-term strategic
decision-making and lasting peace. At this critical
juncture, it is of utmost importance that the Israelis and
the Palestinians alike make the necessary decisions to
break the current impasse and return to direct talks as
the only way to secure a better future for their peoples.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

