Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): I want to thank the
delegation of the United States for convening this
seminal meeting to address a very critical dimension
of terrorism. Being the first Security Council meeting
held at the level of Finance Ministers, it underscores the
readiness of the Council to adopt a holistic approach
to examining terrorist financing. We acknowledge
the presence of participating Finance Ministers and
welcome them to the Security Council. I want to thank
the Secretary-General for sharing his perspectives on
this subject. Mr. Shin, President of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF), has provided significant insights
into countering the financing of terrorism, and we are
indebted to him.

The threat of terrorism is expanding and
intensifying. This scourge is affecting a greater number
of States throughout the entire world. Terrorist groups
have developed an insatiable appetite for territory. They
are increasingly laying claim to territory and, indeed,
setting up administrative structures to support them.
They continue to gain access to significant funding
streams, which they use to support their destabilizing
activities.

Nowhere is that more profound than in the case
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS). The
ISIS phenomenon demonstrates a new type of terrorist
organization. The group sustains its operations through
funding, illicitly generated within the territory that
it occupies. That is primarily from looting banks,
exploiting oil fields, kidnapping for ransom and robbing
economic assets. Those funding streams are crucial to
the activities of ISIS. Cutting them off is therefore of
critical importance and should be a top priority for the
international community. That also applies to Al-Qaida,
the Al-Nusrah Front, Al-Shabaab, Boko Haram and
other terrorist groups.

Criminalizing the financing of individual terrorists
and terrorist organizations, implementing the relevant
United Nations sanctions regime and multilateral
action are some of the most most potent weapons in
the arsenal of the international community in the
war against the financing of terrorism. International
cooperation must be strengthened to achieve the goal of
stifling the funding of ISIS and other terrorist groups.
A comprehensive approach within the scope of the rule
of law and due process, respecting all principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and international human
rights and humanitarian law, is essential. It requires
urgent action at the international, regional and national
levels.

At the international level, the Security Council
has provided effective leadership in countering the
financing of terrorism through instruments such
as Al-Qaida sanctions regime and resolution 2199
(2015). The Al-Qaida sanctions regime requires United
Nations Member States, among other things, to freeze
the assets of ISIS, Al-Qaida and other listed entities
and individuals. Resolution 2199 (2015) specifically
targets the oil trade, the trade in cultural property,
kidnapping for ransom and other sources of funding
exploited by terrorist groups. All of this demonstrates
the commitment of the Council to advancing the
countering terrorist financing agenda.

At the regional level, specifically in West Africa,
the Intergovernmental Action Group against Money
Laundering (GIABA) - an institution of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) - is
playing a key role in the efforts of ECOWAS member
States to comply with international standards
in combating money-laundering and countering
terrorist financing. In addition to its engagement
with Governments, GIABA also works with financial
institutions that operate in ECOWAS States in order to
strengthen their capacity to combat money-laundering
and the financing of terrorists. In response to the
threat of terrorism, ECOWAS has taken a variety of
measures, including the enactment of laws to combat
terrorist financing and the establishment of the
relevant institutional frameworks. They have enhanced
cooperation among their national agencies and with
international partners. They have also strengthened
their investigative and prosecutorial capacities.

At the national level, Nigeria has enacted legislation
to combat terrorist financing. In 2014, the Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism
in Banks and Other Financial Institutions Regulations
were adopted. The objective of the law is to provide
compliance guidelines for finance institutions to counter
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism that
are consistent with international best practices under
the regulatory purview of the Central Bank of Nigeria.
The regulation empowers the Central Bank to diligently
enforce measures to counter money-laundering and the
financing of terrorism, as well as to ensure compliance
by all financial institutions in the country. In addition
to setting up those units in all financial institutions and
banks, the regulation requires financial institutions
to report all suspicious transactions to the Nigerian
Financial Intelligence Unit. The regulation is consistent
with the recommendations of the Financial Action Task
Force concerning resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2178
(2014).

It is not sufficient to establish laws and regulations
to disrupt terrorist financing. We must ensure that they
work effectively. Governments must also approach
those laws in a whole-of-Government approach that
implements the United Nations sanctions regimes,
identifies terrorist financing risk and develops effective
ways to detect, disrupt, deter and prosecute terrorist
financing. We must devise mechanisms to identify,
monitor and take action against unregulated money
transfer services and strengthen the transparency
of financial flows. The ability to detect, analyse and
share information about financial flows is essential to
financial investigations.

National financial intelligence units and other
competent national authorities must be empowered
to effectively discharge these mandates. This may
require capacity-building intervention on the part of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and other relevant
entities. Those entities may also help to identify gaps
in Member States' competencies that diminish their
capacity to detect and disrupt terrorist financing, and
make appropriate recommendations on how to bridge
those gaps.

It is essential that the international community
develop a harmonized and decisive response to cut off
the sources of financing that sustain ISIS and other
terrorist groups. This is a critical first step in degrading
and defeating them. To achieve this, information
sharing, cooperation and coherence must be enhanced
at all levels. In that regard, we believe that resolution
2253 (2015), just adopted this afternoon, is a vital step
forward and a practice point of departure toward our
common purpose.
