Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the honour to
address the Security Council today on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and to start by
expressing the Movement's appreciation for the
briefing given today by Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs.

The Non-Aligned Movement believes that, at this
critical juncture, the international community must
renew its resolve to uphold its long-standing
commitment to the realization of the two-State solution
on the basis of international law and the terms of
reference of the peace process. There is an
international consensus that we must establish the
independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as
its capital, and achieve a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace in the region by September of
this year. Upholding that consensus and fulfilling our
commitments require urgent collective action on the
part of the General Assembly and the Security Council.

NAM. regrets that all serious efforts exerted to
date by international and regional parties, including the
Quartet, to resume and advance direct negotiations on
the Palestinian track towards that objective have failed.
It is equally alarming for the Movement that merely
convening a Quartet meeting is becoming an issue in
itself, with consecutive meetings postponed and no
apparent determination to put forth a clear and credible
vision for achieving the desired solution.

It is also highly regrettable that Israel, the
occupying Power, continues to defy the will of the
international community and pursues its illegal
settlement activities, along with many other policies
and practices, in a manner that constitutes the main
obstacle to all efforts to resume peace negotiations,
thus making it nearly impossible to realize the two-
State solution on the basis of the 1967 borders.

Israel's refusal to renew the unilateral
moratorium on settlement activities; the recent
announcements regarding the establishment of
thousands more settlement units at an unprecedented
pace; and the continued Israeli demolitions of
Palestinian property, including historic places such as
the Shepherd Hotel in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood
of occupied East Jerusalem, and of numerous
Palestinian homes in order to build new settlements in
the heart of the city all affirm Israel's expansionist
intentions and totally contradict the Israeli
Government's alleged commitment to the peace
process and its sincerity in achieving the two-State
solution.

All indications at the present time, including
provocative declarations, accelerated illegal
construction on the ground and the continued
revocation of Palestinian residency rights, reaffirm that
Israel is persisting with its unlawful attempts to alter
the geographic and demographic situation of the
occupied Palestinian territory, particularly East
Jerusalem, with a view to establishing new realities on
the ground that hamper the final status negotiations.
The Security Council should reject and condemn such
unlawful acts.
11-30799
The majority view of the Non-Aligned Movement
States that co-sponsored the draft resolution presented
earlier this year to the Security Council (S/2011/24) -
calling for the immediate cessation of all settlement
activities in the occupied Palestinian territory, as
outlined in relevant letters addressed by the Chair of
the Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Movement to the President of the Security Council -
reflects the international position on this most critical
issue. The Non-Aligned Movement regrets the fact that
the draft resolution was not adopted by the Security
Council as we had hoped and expected.

The Non-Aligned Movement therefore reiterates
its call for the Security Council to be resolute in
demanding that Israel abide by its legal obligations.
Israeli impunity must be tolerated no more and the
Security Council has the responsibility to ensure that
Israel abides forthwith with all of its obligations,
including those under the Fourth Geneva Convention,
relevant United Nations resolutions and the Road Map.

In this connection, the Movement takes note with
appreciation of the consultations undertaken by the
Government of Switzerland to implement the
recommendation made by the General Assembly in
resolution 64/254, of 26 February 2010, that a
Conference of the High Contracting Parties to the
Fourth Geneva Convention be convened on measures
to enforce the Convention in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. NAM. stresses the
importance of a speedy resumption of the process of
consultations, with a view to convening a Conference
of High Contracting Parties at the earliest possible
date.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns the
heinous Israeli military attacks on Palestinian civilians
in the Gaza Strip earlier this month, which resulted in
the killing of 19 Palestinian civilians, and regrets the
fact that the Security Council failed to react after
considering this serious matter. We call upon the
Security Council to take all necessary measures in
order to protect the Palestinian civilian population
living under Israeli occupation, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and in keeping with the
swift actions by the Security Council to protect
civilians elsewhere.

In this regard, NAM. emphasizes the need to
ensure that Israel, the occupying Power, fully lift its
illegal blockade on Gaza, in accordance with its
11-30799

obligations under international law, resolution 1860
(2009) and all other relevant United Nations
resolutions. This unresolved crisis continues to have
serious repercussions for broader efforts to promote
peace and unite the Palestinian people, and continues
to inflict deep suffering on them.

In this connection, the Movement also
emphasizes once again the need for the reconstruction
of Gaza, and calls on Israel to open all its crossing
points with Gaza and allow for the sustained and
regular movement of persons and goods, including the
import of essential reconstruction materials, including
those needed for the long overdue reconstruction of
United Nations facilities and United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) schools, and normal commercial flows.
NAM. also reiterates the need to empower UNRWA
with all the financial and human support needed to
undertake its mission effectively.

NAM. strongly condemns the continued detention
and imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians in
Israeli jails, where ill-treatment and torture are widely
used. The Movement commends international efforts to
shed light on this crisis, including through the
convening of the United Nations International Meeting
on the Question of Palestine in March in Vienna,
focusing on the urgency of addressing the plight of
Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli prisons and
detention facilities. It is the conviction of the members
of the Movement that those prisoners, who include
children and women, should be immediately released,
and proper international inspection of their current
condition should be a priority for the international
community, particularly the Security Council and the
Human Rights Council.

There is unanimous agreement on the imperative
need for Israel to respect its obligations in order for
direct negotiations to be resumed towards a two-State
solution, based on resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008), the Madrid
terms of reference, including the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map. The
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, must exert all efforts to ensure that Israel
abides by its obligations and commitments forthwith
and resume final status negotiations on appropriate
grounds so that we may this year realize the
independence of the State of Palestine, with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
5
Turning now to Lebanon, NAM. condemns
Israel's ongoing violations of Lebanese sovereignty
and the recurrence of serious breaches of resolution
1701 (2006). The Movement calls on all parties
concerned to fully implement resolution 1701 (2006) in
order to end the current fragility and avoid a recurrence
of hostilities.

Concerning the occupied Syrian Golan, the
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all measures
and actions taken or to be taken by Israel, the
occupying Power, to alter the legal, physical and
demographic status of the occupied Syrian Golan or to
impose its jurisdiction and administration there are
null, void and have no legal effect. The Non-Aligned
Movement demands that Israel abide by resolution 497
(1981) and withdraw fully from the occupied Syrian
Golan to the borders of 4 June 1967, in implementation
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

The Non-Aligned Movement looks forward to the
leadership of the Security Council and the revitalized
Quartet setting the parameters that will govern our
joint efforts in the run-up to the establishment of the
independent State of Palestine in September. The
Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its commitment to
work hand in hand with the Council, the Quartet and
other partners to ensure that we achieve our just cause.

