Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President
of the Security Council for holding this debate, which
bears witness to the Council's commitment to
transparency. I also wish to express my country's
support for the text read out a moment ago by the
representative of Costa Rica on behalf of the Rio
Group.

Mexico reiterates its deepest commitment to the
primacy of the United Nations with respect to the
maintenance of world peace, and we repeat our
conviction as regards the validity of the collective
system of international security. The lofty
responsibility that world public opinion and
international community place upon the members of
the Security Council is to maintain and restore
international peace and security through the adoption
of multilateral actions that are timely and effective in
the solution of conflicts. Therefore, the legitimacy and
credibility of this collective-security system
fundamentally lie in the decisions of the Council being
in keeping with the Charter and international law.

Mexico has firmly condemned, as have a large
majority of nations, the continued non-compliance by
the Government of Iraq with the international
obligations imposed upon it by the Security Council.
Our country considers that its failure to observe the
resolutions adopted with regard to disarmament and to
renouncing the use of weapons of mass destruction
under Chapter VII of the Charter for more than a
decade represents a potential threat to peace and
regional stability.

Therefore we cannot fail to recognize that there
has been non-compliance with United Nations
resolutions in other situations, moments and latitudes.
Mexico thus reiterates once again that it is important
for the Government of Iraq to comply immediately,
unconditionally and without restrictions with all
Security Council resolutions with regard to
disarmament and renunciation of the use of weapons of
mass destruction.

As is well known, Mexico has always upheld the
necessity of achieving general and complete
disarmament under effective international control. In
keeping with that position, Mexico addresses an appeal
to Iraq to accept, by actions, the inspection activities in
order to ensure the destruction, removal or
neutralization under international supervision of all
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons that it may
have under its control. We are convinced that the
acceptance by the Government of Iraq of the return of
inspectors to its national territory, unconditionally,
immediately and without restriction, constitutes a first
step towards restoring confidence between the United
Nations and that country, in addition to its fully
complying with its international obligations with
respect to disarmament and renunciation of the use of
weapons of mass destruction.

The least that the international community can
expect is that Iraq will cooperate in all aspects without
subterfuge or pretext, at all times and in all places, with
both UNMOVIC and IAEA, so that we can be in a
position to reliably determine that Iraq does not posses
the type of weapons which it renounced as part of the
conditions laid down in resolution 687 (1991), or that it
is not in a position to use such weapons.

In this process, the Security Council must
preserve its authority to determine the composition,
mandate and rules of operation of the inspection teams
and, in general, the supervision of the implementation
of the enforcement measures adopted pursuant to
Chapter VII of the Charter. Similarly, UNMOVIC must
preserve its identity and independence as a subsidiary
organ of the Security Council, and the inspectors will
have to act in accordance with United Nations
regulations. Thus, the militarization of inspections
could prove to be counterproductive, since it would
have the potential to generate situations of
confrontation or other kinds of unforeseen incidents.
Furthermore, this would constitute a deplorable and
dangerous precedent in international practice. Mexico
believes that the inspection missions should not foresee
having armed escorts or anticipate the assistance of
representatives of the permanent members of this
Council. We do not consider it appropriate that the
inspections regime should be determined exclusively
by the five permanent members, since the inspectors
will have the obligation to report to the Council as a
whole.

In my country's opinion, the Council's
determination should be based on two essential
conditions: first, a reliable assessment of Iraq's actual
military capacity, as well as of its intentions to use that
weaponry or the capacity of terrorist groups to gain
access to it; and secondly, the agreement of members
of the Council and of other involved nations on the
measures to be adopted.

The Security Council cannot renounce the
responsibilities imposed on it by the United Nations
Charter in the maintenance of international peace and
security, nor can it disregard its competence to
determine the existence of a threat to international
peace and security. Accordingly, Mexico supports a
two-stage action of the Security Council.

The first of these two stages would be the
establishment, under a new resolution, of a revised
system of inspections in Iraq and of the conditions
necessary to ensure that the inspection missions meet
with no obstacle. The second stage would be triggered
by Iraq's non-compliance with that resolution. In that
event, if it were to occur, the Security Council will
have to determine, on the basis of UNMOVIC and
IAEA reports, whether the non-compliance constitutes
a threat to international peace and security and to
decide on the measures to be adopted, preferably
unanimously, including the possible use of force.

In any consideration of the latter issue, the
Security Council must establish clear criteria
guaranteeing the conditions of proportionality,
immediacy and necessity that must be present in any
legitimate use of force. We nurture the hope that the
incipient signs of an agreement will emerge, enabling
us - as the Secretary-General has called for - to
preserve the Council's unity. Accordingly, we would
view favourably acceptance of action in two stages,
such as that which I have described.

Mexico reiterates its willingness to pursue
constructive cooperation in the work of the Council on
this question, convinced of the need to exhaust
multilateral efforts to reach a comprehensive, peaceful
and definitive settlement.

Mexico will continue supporting the efforts
pursued in the framework of the United Nations, with
full respect for the powers of the Security Council, to
resolve a grave problem that has faced the international
community as a whole for more than decade: the
continued non-compliance of the Government of
Saddam Hussein with its international obligations
under the Charter of our Organization.

