Mr. Zebari (Iraq): In accordance with paragraph
12 of resolution 1546 (2004), adopted unanimously on
8 June 2004, the mandate of the multinational force in
Iraq is now due for review. The newly elected
Government of Iraq, and the Iraqi people, pay tribute
and express gratitude to the multinational force for its
contribution towards establishing security in our
country. In the exercise of its mandate, it has helped
Iraq to accomplish another year of historic and
dramatic progress on the road towards democracy and
stability - progress on which I am now pleased to
report to the Security Council.

In June 2004, the Iraqi Interim Government
reasserted Iraq's sovereignty and assumed full
responsibility and authority in guiding Iraq from being
an occupied country to an emerging democracy. That
transformation adhered to the political process
mandated in Iraq's transitional administrative law and
endorsed by Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).

The Interim Government and the Independent
Electoral Commission of Iraq delivered on their pledge
to hold free and fair elections, on time, throughout the
country. Those elections heralded a new dawn of
optimism, and inspired confidence in our democratic
transition. The efforts of the authorities and the
remarkable courage of the Iraqi people on 30 January
were duly recognized throughout the world. We have
proved that political transition can be orderly,
democratic and expressed by the free will of the Iraqi
people through the ballot box, not through violence.
For the first time in five decades, we have had a
peaceful transition of power from one Government to
the next.

In the formation of the Transitional Government,
we reached out to all communities in Iraq and forged a
national unity Government that is inclusive and
representative. We did include new members in the
new Government, sharing power with those who
boycotted or did not fare well in the January elections.
I am pleased to report to the Security Council that
those who chose not to take part in the January
elections or who were unable to participate because of
the intimidation campaign in their areas, are now
recognizing their misjudgement and rallying
themselves in preparation for the December round of
elections.

We remind the Security Council that each step in
our political transition has been implemented so far
according to the timetable endorsed in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1546 (2004), and we reaffirm Iraq's
commitment to meeting the deadlines for the
completion of that process.

Although our achievements to date are
praiseworthy, they have been made at great cost to the
Iraqi people and our security forces, as well as with the
sacrifice of the multinational forces. While my
Government is committed to meeting its obligations
under resolution 1546 (2004), we would like to
acknowledge that we in Iraq still face a destructive
campaign of terror and violence that aims to derail the
political process and undo the progress that has been
achieved so far.

As I wrote to you, Madam President, on 24 May,
our country continues to face an armed insurgency,
including foreign elements opposed to Iraq's transition
to democratic rule. Despite our continuing efforts to
build up our security forces, those forces cannot as yet
assume full responsibility for maintaining our national
security and defending our borders.

We believe that, in order to complete the
transitional process and build on the political
achievement to date, we need the multinational force to
continue to provide its essential contribution to our
security. I would like to reiterate my Government's
formal request for a continuation of the multinational
force's mandate. As we enter into the constitutional
process, we anticipate that the campaign of destruction
and intimidation will continue, perpetrated by a deadly
mix of remnants of the former regime determined to
turn back the clock, and foreign elements whose sole
agenda is to destroy the ongoing political process.
Their horrific and merciless tactics may shift, but their
evil intentions remain the same - to foment civil
division and spread terror among innocent civilians
throughout the country in an attempt to undermine the
new democratic system.

But as they destroy, we rebuild. On 30 January,
Iraqis sent a loud and clear message that they will not
be intimidated and that their future will not be dictated
by terrorists and supporters of tyranny. The terrorists
threatened that they would wash the streets of Baghdad
with the blood of voters. In response, 8.5 million Iraqis
defiantly and courageously headed to the polls to cast
their vote against the past and to vote instead for the
freedom and peace to which they aspire.

We recognize that the transition we are going
through from dictatorship to democracy is fraught with
many challenges. The total collapse of the State and its
institutions has created internal complications and
instability. There are foreign elements that are
determined to exploit the transition in Iraq for their
own extreme agendas, to prolong the suffering of the
Iraqi people and to undermine the stability mission of
the multinational force. We have repeatedly urged each
of our neighbouring countries to abide by their
obligations under resolution 1546 (2004) to prevent the
transit of terrorists to and from Iraq, arms for terrorists,
and financing that would support terrorists. Some have
been more forthcoming than others in their response.
To our regret, despite repeated assurances of their
willingness to cooperate, some have refused to
translate those assurances into concrete action.

We learned recently that Syria has stopped more
than 1,000 foreign fighters from entering Iraq from
Syria.

We welcome that action, but note that it confirms
our long-held view that Syria has been one of the main
transit routes for foreign terrorists, as well as for the
remnants of the previous regime. Although we are in
continuous dialogue with our neighbours to establish
security mechanisms through regional cooperation, in
good faith with the Iraqi Transitional Government, we
urge them to put an end to the flow of those terrorists
who could wreak havoc, not only in Iraq, but beyond.

Here we would like to urge our brothers in Syria
to do more to prevent the movement of extremist
elements from entering our country.

For our part, in tactical and strategic cooperation
with the multinational force, we have been steadily
building the capacity of our security, police and
military forces. In turn those forces have assumed
increasing responsibility for the stability of our
country. Coordinated by the relevant ministries, in
close cooperation with the multinational force, our
forces have grown, and efforts to increase training and
equipping them, and improving their performance, are
ongoing. They have shifted from defensive to offensive
Iraqi-led security initiatives. As combat and security
responsibilities have been gradually turned over to our
forces, they have simultaneously increased their
intelligence capabilities, and are producing effective
results in their mission.

Here I would like to report that we are proud of
the courage and enthusiasm of the new recruits to our
forces: brave men and women who stand daily on the
front line, despite horrific losses to their ranks from
daily suicide attacks on patrols and recruiting centres.
The number of recruits volunteering to serve their
country continues to increase.

The next step in our transition is the most critical
test for the future of our country. The mandate of the
new Transitional Government, outlined in Security
Council resolution 1546 (2004), is to draft a new
permanent constitution by 15 August. This will be
subject to a national referendum in October, leading to
general elections for a constitutionally elected
Government in December 2005. Success in drawing up
the new constitution will be the definitive turning point
for Iraq's stability and the entire process of democratic
change.

Drafting this cornerstone document of our future
will also be an exercise in compromise and consensus-
building. It will bring together the competing agendas
for all Iraqi groups and produce a unified national
agenda. The new constitution will enshrine the ideas of
any free people in its charter: pluralism, democratic
rights, federalism, human rights and civil liberties. It
will also embrace our diversity within our unity and
reaffirm Iraq's territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence. That is a tremendous challenge, but we
all realize what is at stake, and we are determined to
meet the challenge. We recognize that the constitution
is neither just for this generation, nor just for the
winners of the January election, but for all Iraqis and
for future generations to come - who all have a stake
in its success.

A satisfactory formula can only be reached with
the input and consensus of all the country's
communities. As we have just learned from the
European experience, a permanent constitution is
unlikely to succeed if drafted behind closed doors, in
isolation from the constituency.

We are reaching out and engaging all groups in a
broad consultative dialogue in the writing of the
constitution. In our social, religious and ethnic mosaic,
the only route to peace, tolerance and national unity is
for all Iraqis to be represented in this process. My
Government is committed to ensuring that the
constitutional process will be inclusive.

The constitution will provide the foundation for
the new Iraq and will be an Iraqi-authored document,
but we are facing a tight deadline to complete the
drafting by 15 August. The United Nations has a
history of experience it can bring to advising the
drafting committee, which has already begun its work.
We are aware that the United Nations is moving to
extend its technical assistance, and we urge that the
process be accelerated. We believe any delay in
drafting and ratifying the constitution could provide a
vacuum that anti-democratic forces could exploit.

Here we need the awareness and engagement of
the international community to achieve our goals. Let
me express our gratitude to Ambassador Ashraf Qazi in
his important role as Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq. We also welcome the recent
developments towards staffing new United Nations
facilities for the United Nations Assistant Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in Erbil and Basra.

We also remind the Security Council of the
effective and important work of the Independent
Electoral Commission of Iraq in the previous elections.
In that regard, we urge the United Nations to expedite
the appointment of a United Nations Electoral Adviser
to continue supporting the Commission's preparations
for the upcoming general elections in December.

The mandate of the International Advisory and
Monitoring Board (IAMB) is also due for review at
this time. The Government of Iraq believes that IAMB
is useful in promoting greater transparency as the Iraqi
Government, at its discretion, disburses the resources
of the Development Fund for Iraq (DFI). As such, we
propose to continue the IAMB mandate until the end of
the political process in Iraq. At the same time, we urge
all Member States to take seriously their responsibilities
under resolutions 1483 (2003) and 1518 (2003) to
deposit funds into the DFI.

An international conference on Iraq in Brussels
next month is being organized by the United States and
the European Union, together with the Government of
Iraq. We hope to seize the momentum generated by the
success of the January elections and the instalment of a
new Government to strengthen the existing
international partnership and forge new support for
Iraq's reconstruction, military-security development
and democratic transition. We are encouraged by the
positive attitude demonstrated during the preparations,
and we welcome those participants who are dealing
with our country constructively, in good faith and with
respect for the new order.

We look forward to the day when our forces are
able to assume full responsibility for maintaining our
national security, at which time there will be no need
for the engagement of the multinational force in Iraq.
Until then we need the continued presence of the
multinational force in Iraq. I would like to take this
opportunity to extend our thanks and gratitude to the
States participating in the multinational force for their
valued contribution.

Finally, the newly elected Government of Iraq
recognizes what its people expect of them, and we
endeavour to deliver. We are confident that we will
succeed. Our people prove that the majority want
democracy. Iraqis should be respected for their
resilience and determination in rising up to the
Challenges they face every day. Violence will not
distract us from the main goal of building a
democratic, pluralistic, federal and unified Iraq.

