Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
Before starting, I would like to welcome the Secretary-
General to this Chamber. I would also like to welcome
Ambassador Merores, sitting in for the President of the
General Assembly, and Ambassador Christian as
Acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Welcome to all. If you
permit me, Mr. President, I would also like to thank
you for taking the initiative to organize this important
debate.

The responsibility for resolving disputes and
preventing a conflict rests, as a founding principle of
this Organization, in the first place with the States
party to a conflict. Achieving peace, however, depends
to a large extent on our commitment to the architecture
of collective security that we have brought together in
the United Nations. This Council and the Assembly
should redouble efforts to facilitate the success of the
measures provided for under Chapter VI of the Charter
for the peaceful settlement of disputes, given the
human consequences inherent in any conflict.

Contrary to a very well-known quote, conflicts
are not diplomacy by other means. On the contrary,
they are the result of the failure of diplomacy or of
dialogue that was undertaken without due seriousness.
The increase in the number of peace missions is a
troubling indicator of an increasing number of such
failures. Both the General Assembly and the Council
can and should strengthen mechanisms for the
prevention and peaceful solution of conflict.

In the case of Africa, systematic cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union is
on the agenda. The role provided for in Chapter VIII of
the Charter for regional arrangements has been
strengthened by recent agreements between these two
organizations. These agreements bear witness to the
emergence in the United Nations of a culture of
prevention that has given rise to new instruments and
mechanisms. However, a divide still exists between
aspirations and reality.

As the Secretary-General said today, and as his
report (S/2001/574) of 7 June 2001 on the prevention
of armed conflict indicates,

"Preventive action should be initiated at the
earliest possible stage of a conflict cycle in order
to be most effective. One of the principal aims of
preventive action should be to address the deep-
rooted socio-economic, cultural, environmental,
institutional and other structural causes that often
underlie the immediate political symptoms of
conflicts." (5/2001/5 74, executive summary)

It is unfortunate that the efforts of the Security
Council tend initially to address root causes during the
post-conflict period, whether through integrated
missions or the Peacebuilding Commission. The time
has come to consider the desirability of extending,
redesigning or commingling existing mechanisms to
step up the use of the Council's preventive efforts.

Lastly, I should like, in a general way, to touch
upon some particularly important factors in preventing
conflict in Africa.

It is important to redouble efforts to implement
resolution 1325 (2000). Without concrete efforts to
increase the participation of women as stakeholders in,
and beneficiaries of, the prevention of conflict, we
diminish the value of the good offices of a sector of the
population that, as often the primary victims of the
ravages of violence, have a great deal of experience to
bring to bear in preventing violence.

Justice is also an essential component of peace,
reconciliation and the prevention of conflict. We would
therefore emphasize the need for Governments and
political actors to strengthen and respect the
institutions needed to ensure the rule of law, as well as
to cooperate fully with the work of international
tribunals.

In conclusion, in Africa in particular,
international cooperation is essential in combating and
controlling the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons.

