Mr. Djani (Indonesia): First of all, I would like to welcome our new colleague, the Deputy Permanent Representative of the United States of America, Ambassador Richard Mills. We are of course looking forward to working closely with him. I would like to make a joint statement on behalf of the member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in the Security Council, namely, Indonesia and Viet Nam. Allow us to begin by thanking Under-Secretary- General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Special Envoy Parfait Onanga-Anyanga for their important briefings. We commend the peace agreement signed earlier this month in Juba, which was possible due both to the active engagement between the Sudan and South Sudan in facilitating each other's transitions and to effective mediation. That is a testament of the tremendous progress that could be achieved by the engagement of the two countries. We look forward to the continuation of such engagement and momentum in resolving the Abyei issue, thereby contributing to long-term peace, stability and development in both countries. On that note, I would like to highlight three important issues. First, on improving law and order, we emphasize that the absence of the rule of law in Abyei remains one of the contributing factors to persistent violence, including intercommunal clashes, in the Area. We are also concerned about the security and humanitarian situation in the Area due to the impact of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Our two delegations therefore urge all parties to accelerate the deployment of the remaining authorized additional United Nations police and formed police units. We highlight what the Secretary-General has emphasized, namely, that this deployment is critical in maintaining the capability of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) to maintain the rule of law in the Area. Our two delegations also attach great importance to UNISFA's provision of capacity-building to the community protection committees in the absence of an Abyei police service and its support for traditional justice mechanisms. It is also important to strengthen efforts in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as facilitating mine-action activities. The second issue is on promoting peaceful dialogue. As members of ASEAN, we firmly believe in the virtue of peaceful dialogue in nurturing trust and confidence between all parties. We would like to commend, and reiterate our support for, the efforts of the United Nations, UNISFA, countries of the region and regional organizations, particularly the African Union, in supporting peaceful dialogue on Abyei. Our two delegations welcome UNISFA's active engagement with local communities, including its intention to convene a peace meeting between community representatives before the end of the year. We call for all parties to support and encourage that peace meeting as part of confidence-building measures among all communities ahead of the migration cycle in Abyei. We therefore emphasize the dire need to maintain and further enhance this role in the coming UNISFA mandate renewal. The third issue is that of the safety and security of UNISFA personnel. Our two delegations firmly believe that UNISFA's presence is essential to maintaining stability in Abyei. We commend UNISFA for its work in maintaining security and stability in Abyei, including through its continued engagement with Area residents and the community protection committees. As police- and troop-contributing countries to many United Nations missions, Viet Nam and Indonesia join the Secretary-General in condemning the attacks that target UNISFA personnel in Abyei. Such attacks are unacceptable. Enhancing the ability of UNISFA to fulfil its mandate should remain our utmost priority, especially the safety and the security of its personnel. To that end, we call for all parties to maintain and facilitate their support to UNISFA, including the operationalization of the Athony airstrip, as well as other outstanding issues. Ultimately, our delegations reaffirm their long- standing support for the Sudan and South Sudan in finding a timely and peaceful solution in Abyei as an inseparable part of their journey towards peace. We support the renewal of the UNISFA mandate, as recommended by the Secretary-General, in order to continue promoting long-term stability in Abyei and facilitating dialogue, cooperation and friendship between the Sudan and South Sudan.
