Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
First and foremost, I would like to thank the Special
Representative, Mr. Jan Kubis, for his presence here
today and for his briefing to the Council. I would also
like to thank him for his work and dedication to the
cause of Afghanistan. We would also like to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
and thank him for his briefing on the situation in his
country today, a country that we will be visiting very
soon.

Colombia supports the international community's
commitment to Afghan development, which was
renewed during the Tokyo Conference held last July.
There, we agreed to work towards a stable, democratic
and prosperous Afghanistan in the transition into
the transformation decade of 2015-2024, based on
the principles and mutual commitments in the Tokyo
Mutual Accountability Framework.

The adoption of the presidential decree of 27 July,
which sets forth specific measures and timelines for
fighting impunity and corruption, represents a very
important step towards fulfilling the commitments
undertaken by Afghanistan in Tokyo in the five
priority areas that were identified, namely, democracy
and fair elections, the rule of law and human rights,
public financing and commercial banking, budgetary
implementation and governance, and, finally,
sustainable and inclusive growth. That and progress in
other areas, in both the political and the institutional
arenas, contribute by strenghtening a fully functional
and sustainable State that is capable of providing
basic services to its people and progressively reduce
dependence on foreign aid. Inclusive, transparent
and fair elections, to be held in 2014, will be a clear
indicator of the progress achieved by the Afghan State
in the area of the strengthening of democracy.

With regard to security, we can only express our
concern about the escalation of violence seen in recent
months. While those incidents might seem not to have
affected the transition process, which provides for
Afghans assuming total responsibility and leadership
in 2014, it is still necessary to continue increasing the
professionalism and capacity of the security forces
and law enforcement in the Afghan police, including
institutionalization of the mechanisms of accountability
and the fight against impunity, as well as deepening
measures undertaken to provide protection to civilians,
respect human rights and ensure a structure of command
and oversight.

To that end, the contribution of the International
Security Assistance Force and NATO's Afghan training
mission continue to be vital. We hope that the recent
incidents will not impact their cooperation and that their
commitments will be upheld in that area beyond 2014.
Advances in the political and reconciliation processes
have also been affected by recent security incidents that
have led to a number of civilian victims.

It is important that all parties show clear signs
of commitment to the dialogue and reconciliation
process in order to prevent further instability and
fragmentation. We are optimistic about the interest
in dialogue shown by some Taliban groups. In that
regard, cooperation of the Committee pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning
Al-Qaida and associated individuals and entities with
the Government of Afghanistan, established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011), must be strengthened so that
the tasks and activities developed in compliance with
the mandate continue to be a tool of support to the
peace and reconciliation process.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan and the Special Representative should
continue to give priority to supporting the Government
forces towards an Afghan-led and -owned peace and
reconciliation process and to direct their cooperation
and assistance activities towards strengthening the
role of Afghan institutions in order to meet their
responsibilities in priority areas, such as governability,
economic development and regional cooperation. The
United Nations should continue to play a central role
in coordinating international efforts with the national
authorities so as to ensure consistency with the priorities
identified by Afghanistan.

With regard to the worrying humanitarian situation,
it is crucial that all parties respect humanitarian
principles and facilitate the provision of humanitarian
aid to those who need it most. That must be a fundamental
principle for participation in the reconciliation process.
Humanitarian agencies are aware of the tremendous
need to provide services such as health care, sanitation,
education and food, which require more funding.
The great national objective should be supporting a
State structure capable of ensuring governability and
economic stability at the local and international levels
and obtaining and access to justice as fundamental to a
sustainable and lasting transition.

The Minister for Foreign Affairs can depend on
Colombia's full support in all areas that he deems
necessary and in which we can be of use.

