Spreading violent conflict, growing economic insecurity and the increasing impacts of climate change disproportionately impact fragile and conflict-affected situations. These challenges have been exacerbated and multiplied by the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). A coherent, collaborative, coordinated and efficient whole-of-United Nations response is crucial to safeguarding and strengthening development gains, addressing the risk factors that give rise to conflict and building more peaceful, resilient societies. While Canada has long been a supporter of United Nations peacebuilding efforts, our experience as Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission during 2020 has crystalized a few critical understandings for us. COVID-19 has laid bare the fact that the peacebuilding success stories of the United Nations are often more fragile than we like to admit. Even after decades of international peacebuilding support, many countries are only one or two shocks away from falling into deep crisis. And we are only beginning to understand the ways in which climate change exacerbates conflict drivers and increases vulnerability. That requires us to fundamentally rethink our approaches and to put livelihoods, economic security for citizens and inclusive economic development at the heart of peacebuilding. It also means sharpening our capacity to jointly assess and respond to the multiple and overlapping risks that increase the likelihood of violent conflict. None of that can happen without sustained, predictable financing and strong partnerships. Countries affected by conflict are already the furthest behind in attaining the Sustainable Development Goals, and this pandemic risks setting them back even further. They need predictable, sustainable, coordinated support. That is why Canada voluntarily supports the United Nations Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), and today we announced our intention to co-host the PBF replenishment conference in January. We encourage all Member States to do what they can to contribute to the PBF and to maximize the scale and duration of their pledges. However, extrabudgetary funding is only a band-aid for a systemic problem. Voluntary financing can catalyse short-term results in the United Nations system, but we also need to look at longer-term solutions. Work across the United Nations system to build and sustain peace should be financed through assessed contributions. These activities are fundamental to achieving the United Nations mandate and our shared peacebuilding goals. Until we agree on a collective approach, Canada will continue working with others to make progress on an iterative, case-by-case basis. We must also examine the overarching global financial architecture and ask ourselves if it is fit for purpose. The growing body of evidence emerging, particularly since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, shows us that for most fragile and conflict-affected countries it is not. A growing number of countries are having to choose between channelling scarce public resources to servicing their debt and remaining solvent or to taking measures to counter the effects of the pandemic. No country, particularly those emerging from conflict, should be forced to have to decide between insolvency and the health of its citizens. It was in recognition of those kinds of challenges that Canada and Jamaica joined with Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to lead the Initiative on Financing for Development in the Era of COVID-19 and Beyond and develop a series of recommendations for how to overcome such unprecedented challenges. We are encouraged by the Secretary-General's commitment to ensuring that missions have sufficient programmatic funding to support mandated peacebuilding activities as priority peacekeeping budget requests. We call on the Security Council to take up these recommendations, particularly in the context of mission transitions, and we encourage Security Council members to continually see through the mandates and priorities of which they have agreed to the financing and implementation stages. Finally, we urge the Council to make better use of the advisory role of the Peacebuilding Commission as the only United Nations body mandated to play a bridging role across the principal organs so as to ensure integrated, coherent and coordinated support to national efforts to build and sustain peace. As more countries and regions make use of the PBC's convening power, it has also strengthened this bridging role, enabling it to address a broader range of challenges and risks to peace - from gender equality in the Great Lakes region to climate security in the Pacific islands. The PBC can be a critical platform to support United Nations reform efforts at the country level in order to strengthen the capacity of United Nations country teams to jointly analyse and respond to risks. We encourage the Security Council to increase the frequency with which it seeks the Commission's advice, including on peace operation mandates and mission transitions, and in particular its advice on longer-term peacebuilding challenges. Thematic debates such as this one would be strengthened by formal Peacebuilding Commission advice on how to strengthen coherence of United Nations efforts to address root causes of conflict and sustain peace.
