Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish to express
gratitude to our colleague, Ambassador Mufioz, for a
very comprehensive oral report and to extend to him
our warmest congratulations for the tremendous
leadership he is displaying at the helm of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaeda and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities.

As the main subsidiary body of the Security
Council entrusted with the task of combating the threat
posed by Al-Qaeda terrorism, the 1267 Committee
bears an enormous responsibility. Living up to the high
expectations placed in it does not only mean reducing
to the minimum eventual missteps, but also making full
and effective use of all the tools at its disposal.

The most relevant instrument in this regard is
undoubtedly the Consolidated List of Individuals and
Entities Belonging to or Associated with the Taliban
and Al-Qaida Organisation as Established and
Maintained by the 1267 Committee. It is for this reason
that absolute priority should be given to constantly
improving the quality of the List. It has to be as
credible as possible, so that States are encouraged to
submit names and provide additional information that
would enhance the List's effectiveness. Establishing
clear delisting procedures, with adequate consideration
being given to due process concerns, would greatly
facilitate the achievement of this goal.

Ensuring full implementation of the sanctions
regime is crucial for counterweighting the great
flexibility shown by Al-Qaeda in carrying out its
deadly plans. It is, therefore, imperative that the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaeda and the
Taliban and associated individuals and entities be
provided with all the necessary inputs that would allow
it to have as clear a picture as possible on concrete
problems States are facing in implementing sanctions.
Submission of reports by all Member States and
enhanced dialogue, including through on-site visits,
represents an obligatory prerequisite in this regard.

As recent experience has shown, on-site visits by
both the Chairman of the 1267 Committee and the
Monitoring Team are invaluable means for learning of
difficulties encountered by States in implementing the
sanctions regime and for properly determining their
assistance needs. As Vice-Chairman of the Committee,
Romania participated in the recent visit to selected
countries from 5 to 10 December. We believe further
that better coordination and cooperation between the
1267 Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) in preparing those visits is needed in order to
avoid possible overlapping. Joint visits by
representatives of the two Committees should also be
considered.

The risk of Al-Qaeda and its associates, as well
as other terrorists, acquiring weapons of mass
destruction offers a daunting perspective for the
international community as a whole. The world of
today is confronted by the dual spectrum of
proliferation of both weapons of mass destruction and
terrorist acts. We do not want to wait for a nuclear,
chemical or biological 11 September to happen. That is
why increased cooperation should be sought by both
the CTC and the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaeda and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities with the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and its newly appointed Expert Team. In my
capacity as Chairman of the latter Committee, I stand
ready to continue and further strengthen our tripartite
consultations.

