Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet for his briefing and for the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
for the period from October 2011 to January 2012
(S/2012/72). I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremie, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, and Mr. Enver Hoxhaj for their statements.

We commend Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Zarif and UNMIK for their ongoing
efforts to improve the situation in northern Kosovo and
for the services the Mission is rendering in areas such
as document certification, mutual legal assistance,
determining the fate of missing persons, the protection
of architectural and religious sites, promoting
UNESCO's activities, and facilitating Kosovo's
interaction with INTERPOL, other international bodies
and non-recognizing States. Those services serve to
better the lives of all Kosovars and should be continued
in accordance with resolution 1244 (1999) and other
relevant decisions.

As the report of the Secretary-General notes, the
situation in northern Kosovo continues to be tense and
potentially unstable. In order to deal with that volatile
situation, we urge all United Nations bodies and
international agencies to use persuasion and
negotiation, rather than force. Further, all sides must
try to avoid taking unilateral steps to change the status
quo. All sides should show creativity in finding a
compromise on the contentious issues. In that
connection, we appreciate the helpful position taken by
the Government of Serbia on the issue of roadblocks
and on the proposed holding of a referendum in
northern Kosovo.

We applaud the concerned parties as well as the
European Union for successfully holding two rounds of
dialogue in Brussels in November and December 2011,
despite the prevailing tensions. We have noted that
these talks have resulted in forward movement on the
agreements reached previously and in a new agreement
on integrated management of crossing points. We hope
that the implementation of those agreements will
further facilitate the daily lives of the Kosovars.

We have taken note with satisfaction that the
Lead Prosecutor of the Special Investigative Task
Force of the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) to investigate allegations of organ
trafficking has assumed office and has started his work
in earnest. We reiterate our stand that a thorough and
impartial investigation should be carried out into all
aspects of the matter.

In conclusion, I would like to express our support
for Special Representative Zarif and UNMIK. Other
agencies in Kosovo - the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the Kosovo Force, EULEX and
others - should continue to cooperate and coordinate
with UNMIK in accordance with their respective
mandates. We reiterate the call on the parties to resolve
all issues concerning Kosovo through consultation and
dialogue without resort to unilateral action. Only thus
can the aspirations of the Kosovars be met and lasting
peace and stability established in the region, creating an
enabling environment for socio-economic development.

