Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
congratulates you most warmly, Mr. President, on your
skilful conduct of the presidency of the Council.
Plaudits are also owed to Ambassador Sergey Lavrov
for Russia's astute leadership of this forum during the
month of June. The presence here today of Mr. Javier
Solana, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno and Mr. Amos
Namanga Ngongi lends special significance to these
proceedings. I thank them for their important briefings.
We also congratulate Ambassador Swing on his
appointment, and we wish him every success.

The recent waves of violence in eastern Congo
have deeply shocked the international community.
Despite the Council's many calls, the fragile peace
continues to remain threatened. The conflict, apart
from wreaking havoc in the form of death and
destruction, has displaced an enormous number of
people from their homes. An acute humanitarian crisis
has thereby been created. The gross violations of
human rights that have been perpetrated there with
impunity are odious. They undermine all the universal
values that we hold so dear. Bangladesh, along with
others, is profoundly concerned.

The Council is to be commended for its timely
action in authorizing the Interim Emergency
Multinational Force (IEMF). France deserves the
highest praise for having led it so effectively. We
applaud the European Union for its active participation.
Operation Artemis has been able to restore a modicum
of calm.

Certain positive political developments to which
Mr. Ngongi has referred point to an emerging silver
lining. They include the formation of the Transitional
Government and the national army. We are heartened
by those measures and we reiterate our call on all
Congolese parties to work together with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and others. That is
essential to bringing peace and stability to that troubled
land.

Bangladesh welcomes the important contribution
made by the United States to the trust fund for the Ituri
interim administration.

We are pleased that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has included
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Bunia in
particular, as a very deserving case in the international
humanitarian appeal for refugees in Africa. We
commend MONUC for its strategy paper on Bunia and
Ituri, which provides a phased timeline to address the
range of future challenges in that region.

Bangladesh, whose birth was preceded by a
protracted war, is today a country in the midst of a
most positive transformation. A democratic polity
dedicated to development and a vibrant civil society
have spawned many innovative ideas, raising vast
numbers of the populace out of poverty every year. We
are anxious to share our experiences with societies of
comparable milieu. We believe that, just as we have
done, Africa has the potential, with some external help,
to lift itself up by its own bootstraps. But development
requires that conflicts must first cease.

Bangladesh is therefore prepared to contribute, to
the best of its modest capability, to that process in
Africa, which includes the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. To that end, we have committed one
mechanized infantry battalion of 1,050 troops to
MONUC's second task force. The deployment is well
under way. In this connection, I must pay tribute to
Under-Secretary-General Guehenno and his team for
the excellent cooperation and coordination between his
Department and us, which have rendered this intricate
procedure so smooth. The Bangladesh troops will
relieve the IEMF by 1 September, as the Council has
stipulated. We are fully aware that the military threat
assessment is higher in that area of operation than in
most others we have faced. Nonetheless, the
Bangladesh army has a rich tradition that dates back
long into history. We are confident of delivering in the
Congo. Indeed, if required, we are prepared to make
further contributions in terms of men and material.

It is our hope, though, that the Council will act
promptly in consonance with the Secretary-General's
recommendations to raise troop ceilings under
MONUC and to provide a more robust mandate. These
sentiments have rightly found resonance in many
statements made here today. It is also important that the
second task force, in its full-strength enhanced brigade
formation, be in place on the ground as soon as
possible. That failing, there could be a security vacuum
following the departure of the IEMF. That is something
no one wants; it cannot, and must not, be allowed to
occur

We are encouraged by the contents of the draft
resolution at hand. In our View, its adoption will make
a tremendous difference in helping to stabilize the
situation in Bunia and beyond.

The tragedy in the Congo has gone on for far too
long. It must be brought to a close. The Congo must be
put back on the track of peace and progress as soon as
possible. The international community has a
responsibility in that regard. Our commitment to
universal values demands that it be discharged.
