Mr. Sorreta (Philippines): The Philippines wishes
to express its appreciation and full support for your
efforts, Mr. President, in bringing attention and much-
needed focus to an issue of vital importance to us all.

The rule of law at the national and international
levels is the bedrock upon which nations build stable
and flourishing societies and foster strong relations.
The rule of law emphasizes the protection of rights and
underscores compliance with obligations. Those are
crucial in order to exact responsible behaviour both
from individuals and from States. Those are vital in
order for justice to be served at the national and
international levels.

The rule of law is essential as an instrument and
object of policy as we seek to rebuild and strengthen
societies in, or emerging from, conflict. The rule of law
and justice are cornerstones in President Benigno
Aquino's programme of good governance. The
Philippines development plan for the period 2011 to 2016
highlights that, stating that justice is no less important a
public good and that the framework of the rule of law is
the foundation of our democratic society. The strict
implementation of the rule of law indicates our
Government's seriousness in carrying out its
responsibilities and obligations in a democratic
environment.

Beyond its borders, the Philippines continues to
do its part in further strengthening the rule of law and
the institutions and processes needed to uphold it in
post-conflict and conflict-affected areas around the
world. The Philippines actively participates in the
efforts of the United Nations to bring about peace and
security to countries torn by conflict and instability.
Close to 1,000 Filipinos - men and women alike -
serve as peacekeepers on the ground in eight United
Nations missions. Additional training and capacity-
building - based on solid rule of law principles and
delivery of justice - will further enable peacekeepers
and allow peacekeeping operations to accomplish much
more. For our part, we hosted the train-the-trainer
course in the United Nations police standardized
training curriculum on preventing and investigating
sexual and gender-based crimes, which was held in
Manila in June last year. This was the first such
training to be conducted in the Asian region.

There is a need for greater international cooperation
in delivering predictable, accountable and effective rule
of law assistance where it is most needed. The continued
support of donor countries remains crucial, particularly
for rule of law programming and for follow-through
efforts in implementing reforms in conflict and post-
conflict societies.

The conclusions and recommendations contained
in the report entitled "New voices: national
perspectives on rule of law assistance", issued by the
Rule of Law Coordination and Resource Group, are
worthy of our interest. We draw particular attention to
the need to draw on and empower national stakeholders
and the need for greater coordination and coherence in
rule of law assistance in the rational implementation of
reform measures. It is vital that we engage each other
within the United Nations on rule of law issues. The
high-level meeting on rule of law at the national and
international levels, to be held during the high-level
segment of the sixty-seventh session of the General
Assembly, will be a very valuable venue to enrich our
discussions on rule oflaw at both levels.
Conscious of its obligations and responsibilities
as a democracy - and keeping in mind the valuable
lessons we learned in fighting colonial rule and an
oppressive dictatorship - last year the Philippines
ratified the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court (ICC). The election of Ms. Miriam Defensor
Santiago to the International Criminal Court
demonstrates the international community's confidence
in our commitment and ability to contribute to our
collective efforts against impunity.

The ICC and other international judicial bodies
play a vital role in preventing conflicts and abuses and,
just as importantly, in helping to resolve disputes. We
must make full use of our resources and institutions to
ensure that justice and the rule of law prevail. Time
and again, conflicts - ideological, political, military
and territorial * have arisen when the rule of law is
weak. We need to continue to work together to rebuild
societies ravaged by conflicts and to ensure that
democratic institutions and processes are established or
strengthened. But we also need to continue to work as
one to prevent the escalation of conflicts by respecting
the rule of law. On that point, I would like to join
others who have emphasized that the rule of law has a
central role to play in the settlement of disputes, be it
in the method of the settlement or in the very substance
of the reasons behind the dispute.

Thirty years ago, on 15 November, 1982, we all
reiterated our high regard for law and justice when
faced with potential or actual disputes when the
General Assembly adopted the Manila Declaration on
the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes
(resolution 37/10). The Manila Declaration reinforces
the norm that international disputes shall be settled in
conformity with the principles of justice and
international law. This year, we will mark the thirtieth
anniversary of the Manila Declaration, and the
Philippines will be commemorating this landmark
throughout 2012.

Justice and the rule of law are both objectives and
instruments that we rightly must harness to achieve our
shared goals of a world of greater peace, progress and
prosperity.

