Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Once again I would like to extend the
appreciation of my delegation to the Secretary-General
for having sent out the multidisciplinary assessment
mission to the Central African subregion last June. I
also thank him for having made the report of that
mission available to us now. I thank Mr. Tuliameni
Kalomoh, the Assistant Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his eloquent introduction to the mission's
report.

Before offering any comments on the report I
would like to congratulate Mr. Kalomoh and his team
for the energetic manner in which the mission tackled
its mandate and for the very serious approach taken
therein. Like other countries in Central Africa,
Cameroon attached fundamental importance to the
work given to the mission. We have been awaiting the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with great
interest.

The representative of the Republic of the Congo
currently serves as Chairman of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and I
will leave it to the representative of ECCAS to review
the various issues raised in the report. I associate
myself with everything he will say on our behalf.

I would confine myself at this point to certain
aspects of the mandate of the mission. The mission was
asked to determine what the main priority needs and
problems were in the subregion and to hold
consultations with Governments to determine how best
to strengthen cooperation with the United Nations in
order to meet the needs of the Central African
subregion. It was also asked to determine measures to
be taken at the subregional level by ECCAS and the
Central African Economic and Monetary Community
(CAEMC), with assistance from the United Nations
system. Lastly, it was asked to make recommendations
on the best ways in which the international community
could support programmes aimed at strengthening the
effectiveness of subregional efforts and mechanisms.

As can be seen from reading the report, the
mandate was discharged and discharged well. But one
point remains that relates to the outcome of the
consultations with member States on how to strengthen
cooperation with the United Nations. At the talks,
according to our information, the countries of Central
Africa strongly urged the introduction of a United
Nations political presence in the subregion through the
establishment of a subregional office that could
specifically facilitate, inter alia, the integrated, overall
approach that the Security Council recommended.

The report before us, in its observations section,
does not resolve that concern that was so strongly
voiced by the Governments of the subregion, and that
has given rise to a feeling of disquiet, indeed, of
disappointment, in the subregion. Why does the

mission - after devoting an entire section to the
question of a United Nations political presence in
Central Africa - neglect that issue in the

recommendations made in its final observations?
Perhaps some clues to an explanation could be found in
reading the letter of transmission from the Secretary-
General. But reading that letter simply increases the
sense of disquiet and disappointment that I mentioned
before. The Secretary-General's letter begins by
suggesting that a United Nations political presence in
Central Africa is something called for by "most" of the
subregion. In other words, to further clarify, the need
for a United Nations political presence is not
something that was expressed by all of the members of
the subregion, by all the members of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) -
because that group essentially is Central Africa.

I would be happy to hear from the Assistant
Secretary-General who led the mission how many of
the countries he met with objected to the idea of an
enhanced United Nations presence in Central Africa
through the establishment of an office there. I would
appreciate his reply in his capacity as head of that
mission. While awaiting that response, I would like to
say that - given the information that I have - I
believe the request for an increased United Nations
presence comes from the membership of our subregion
as a whole. The request was made explicitly in certain
documents, some of which are available at the United
Nations. I refer, in particular, to the deliberations of the
United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa and I believe our
President will revert to that question. Thus, from the
information we have, Central Africa unanimously
desires an increased United Nations presence in the
form of a subregional office. So, for that reason, it is
not quite proper to say that "most" of the countries
supported the proposal. That was my first point.

My second point, in rereading the Secretary-
General's letter, is that he says that while it is true that
the Central African States want an increased United
Nations presence, there are problems, one of which is
the proliferation of offices and special representatives
in the subregion. That is true. But I would note that
Central Africa does not have a monopoly on having a
profusion of United Nations offices - that is the case
in other subregions. However, that has not prevented,
the Secretary-General, at least in the recent past, from
setting up an institution or an office such as the one
proposed by the Central African subregion in this case.

In addition, it bears remembering that the offices
in question are national offices, national structures, and
they deal with very specific issues, not with regional
issues as a whole. So those offices and their leadership
cannot really help in advocating the integrated, global
and comprehensive approach that is needed in Central
Africa. I can give you as an example some of the
offices which I am aware, such as an office in the
Central African Republic that deals with Central
African Republic issues; an office in Burundi that deals
with issues relating to Burundi; and a mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that deals with
matters relating to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There is no structure for Central Africa as a
subregion.

The Secretary-General says in his letter that the
person he would appoint would work in collaboration
with his special representatives in the subregion. Now,
who are those special representatives of the Secretary-
General in our subregion? We do not know them. We
know that there is one representative charged with a
very specific mandate: the preparations for the
international conference on the Great Lakes region.
But, as far as concerns the Central African
subregion - made up the members of ECCAS - as
far as we are aware, we do not have a special
representative for our subregion.

There is a third point I would like to make about
the Secretary-General's letter. There is a reference to
certain circumstances that could foster the
establishment of a regional office: specifically, he
refers to the need for a study on the causes of conflict
in Central Africa. But we would question the
advisability of such an exercise for two reasons. First,
Central Africa itself has carried out a study within the
context of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa.
The outcome of that study was published in a United
Nations document (A/50/474), which is available. So
why should a new study be carried out? Secondly, it
should be pointed out that the Secretary-General
himself, a few years later, published a report on the
causes of conflict in Africa, which dealt with the entire
issue. We cannot understand what new insight the
study to be carried out is supposed to provide.

The last point underscored in the Secretary-
General's letter - which is seen to effectively prevent
any discussion of the creation of a United Nations
office at the moment - relates to preparations under
way for a conference on the Great Lakes region. One
would therefore have to wait until all of that is
finished, especially since there are ECCAS countries
that are parties involved in this conference as well.

But I think that here also we have to distinguish
between two things. The conference on the Great Lakes
covers one very specific subregion, even though three
or four countries in our subregion are affected by what
happens there. But in no way does the Great Lakes
conference concern the Economic Community of
Central African States. I think we have to draw that
distinction. Central Africa has its own identity; it

should not just be hooked onto other entities.

I apologize if I have spoken at some length, but I
am saying this so that the members of the Council, who
called for this study and gave a mandate to the mission,
will be fully informed about what has happened and is
happening.

Just one last comment. The report before us has
been available since 10 September, but as far as
members of the Council are concerned, I believe it is
only this month that we were able to have in English a
report that deals with basically a French-speaking
subregion. That did not facilitate the study of the report
in our capitals, and that is one of the reasons why most
of the ministers that might have attended this debate
were not able to come.

Central Africa has come to the Security Council
to say exactly what Central Africa is and what it hopes
for from the Security Council and the United Nations.
Central Africa has come to request, and it has
requested, of the United Nations that it be present
permanently, not just on an ad hoc basis, that the
United Nations have a permanent presence in Central
Africa. Central Africa hopes that the United Nations
will do its utmost to ensure that a positive response can
be provided to that request, a request made and
repeated on good grounds, I believe.

We might have expected financial factors to be
somewhat of a hindrance. Central Africa is saying that
the United Nations does in fact have sufficient existing
resources and structures. It is a question of seeing how
those existing structures and resources can be used to
ensure a permanent United Nations presence.

My delegation hopes that at the end of our
deliberations, the statement that will be negotiated in
the next few days and then adopted may reconfirm the
need for a comprehensive, agreed-on and integrated
approach. It is our hope that the Council will take note
of and be pleased by the interest shown by Central
Africa in having a United Nations presence there and
will welcome the proposal by the heads of State.

And lastly, it is our hope that the Secretary-
General might be requested to see how the request can
be met within existing resources. Experience shows us
that our requests can be handled swiftly and effectively.
Perhaps it could be specified just when the Secretary-
General would report to the Council on how this matter

has been handled. As a mission has already been
carried out, three months or six months might be
appropriate, but in any case, a date must be set.

I apologize for having spoken at such length, but
I do believe that this matter is particularly important.
Central Africa wants to work with the United Nations.
Central Africa is requesting, imploring the United
Nations to have a permanent presence in the subregion,
so that it can monitor closely what is happening there
and provide assistance on an ongoing basis to the
States in the subregion.

