Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): My delegation thanks
our briefers, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Fall and the Secretary-General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS),
Mr. Ahmad A11am-Mi, for their informative updates
and contributions to our deliberations today. We would
like to make our observations and recommendations on
some key and salient points.

First, Kazakhstan recognizes the importance of
the work of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA), in line with the Secretary-
General's new agenda for peace, inter alia, in the
field of preventive diplomacy and mediation, as well
as the support it provides to regional and subregional
organizations in achieving durable and long-term
peace. We also note, despite the existing problems in
the region, the efforts and commitments of the countries
of the region to increase subregional integration and
ongoing reforms aimed at strengthening the rule of law
and good governance.

On the other hand, we are particularly concerned
by the tension in the English-speaking regions of
Cameroon. We support the efforts of the authorities of
Cameroon, as well as UNOCA, the African Union and
ECCAS, to address that issue. At the same time, we urge
all parties involved to create all necessary conditions
for the cessation of violence, and we stress the need to
establish genuine and inclusive dialogue, rebuild trust
and use confidence-building measures.

Secondly, with respect to the counter-terrorism
track, we draw attention to the activities of Boko
Haram and other extremist groups and organized crime
networks. It is therefore important that the African
Union, the Lake Chad Basin Commission and the
United Nations continue to work towards formulating
and implementing a well-coordinated regional
strategy to fight the root causes of the crisis, which
is of a transnational nature expanding across borders.
Simultaneously, if is to be effective and streamlined,
the United Nations has to utilize a whole-of-system
approach and deliver as one United Nations, with a
strengthened security-development nexus for more
enduring political and socioeconomic stability.

The regional States are encountering unprecedented
challenges in combating terrorism. We support the
efforts of UNOCA to coordinate the activities of regional
organizations in that regard. We welcome the adoption
of the ECCAS strategy to prevent and fight terrorism
in Central Africa, developed under the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions in
Central Africa. In that vein, we call on all international
partners - such as the Multinational Joint Task Force
in the Lake Chad area and the African Union Regional
Task Force in the Central African region - to continue
to support regional counter-terrorist forces.

Thirdly, the problem of the increasing number of
internally displaced persons and refugees in the region
deserves special attention. That issue, along with a
reduction in humanitarian access due to the lack of
security for those in need of help, puts a heavy burden
on host communities and countries against the backdrop
of limited funding for humanitarian assistance.
Moreover, outbreaks of epidemics worsen the situation.
In that regard, what is needed is not only the support of
international donors, but also the coordinated efforts
of local Governments to ensure security and create the
conditions for the voluntary return of refugees, with the
full support of the United Nations system.

Lastly, we highly appreciate the coordinating role
of UNOCA as the secretariat of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa and its invaluable contribution to the
maintenance of peace and security in the region. Still,
much work remains to be done to consolidate the gains
achieved. In that regard, we support the extension of
the UNOCA mandate for the next three years.

