Mr. Al-Shamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me to first of all
congratulate you on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. We have full
confidence in your ability to wisely steer the work of
the Council. We would also like to thank your
predecessor, the Chinese Ambassador, on his
presidency of the Council. We also want to thank you
for convening this emergency open meeting of the
Council at such a delicate time when we urgently need
the political will of the international community to end
the brutal and immoral practices carried out by the
Israeli occupying forces against the helpless Palestinian
people in defiance of international law.

The United Arab Emirates was shocked, along
with the rest of the world, by the assassination
yesterday morning of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, founder of
the Islamic resistance movement Hamas, as he left a
mosque, by means of rockets fired from an Israeli
helicopter. We firmly condemn this cowardly killing,
which targeted an elderly, helpless and disabled man.
We believe that that butchery is flagrant evidence of
the policy of State terrorism systematically carried out
by the Israeli Government against the Palestinian
people. Even more serious, the Israeli Prime Minister,
Ariel Sharon, personally directed the extrajudicial
killing of Sheikh Yassin from his office. This is
evidence that the Israeli Government rejects peace and
all initiatives to achieve a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, to end the occupation and to establish an
independent Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its
capital.

This is not the first time that Israel has resorted to
State terrorism. From September 2000 until the
beginning of this month, the Israeli army has killed
2,858 civilians - men, women and children - in
addition to destroying property and hundreds of homes.
The fact that Israel is continuing this policy of terror
and extrajudicial killings not only constitutes a
contradiction of international law and basic human
rights, but also undermines the rule of law, which is the
cornerstone of the fight against terrorism.

The United Arab Emirates believes that this
criminal act of assassinating Sheikh Yassin and his
companions is further evidence of the Israeli
Government's contempt for international law and the
divine Shariah. It also shows that Israel is determined
to increase tension in the region and undermine all
efforts for peace supported by the Secretary-General
and many world leaders. Therefore, we call upon the
international community and the major countries to
condemn this operation, to work promptly to put an end
to the continued Israeli attacks against Palestinians and
to offer the latter guarantees of protection.

We reaffirm that Israel must withdraw from all
the territories it occupied in 1967 and implement all
international resolutions on the question of Palestine.
We also insist that the international community face up
to its responsibilities with respect to the future of the
Palestinian people and compel Israel to return to the
peace process on the basis of the Arab peace initiative
and the road map in order to establish two independent
States, Palestine and Israel, living side by side in peace
and security.

We hope that this meeting will not conclude as
always with the mere repetition of condemnation. The
Council must face up to its responsibilities and
mandates to preserve peace and security in the world
and must adopt the necessary measures to immediately
dissuade the Israeli Government from its hostile
practices in order not to endanger international peace
and security.

