Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to begin by congratulating the
Republic of Ghana on its presidency of the Security
Council this month. It is an honour to see the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of your country, Mr. Nana Addo
Dankwa Akufo-Addo, chairing the meeting. We
welcome the initiative to discuss peace consolidation in
West Africa, because it enables us, in the Council and
in general, to review the situation prevailing in the
countries of that important subregion of Africa, in
order to contribute to finding comprehensive solutions
to the various challenges facing the region. In that
context, we welcome the presence and support of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
West Africa, Mr. Ould-Abdallah, as well as the
Executive Secretary of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), Mr. Ibn Chambas.

Guatemala has closely observed the violent
conflicts involving various countries of that region of
Africa. Guatemala itself experienced an internal
2

conflict that lasted four decades, and we understand the
urgent need to strive for peace, stability and
development. We also understand the importance of
regional cooperation and the benefits of strengthening
integration mechanisms.

At no other time in the past have we been as close
to establishing a favourable environment for the
creation and strengthening of international capacities
and for articulating strategies that will help to achieve
sustainable development in the region. The
revitalization of ECOWAS and its links with the
African Union, the way in which it works with the help
of the United Nations and the support of other
international actors are steps in the right direction for
these efforts and thus, bode well for a better future for
the people of the region.

We are glad that the document circulated for this
meeting (5/2006/610) has acknowledged the need to
strengthen and bolster that kind of concerted action.
Guatemala strongly supports the high-level meetings of
the United Nations Secretariat and regional
organizations, as well as the creation of the Standing
Committee. We believe those will help keep us focused
in the correct strategic direction and offer general
guidance on the practical level. We must now take care
of those mechanisms to ensure that they are effective,
binding and flexible and that they always act in
keeping with the principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter.

We must remember that security matters are of a
priority nature, and cooperation in military and
political areas should be sustained and coordinated.
However, we believe that cooperation should go further
and should try to address the precarious humanitarian
situation of refugees and internally displaced persons
in the regions. The synergy between ECOWAS and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) in that area seems to be a sound
approach.

We also attach similar importance to another joint
effort that we believe will contribute to peace
consolidation in the region, namely, the cooperation
among United Nations entities that are designed to
harmonize disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes, while taking into account
the special needs of women and children as the most
vulnerable individuals, as well as the disabled.
06-46124
Good governance, the strengthening of justice
systems and the formulation and pursuit of human
rights policies will not be possible without
strengthening national capacities and keeping those
capacities up-to-date. Here too, we see a special role
for actors in the region, who should supplement United
Nations actions aimed at continued identification of the
priorities and actions needed for the elaboration of
effective strategies and programmes to overcome
challenges and contribute to the region's development.
In that connection, we welcome what appears to be a
Council practice: the incorporation of elements
anticipating that need within the framework of
peacekeeping operations.

I should like to refer briefly to the role of
development of the Peacebuilding Commission, which,
following its initial organizational and informational
meetings, must provide concrete follow-up to actions
needed to stimulate peace consolidation and attain the
wider objective of sustainable development in the
region.

Given the experience acquired through the
Economic and Social Council's Ad Hoc Advisory
Groups on African countries emerging from conflict,
we believe it is important that the Peacebuilding
Commission cooperate proactively not only in the
important work of mobilizing international
cooperation, but also in helping national authorities
establish priorities and devise realistic strategies and
coherent policies adapted to the circumstances and
environment of each country.

We must bear in mind that peace consolidation is
not achieved only by preventing outbreaks of violence
or physically rebuilding a country or its legal
framework. The Peacebuilding Commission must go
further and support comprehensive changes that
eliminate practices leading to social, economic and
political exclusion and transform State institutions so
that citizens can regain confidence in them and
participate in them.

Therefore, the cooperation that the Peacebuilding
Commission can provide to the Security Council
should be to offer a mechanism to follow up on the
initial work of maintaining peace and security, in
which all actors involved in a particular transition and
recovery process can interact openly and transparently,
addressing the broader areas involved in peace
consolidation - areas in which the Economic and
06-46124

Social Council, in its particular area of responsibility,
has tasks to accomplish. That would ultimately
contribute to better interaction, coordination and
coherence not only between the two Councils but also
throughout the United Nations system.

Finally, Guatemala notes with satisfaction the
recent creation of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Sierra Leone, established by the Security Council in
order to consolidate peace in that country, help the
Government to strengthen human rights and achieve
the Millennium Goals, improve transparency and
cooperate with the country so that it can hold
democratic elections in 2007. We have the same
expectations for Cote d'Ivoire in October 2006.

Guatemala welcomes the developments in
Guinea-Bissau and the activities of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Support Office in Guinea-Bissau.
Likewise, the positive changes that have occurred in
Liberia are true examples of stability and strengthening
in the region. These examples make us optimistic about
the achievement of a promising future for all our
brothers and sisters in the region.

