Ms. Pham (Viet Nam): I would like to join previous
speakers in congratulating the President on Sweden's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
this month and in thanking the President for convening
this very important meeting on conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. My sincere congratulations and warm
welcome also go to the new non-permanent members of
the Security Council and the new Secretary-General.
I would like to wish them tremendous successes
throughout their terms.

Our world today is facing a multitude of complex
emerging and recurring security challenges, both
traditional and non-traditional. Prolonged disputes
not only hinder the development efforts; they are also
potential causes of conflict. The Asia-Pacific region is
no exception and is wracked with intractable conflicts
over natural resources and territorial disputes,
including in the East Sea - also known as the South
China Sea - that could undermine international peace
and security.

Therefore, it is high time for the United Nations
to renew its commitment to taking effective collective
measures for the prevention and removal of threats to
peace. The United Nations should continue its leading
role in promoting a collective security architecture.
For such an architecture to work, we must strengthen
multilateralism, advance the establishment of rules
and norms and ensure respect for and compliance with
international law, without any threat or use of force.
We treasure the values outlined in the vision of the
new Secretary-General for fulfilling the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations
with regard to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

As indicated in relevant resolutions and reports
during the past reviews on the United Nations peace
and security architecture, there is an urgent need to put
conflict prevention and dispute settlement at the core of
the Organization's work, as provided for in Article 33 of
the Charter. In order to achieve such goals, the Security
Council should continue to promote robust leadership
and actively assume its primary responsibility to
maintain international peace and security. Such
endeavours also need the shared responsibility of all
Member States, with strong political will and the active
participation of the relevant international, regional and
subregional organizations.

Furthermore, we should strengthen close
coordination and cooperation within the United Nations
system, particularly among the Secretary-General, the
Security Council and the General Assembly, in order
to develop a long-term and comprehensive strategy for
conflict prevention and sustainable development, with
due respect for national independence, sovereignty
and integrity.

We also believe that additional internationally
binding legal instruments are much needed and should
be strengthened to effectively control the proliferation
of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass
destruction to non-State actors, to combat transnational
human and drug trafficking and to prevent the
propagation of violent extremist ideology and terrorism.
More attention should be given to assisting Member
States in addressing the root causes of conflicts,
promoting national reconciliation, reconstruction and
development and enhancing good governance and
institutional capabilities, which are key factors that
lead to sustaining peace.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), of which Viet Nam is a very proud member,
is a community striving for peace, harmony and
shared responsibility, and has been playing the central
role in building our region's security architecture,
thereby contributing to the maintenance of peace and
security in South-East Asia. ASEAN has also worked,
with much success, to seek solutions to disputes and
prevent conflicts, including in the East Sea. ASEAN
has always been committed to upholding the primacy
of international law, including the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, and diplomatic
and legal processes, to ensuring the full and effective
implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct
of Parties in the South China Sea and to striving for
an early conclusion of a code of conduct in the South
China Sea. We call on all States to join ASEAN in
that effort, with the common vision for a South-East
Asian region of peace, stability and prosperity. In order
to move the United Nations conflict prevention and
sustaining peace agenda forward, we need bold and
tireless endeavours from both the United Nations and
Member States.

