Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): I thank the Council for
convening this meeting and for inviting me.

I would like to start by expressing my gratitude
to all Council members who addressed my Mission
today with words of condolences to the family of the
Ukrainian soldier who was killed yesterday after being
shot in his neck when a group of gunmen stormed the
Ukrainian military base in the north-east of Crimea, in
Simferopol. Yesterday our Foreign Minister protested
against all hostile and provocative actions of the
Russian Federdation's armed forces, which caused the
death of the Ukrainian soldier.

Today we observed tremendous changes in the
situation in Crimea, but unfortunately those changes
are not for good. As we have envisaged in other previous
statements, the illegitimate referendum on the issue of
the annexation of the territory of Crimea to the Russian
Federation was conducted in an expedited manner on
16 March. Following immediately after the referendum,
on 18 March, the President of the Russian Federation
defiantly signed the agreement on its accession to the
Russian Federation, which is supposed to be ratified by
the Parliament of the Russian Federation on 21 March.

We consider all those acts to be illegitimate and we
call upon the entire civilized world not to recognize the
illegitimately declared independence of Crimea and its
violent dismembering from the territory of the country.

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights
for their important briefings on the situation of human
rights in Ukraine. For our part, I would like to say
only that the real violation of human rights is taking
place on the territory of the Crimean peninsula, which
is currently under the total control of the illegitimate
authorities of Crimea.

First of all, there are serious reservations about the
expressed free will of the population of that region of
Ukraine, because since 26 February, the armed forces
of the Russian Federation have, de facto, occupied
Crimea. Let me provide the Council with some of
the facts of the human rights violations that occurred
during the illegal referendum.

Some ballots were distributed to voters who were not
registered at the voting site, including nationals of other
countries. Russian citizens with a residency permit in
Simferopol were able to get a ballot for the referendum
and in fact to vote. But those who did not go to polling
stations were visited by mobile voting teams, escorted
by police, thus forcing people to vote. Journalists were
banned, despite having valid credentials.

Additional voters lists included large numbers
of citizens who were not qualified to vote. Contrary
to existing elections provisions, ballots were issued
immediately after submitting a registration application
to a supplementary list, without a vote by the
Commission members having taken place.

Even the results of the illegal referendum are very
doubtful because of the decision made by the Crimean
Tartars - who include about 300,000 people - to
boycott. Ethnic Ukrainians, who make up about half
a million people, and national minority populations
in Crimea did not take part in the referendum. The
referendum ballots indicated two questions as options,
neither of which provided for maintaining the present
status as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea;
rather, they only referred to accession to the Russian
Federation.
The personalities of foreign observers who were
invited to Crimea to monitor the referendum raised
serious doubts regarding impartiality.

Once again, I would like to emphasize the illegality
of the referendum. Even without regard for the laws or
sovereign territorial jurisdiction of Ukraine, of which
the Autonomous Republic of Crimea is a subject, self-
proclaimed authorities in Crimea held a referendum
on 16 March that violated not only Ukraine's
current legislation but also the fundamental rules of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, the Statute of the Council of Europe and other
documents, including of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the 1991 Alma-
Ata Declaration regarding the Commonwealth of
Independent States.

An abundance of evidence, including photographs
and videotaped materials, eyewitness accounts of
events, including those of foreign nationals, prove
that the conditions of the so-called referendum failed
to meet the democratic standards of referendums
developed under the framework of the OSCE and the
Council of Europe. The declaration of independence
by the Crimean Republic is a direct consequence of
the application of the use of force and threats against
Ukraine by the Russian Federation. Given the Russian
nuclear power status, the situation is particularly
dangerous in terms of Ukraine's independence and
territorial integrity and for international peace and
security in general.

Accordingly, I assert that, on the basis of customary
norms and international law, the international
community is obliged not to recognize Crimea as a
subject of international law, or any situation, treaty
or agreement that may arise or be achieved by that
territory.

My country expresses its strong and imperative
protest against the recognition of the Russian
Federation of the self-proclaimed republic, as a matter
of international law. Those actions by the Russian side
do not meet the international obligations of the Russian
Federation in relation to its multilateral and bilateral
agreements guaranteeing the territorial integrity of
Ukraine, the integrity and inviolability of borders and
non-interference in the internal affairs of other States.

The independence of that formation was declared
by an illegitimate authority based on the results of the
anti-constitutional referendum held under outrageous
violations of the democratic standards. Russia's
recognition of the self-proclaimed republic of Crimea
has one single goal: to create pseudo-legitimate reasons
for the annexation of the territory of Ukraine and its
incorporation into the Russian Federation.

We are seriously concerned about the security of
the ethnic Ukrainians, Ukrainian Tartars, Karaims
and other ethnic groups living in Crimea that have not
supported the so-called referendum. Their lives are
seriously threatened.

In conclusion, I would like to echo my Council
colleagues. Ukraine and the entire civilized world
will never recognize the illegitimately declared
independence of Crimea and its accession to the
Russian Federation.

