The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Gabon.
At the outset, I should like to express my
gratitude to the Deputy Secretary-General, who wished
to participate in this debate, and to thank her for her
important statement, which recalled the ongoing efforts
of the United Nations to better organize the fight
against illicit trafficking in small arms and light
weapons.

I also welcome the presence of Mr. Louis
Sylvain-Goma, Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS), and
thank him for his rich contribution to this debate, in
which, as members will have noted, he underscored the
scale of this problem in Central Africa, the
susceptibility of the subregion owing to its numerous
areas of lawlessness, as well as the cooperation
initiatives being carried out by ECCAS member States
with a view to better combating trafficking.

We further welcome the participation in this
debate of representatives of other regional
organizations, in particular the African Union and the
European Union. Finally, I should like to thank various
speakers for the kind words they expressed to the
Gabonese delegation, and above all for their positive
assessment of the topic and timeliness of this debate.

It is evident from all the statements we have
heard that, from a broad perspective, the issue of illicit
arms trafficking is new neither for the Security
Council, nor for the United Nations in general. It will
be recalled that the Council first considered this matter
at a ministerial meeting held on 24 September 1999 at
which it issued a presidential statement
(S/PRST/1999/28). In 2001, the Council once again
considered this topic to assess its role in the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects of July 2001. That meeting
also led to a presidential statement (S/PRST/2001/21).
The representative of China correctly referred in his
remarks to other meetings of the Council on this topic
and others related to it. Since 2002, the Secretary-
General has published no less then five reports on this
matter. All these efforts of the Council and the
Secretary-General were able to identify the measures to
be taken at the international level to tackle the
challenge of illicit arms trafficking.

In taking the initiative to organize this debate
during our presidency, Gabon seeks to further engage
the Security Council to take account of changes
relating to illicit arms trafficking in the subregion and
to consider innovative measures aimed at better
combating and eliminating this scourge. Our hope is to
see this debate trigger consideration in greater depth of
ways to strengthen the implementation of the measures
contained in the July 2001 Programme of Action and
the International Instrument to Enable States to
Identify and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner,
Illicit Small Arms and Light Weapons, as well as the
various relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

As several speakers have stressed, the
proliferation of weapons, in particular small arms and
light weapons, has become one of the main concerns of
the international community because of the multiple
negative consequences arising from this phenomenon.
Indeed, the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
is a factor that destabilizes States in terms of security,
humanitarian considerations and development. These
weapons are also used as means for violating human
rights, including in times of peace.

Because of the various crises and conflicts
throughout the world exacerbated by the illicit flow of
small arms and light weapons, the United Nations
organized, in New York in July 2001, the first
Conference devoted to this question, which led to the
adoption of the United Nations Programme of Action
to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.

The Secretary General of the Economic
Community of Central African States, Mr. Louis
Silvain-Goma, has rightly pointed out that Central
Africa, which is one of the regions most affected by
this phenomenon, has adopted measures to implement
that programme. The countries of Central Africa also
decided in May 2007 in Sao Tome and Principe to
establish a legally binding instrument to control small
arms and light weapons, their ammunitions and all
equipments that might be used in their manufacture.

The next ministerial meeting of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Questions in Central Africa, which will take place in
April in Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
will be devoted to consideration of that draft. With
other countries of the subregion, Gabon is committed
to enhancing national and subregional measures to
combat the illicit traffic in small arms and light
weapons and to strengthening confidence-building
measures adopted within the context of the United
Nations Standing Advisory Committee on Security
Question in Central Africa. Similarly, we are
determined to enhance the transparency in weapons,
including through the establishment of a subregional
register of national stockpiles of small arms and light
weapons.

Globally, Gabon is in favour of the drafting and
adoption of an arms trade treaty establishing common
standards in this area. Such a treaty would enhance
existing international instruments against the illicit
arms traffic. The draft presidential statement that has
been negotiated, and which my delegation is
submitting to the Council today for adoption, reflects
our commitment to combating the illicit arms traffic.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on Mr. Te'te Antonio, Permanent Observer
of the African Union.

