Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Once
again, tragedy has struck Haiti. As we all know, that
unfortunate nation has suffered for many years, and it
has required the support of the international
community time and again in order to lay the
foundation for its development, as the Council noted
when it travelled to Haiti in March 2009. We extend
our sincere condolences to the Government and people
of Haiti and to all those Governments whose nationals
have been affected on the ground, personnel from the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti, other
United Nations agencies and other organizations
present in the country.

The Government of President Caldero'n took
immediate decisions in coordination with the
Government of Haiti, and a group of experts and
consultants comprised of doctors specializing in
treating injuries caused by collapsed structures, search
and rescue specialists, experts in damage assessment
and emergency administration is travelling to Port-au-
Prince to determine, in support of the Government of
Haiti, specifically what kind of help will be needed.
The President and the Government of Mexico have also
been in contact with other Governments in order to
provide the necessary coordination of aid that will need
to be given to Haiti.

We welcome the decision taken by the Chinese
delegation to select such a relevant subject for this
thematic debate of the Security Council. Indeed, this
meeting follows up on discussion promoted by Mexico
in April 2003 during its previous membership as a
non-permanent member of the Security Council. We
welcome the representatives of the regional and
subregional organizations who have joined us in this
meeting today. We welcome this opportunity to have an
exchange of views on the way in which we can define a
consistent format for cooperation between the United
Nations and various regional and subregional
organizations working in the area of peace and
security.

The founders of the United Nations had the vision
to identify the advantages of a close relationship
between the new Organization and the so-called
regional and subregional arrangements with regard
both to the pacific settlement of disputes and to the
implementation of coercive measures, according to the
cases and procedures provided for in the Charter of the
United Nations itself. It is important that we remember
that.

We should also remember that at that point in
time the countries of Latin America played a
significant role in promoting this vision, which had
emanated from the Chapultepec Conference in Mexico
that took place prior to the San Francisco Conference.

I would note that my delegation considers that,
despite recent significant developments, cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
has yet to reach its full potential and should be
substantially strengthened.

Joint action by the United Nations and the
African Union in Burundi, Ethiopia and Eritrea, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Somalia, along
with that carried out together with the European Union
in Chad, Congo and the Sudan and with the
Organization of American States in Haiti, provides
convincing evidence of the contribution of regional
organizations in the Security Council's efforts to
maintain international peace and security. An important
component of cooperation between the United Nations
and those organizations may be seen in cases where we
need to ensure the maintenance of peace through joint
or hybrid missions such as the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) and the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). There, as in
other cases, the human and material resources that
regional organizations can provide, given the necessary
mandate and capacity, have proven to offer an
appropriate and effective option.

We must analyse these experiences and lessons
learned in order to promote greater coherence within
the Security Council, permitting due coordination and
the adoption of decisions jointly with regional
organizations, in particular the African Union. My
delegation considers that initiatives by regional and
subregional organizations in the early stages of a
conflict, making use of early warning and prevention
mechanisms, can be decisive in avoiding the need for
larger-scale action by the broader international
community. In particular, the ability of those
organizations to promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes through mediation and other means has clearly
proven effective and importance.

The same can be said of the peacebuilding and
national reconstruction phase, when regional and
subregional organizations are called upon to play a
fundamental role in building stability and preventing a
new spiral of violence. Regional organizations'
in-depth knowledge of the underlying causes of local
conflicts and other security challenges gives them a
comparative advantage vis-a-vis actors from outside
the region. In all cases, the promotion of economic and
social development is an indispensable element in
addressing the structural causes of conflict and
ensuring peace and stability in the medium term, taking
account of the indissoluble link between security and
development.

We must take full advantage of each regional
organization's particular experience in its own sphere
of competence and in the context of its own mandate.
That is why we welcome the emphasis in today's
debate and in the draft presidential statement to be
adopted later in the meeting on the prevention of
conflict and on peacebuilding. We consider that the
Security Council and the Secretary-General should
focus on both those areas.

Let me briefly note a number of areas in which
my delegation feels that the efforts of the Security
Council and other United Nations bodies can
complement the work of regional and subregional
organizations. I shall mention only the areas of
strengthening the rule of law, promoting human rights,
protecting civilians and combating the illicit trade in
small arms and light weapons.

On the latter matter, resolution 1631 (2005)
stresses the role of regional organizations in combating
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons,
including by facilitating the identification and tracing
of such weapons. We know that the illicit trade in these
arms fuels conflict. That is why a number of regional
and subregional organizations have gone to
considerable lengths to prevent that trade. An major
integrated focus on this, making it possible to repeat
past successes, would be of great value to the United
Nations. The same could be said of other regional
problems such as transboundary organized crime and
drug trafficking.

In conclusion, let me say that the regional and
subregional organizations represented here have
diverse mandates and capacities. Hence, we cannot
have a single template for cooperation and
coordination between the United Nations and all these
organizations. It is clear, however, that all have a
contribution to make in achieving the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. On the basis of the
principle of complementarity, we can make more
rational and effective use of the comparative
advantages of each organization.

We should therefore work together to develop
common principles that will enable us to make better
use of these relationships, in accordance with the
norms of international law. It is vital to establish
mechanisms for consultation between relevant regional
bodies and the Security Council, including periodic
interactive dialogues. We have already set our common
agenda; we need now to further define how we can
work together closely and to our mutual benefit, as
provided for in 1945.

