Mr. Kawamura (Japan): I would like to thank
Ms. Sandra Honore, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her comprehensive wrap-up
briefing on the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH), whose mandate will successfully
conclude next Sunday. Japan welcomes the outline
of MINUSTAH's achievements in the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2017/840) and pays tribute to
Special Representative Honore, her predecessors, their
teams, the Secretariat and, particularly, the troop- and
police-contributing countries for their tireless support
to Haiti over the past 13 years.

Japan's participation in MINUSTAH was also an
important step in its history of contributing to United
Nations peacekeeping.

We deployed approximately 2,200 Self-Defence
Forces personnel to the Mission beginning in 2010
to support reconstruction following the earthquake.
Those efforts included training Haitians in the use
of heavy machinery, as well as technology transfer. I
was particularly encouraged by a report that I received
from a staff member who joined the Mission and
provided training to young Haitians in the operation
of the heavy machinery. In it, he wrote that the most
memorable moment for him was when the young
Haitian trainees expressed their joy with every part of
their body on the day they passed the qualifying exams
for their operating licenses. We have been encouraged
by the Haitian display of ownership in rebuilding their
country based on that report. Japan is proud of its Self-
Defence Forces' success in helping lay the groundwork
for stability, and we have built on those experiences
during subsequent deployments.

Japan welcomes the continued implementation of
the joint MINUSTAH-United Nations country team
transition plan, as well as the progress in efforts to
ensure that the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) will be operational
on the first day. We join the Secretary-General in
calling on the Government to sign the status-of-forces
agreement by 16 October. We look forward to working
with MINUJUSTH and the Government to strengthen
the rule of law and institutions, and further advance the
development and professionalization of Haiti's police
in line with the 2017-2021 strategic development plan.
Haiti is on the path towards further consolidating its
democracy, national unity and stability. We commend
the efforts of the Government and the people of Haiti to
that end, and those efforts must continue.

However, as was evident during the Council's Visit
in June, enormous peacebuilding and development
needs remain. As the Secretary-General stressed in
his report, there are ongoing challenges in the areas
of governance, human rights, gender equality, judicial
reform and institution-building. We must support Haiti
now so as to ensure its self-reliance in future. The role
of the international community and the United Nations
country team will be crucial. With the ownership of the
Haitian authorities, Japan will continue to support the
development and improvement of basic social services,
as well as post-disaster reconstruction.

We have focused a great deal on alleviating the
suffering caused by the devastating cholera outbreak.
Japan has provided more than $9 million through
UNICEF and other international organizations since
2010, with a focus on the construction and improvement
of water-, sanitation- and hygiene-related facilities.
We will continue our support, especially through
preventive social, economic and public-health measures
and poverty reduction, as well as resilient and high-
quality infrastructure.

Haiti has made commendable progress under
challenging conditions, but continued United Nations
efforts and the attention of the Security Council
continue to be necessary. Japan looks forward to
working with the international community to ensure
that recent improvements lead to lasting progress in the
lives of the Haitian people.

