Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank High Representative Valentin
Inzko and Ms. Selma Korjenie for their briefings.

We welcome the unanimity demonstrated by
the Security Council, which led to our adoption of
resolution 2496 (2019), renewing the mandate of the
European Union-led Operation Althea for a further
year. The mission contributes to the viability of a
united, sovereign and multi-ethnic Bosnian State, as
well as to the stabilization of the region. As a member
of the European Union, Belgium will continue to lend
Bosnia and Herzegovina its full support.

Six months after the High Representative's last
briefing (see S/PV.8522), we have to acknowledge that the
same challenges persist and that the political stalemate
continues to delay the adoption and implementation
of the reforms that the country desperately needs. We
reiterate that a political or legislative solution to the
electoral process must be consistent with the decisions
of the European Court of Human Rights. Almost 10
years after the decision on the Seja'ie and Finci case,
its implementation is a dead letter. In this context,
it is also essential to work urgently to implement
the recommendations of the Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has made a strategic
choice, taking the path of Euro-Atlantic integration.
That is also a choice for a democracy founded on respect
for the rule of law and human rights. We are deeply
concerned about the serious shortcomings we have seen
with regard to respect for the rule of law, as well by the
latest incidents in the High Judicial and Prosecutorial
Council. It is a matter of urgency to ensure that the
necessary reforms are enacted to strengthenjustice and
the independence of the judiciary. Given the Council's
crucial role, it is critical that it respect the highest
ethical and professional standards. We are also deeply
concerned about the increasing attacks on freedom of
expression and assembly and freedom of the press over
the past few months. We reiterate the importance of
guaranteeing those freedoms without discrimination of
any kind.

A just, stable and lasting peace is not possible
if justice is not done. In the context of a transitional
justice process, true reconciliation is only possible if
concrete measures are taken to combat impunity by
guaranteeing the prosecution of war criminals. The
victims and survivors must be at the heart of these
efforts. Their rights must be assured, as must their
substantial participation in defining the Government's
reconciliation efforts. There can be no reconciliation
without reparation. We stress the importance of
including civil-society organizations, young people
and women in this process so that it has broad support
throughout society.

Finally, in that connection, we reiterate our
profound concern about speech that seeks to deny
the Srebrenica genocide, glorify war crimes and their
perpetrators and incite hatred. Such rhetoric reinforces
a climate of mistrust and undermines the reconciliation
process. Rather than sowing seeds of discord, we call
for the planting of seeds to grow a just, stable and
lasting peace.

