Mr. O'Brien: I would like to begin by saluting the
life of Khaled Omar Harrah, a member of the White
Helmets killed on 11 August by air strikes. Council
members all remember him, I am sure. We remember
him in the video that we saw as he brushed aside debris
and reached through a hole in the wall to pull out a
lO-day-old baby from the rubble ofa collapsed building
in 2014. How could we not? How could anyone forget
those searing images of rescued children, carried by
young men and women barely visible through clouds
of smoke and mounds of rubble. How can we forget
such haunting images as that of 5-year-old Omran
Daqneesh, a silent face covered in blood and dust, after
being pulled from the rubble caused by an air strike.
In Omran's case, there is even a video - if one can
bear to watch. Just pause for a moment and imagine
that this was your child, a child that has known nothing
but horrific war. And his brother is dead. Omran was
the "lucky one" according to a local doctor. Lucky is
the word that corresponds to such a context. That is
the reality of what is at stake this morning here in the
Chamber - not the politicking and posturing or the
power games and defensiveness. All we need is for the
guns to fall silent.

Aleppo is being bombed every single day. Just this
morning, we received reports of dozens of new attacks.
The entire city is affected by fighting causing hundreds
of civilian casualties. Air strikes in the east and rocket
and mortar attacks in the west are destroying civilian
structure, forcing yet more people to flee for safety,
while their houses are being destroyed and others are
trapped by fighting and unable to move owing to fear
and insecurity. As we sit here around this safe table,
humanitarian rescue workers are risking their lives in
search for those buried under the debris. The risk to
rescue workers is always immense, but it is particularly
so in much of Syria, with reports of these so-called
"double-tap attacks", wherein a helicopter or a jet
bombs a building, then waits some time -just enough
for rescue and medical workers to arrive - before
attacking again. It is estimated that more than 130
White Helmets volunteers have lost their lives since
2013 and that most killings were caused by those
heinous double-tap attacks.

Most rescue workers know that the helicopters are
still circling, but they also know that people are trapped,
dying under the rubble. They still go in, risking their
lives. Doctors facing shortages of supplies must decide
which patients to treat, even as the hospitals in which
they work are attacked while they are all crammed into
the basement. Rescue workers must decide to which
neighbourhoods to send ever-dwindling crews after an
airs trike or mortar attack has destroyed yet another
home, school or hospital.

Khaled and his colleagues have been saving
thousands of lives. Their humanity provides hope in a
place in which there is scarcely any left. They represent
the very best of what it means to be a humanitarian. Just
last Friday, we commemorated World Humanitarian
Day, when we took time to pay tribute to Khaled
and all the brave men and women who have died in
humanitarian service in Syria and around the world.
Let us together honour them here today as well, and
all of those who continue to risk their lives every day
for the benefit of others. The best way of honouring
them is to make the politics round this table work by
collectively agreeing to stop the guns, the shells, the
airstrikes and the bombs. With the Council's collective
will, that can be done now - and now, immediately. I
can assure members that the humanitarians are ready
to go in.
I have briefed the Council numerous times already
on Aleppo. Aleppo has become the apex of horror
at its most horrific extent of the suffering of people.
I did so during an emergency meeting in early May
(see S/PV.7687). I briefed the Council in June (see S/PV.7725) , in July (see S/PV.7744) and as recently as
last week. I have underscored that up to 275,000 people
in eastern Aleppo have been almost entirely cut off
from vital supplies, including food, water, medicine and
electricity, for over a month now, and they are living
in constant fear of total besiegement, while access also
remains extremely difficult to the estimated 1.5 million
people in western parts of the city. Depending on
military developments, either or both parts of the city
could become besieged.

Earlier this month I stressed that the United Nations
had developed an emergency response operational
plan and stood ready to send truckloads of lifesaving
supplies across Aleppo if access and security were
granted. I repeatedly called for a pause in fighting to
allow us to secure a lifeline to those in need. I urged
for a ceasefire, or at a minimum a 48-hour pause. The
Secretary-General reiterated those calls, and so has his
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura, as well as others,
including President Peter Maurer of the International
Committee of the Red Cross. This is not a negotiating
tactic - this is what is needed to put confidence into
the hundreds of truck drivers to jump back in their cabs,
load their trucks and set off on the slow journey over
shell-cratered roads, all the time wondering whether
the sniper will take the shot, or whether an improvised
explosive device will catapult him into the air.

I therefore welcome the announcement by the
Russian Federation on 18 August to support the call for
a 48-hour ceasefire. We are clear that anything shorter
would not allow us to respond meaningfully to the size
of the need we are facing, either in eastern or western
Aleppo today. While that statement is positive, this
cannot be a one-sided offer. I have consistently said
that any pause also needed to include clear security
assurances from all the parties to the conflict. As
German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said
the other day, "you cannot have a unilateral ceasefire";
it has to be a United Nations lead, as the humanitarian
access has to be to all those in need, whoever and
wherever they are. I and my Office are therefore
working with all sides to seek to ensure that, should the
announcement by the Russian Federation translate into
a comprehensive pause, that will enable aid to safely
make its way to those who so desperately need it and
that we can move as quickly as possible.
We are continuing to provide support into western
Aleppo. Over the weekend, we completed an assessment
of an alternative route into western Aleppo that the
trucks would follow, following the closure of the main
thoroughfare into Aleppo from the south. The new
route, which goes around the east of the city and enters
into west Aleppo from the north, has been cleared for
movement. Through that route, we have been able to
provide assistance through our regular programming to
those in western Aleppo, but have at the same time been
prepositioning aid in western Aleppo for movement into
eastern Aleppo. We have the stocks, have identified the
route and are ready to move 50 trucks of assistance from
western Aleppo into the east, as soon as we receive the
necessary security assurances.

We are also preparing for cross-border movement
of assistance into eastern Aleppo. The plan is largely
business-as-usual for our cross-border operation - it
uses the same mechanisms that are currently in place
and utilizes the same routes that had been used prior
to the 7 July, cutting of the Castello Road. We are
preparing for an initial movement that would send 20
trucks with much-needed food into eastern Aleppo
during the first pause. That would then be scaled up
as appropriate for future pauses, and include additional
humanitarian assistance based on assessed need. The
plan would see the loading of items monitored by the
United Nations Monitoring Mission, which would
then seal the trucks so that any tampering would be
evident on arrival. All trucks would include United
Nations identifying markers. Once cleared, the trucks
would travel across the border into Syria along the
same routes as used prior to 7 July. They would travel
along the Castello Road and into eastern Aleppo city
directly to the warehouses of our partners. Once at the
warehouses, trucks would be confirmed as not having
been tampered with, and then the seals would be broken
and assistance off-loaded.

As I have said, we are ready. Once we have the
green light, we can start to move assistance within 48 to
72 hours. Plans are in place, but we need the agreement
of all parties to let us do ourjob.

This is a race against time, as fighting rages on,
with ever-more shocking reports of bombed hospitals
and wrecked schools. Electricity is out, water is scarce
and movement is restricted. Civilian infrastructure
continues to be relentlessly attacked, collectively
punishing hundreds of thousands of civilians. These
include attacks on countless hospitals and medical
facilities, in Aleppo and elsewhere. The few staff that
remain are overstretched and working in shifts. And the
lack of health workers is compounded by the inability
of many health workers to make the daily journey to
work due to insecurity and moving front lines. In July
alone, 44 attacks on medical and health facilities were
reported throughout Syria, including attacks against
five out of the nine hospitals in eastern Aleppo. We
have received further reports of hospital attacks these
past few weeks, including last Friday - on World
Humanitarian Day. In besieged Daraya, for example,
the last remaining civilian hospital was reportedly
hit as a result of shelling and attacks on the area. In
western Aleppo, a mobile clinic was attacked in the
Al-Hamdaniya neighbourhood, a facility supported
by UNICEF and providing health care to internally
displaced persons from the 1070 apartment complex.

To help put things in perspective, Physicians for
Human Rights has documented 373 attacks on 265
medical facilities since the adoption of Security Council
resolution 2139 (2014). Three hundred and thirty-six
attacks were by Syrian Government and allied forces,
14 by non-State armed groups, 10 by the Islamic State
in the Levant and Jabhat Al-Nusra, one by coalition
forces and 12 by unknown forces. At least 72 attacks
were with barrel bombs. According to Physicians for
Human Rights, those attacks caused the deaths of 750
medical personnel. What is more, those numbers do not
even include figures for June, July and August, which
appear to have been among the deadliest since the start
ofthe conflict, more than halfa decade ago. In late July,
for example, airstrikes repeatedly hit the Al-Hakim
hospital. According to reports, a two-day-old baby died
in his incubator due to oxygen interruptions following
the attack. Three more babies reportedly died the next
day due to respiratory problems caused by the fallout of
the bombardment. This is obscene and unconscionable.

Let me now turn to cross-line inter-agency
operations to besieged, hardto-reach and other priority
locations. Progress has been made this year, with a net
total of 1,275,750 people reached in besieged, hard-to-
reach and priority locations. As I reported to the Council
last month, we have reached each besieged location at
least once, including 401,650 of the 590,200 people
living in those locations, including through almost 100
airdrop rotations to Deir ez-Zor city since 10 April.
Significant progress was made on approvals by the
Government of Syria for the July inter-agency convoy
plan, with 34 out of 35 locations approved for convoys,
including all requested besieged areas. Moreover,
following my latest open briefing to the Council, on
25 July, we managed to deploy, during the closing days
of the month, a number of inter-agency convoys to
Hajeb and Banan, as well as Talbiseh, Ar-Rastan and
Al-Houla, reaching over 270.000 people in need.

That being said, as I informed the Council on
9 August, we unfortunately appear to be once again
in reverse gear. In fact, on 19 July, the United Nations
submitted its August inter-agency convoy plan to the
Syrian authorities, which included 24 requests to 32
locations, including all besieged locations, aiming
to reach 991,050 people, including 523,550 people in
hard-to-reach areas and 467,500 people in besieged
areas. In its response, which was due on 28 July but
received on 3 August and amended twice thereafter,
the Syrian authorities affirmed that the United Nations
and its partners could deliver multisectoral assistance
to 505,750 of the 991,050 requested people in 23 of 32
initially requested locations. The Syrian authorities
also requested that 41 other locations be reached in
August outside the plan.

All in all, the United Nations was denied access
to more than 50 per cent of requested beneficiaries,
which includes locations such as Darayya and the Kafr
Batna sub-district in rural Damascus, as well as eastern
Aleppo. The four towns - Madaya, Zabadani, Fo'ah
and Kefraya - even though approved under the August
plan, have not received United Nations assistance
since 30 April because of tensions among parties to
the agreement, fuelled by heavy aerial bombardment
in Idlib and shelling on Fo'ah and Kefraya. Moreover,
active conflict and insecurity elsewhere, as well as
numerous delays in getting the necessary facilitation
letters required to load and move convoys, have been
limiting factors in reaching other locations these past
many weeks.

As a result, no inter-agency convoys have moved in
August - not a single one, and we are just one week
away from September and have already submitted next
month's inter-agency convoy plan. This plan, which
was submitted to the Syrian authorities yesterday,
aims to reach 1.19 million people in need across 34
besieged, hard-to-reach and priority cross-line areas. A
response from the Syrian authorities is expected around
30 August, as per the agreed review process.

The United Nations has made numerous appeals in
recent weeks and months for the medical evacuation of
people with urgent needs from all besieged locations,
in particular the besieged towns of Fo'ah, Kefraya,
Madaya, and Zabadani, where over 62,000 people
are who continue to be besieged. I welcome the news
received last Friday and over the weekend of the
evacuation by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent of 39
people requiring urgent medical assistance, including
children, from Fo'ah and Madaya. These evacuations
follow the evacuation of a 10-year-old girl from Madaya
on 13 August and the well-publicized evacuation from
eastern Ghouta of conjoined twins on 12 August. These
evacuations would not have been possible without the
approval of the Syrian authorities.

While I would like to express my appreciation to
all who have been involved in this operation, similar
actions are needed in order to evacuate all Syrians in
need of medical assistance. As I have said countless
times before, medical evacuations are not a question of
politics or military advantage, but of basic humanity.
They must be immediately available wherever needed.
This also includes the delivery of humanitarian and
medical assistance to besieged locations, in particular
into the four towns, which have remained without any
United Nations assistance in over 110 days.

This is the greatest crisis of our time, and that is
saying something in the light of what is happening in
Yemen, South Sudan, the Lake Chad Basin, Iraq and
Afghanistan, and that is without even mentioning those
that are not man-made conflicts - natural disasters
such as those in the Philippines, Nepal, Fiji and
Ecuador. The Syrian people have faced an onslaught of
unspeakable violence. The reports are endless: barrel
bombs, hellfire cannons, cluster munitions, chemical
weapons, thermite bombs, napalm, suicide bombs,
mortars and rockets, snipers, bombs landing on schools,
hospitals and civilian neighbourhoods, rape, illegal
detention, torture, child recruitment, sieges of entire
cities, starving people to death deliberately. And all of
that has occurred when someone has the power - with
a pen, with the simple stroke ofa pen - to allow food to
get to people. It is a chilling thought that these actions
and these levels of suffering have been tolerated, with
only limited international interference.

When hospital attacks have become the new
normal, when medieval sieges of entire cities and
neighbourhoods have become a lasting reality for
hundreds of thousands of people, the Council cannot
look the other way. It needs to act and ensure the full
implementation of all its resolutions. For as long as
there is impunity, this unprecedented scale of abuses
and violations will simply not decline.

In Aleppo we risk seeing a humanitarian catastrophe
unparalleled in the over five years of bloodshed and
carnage in the Syrian conflict. Once again, I cannot
stress strongly enough the need for a 48-hour pause
in fighting to be approved by all sides and come into
effect so that safe and sustained humanitarian access is
opened to all areas of Aleppo. I urge all parties to the
conflict to heed the call for a cessation ofviolence in all
its forms, first and foremost for the sake of the Syrian
people. I urge all Member States, all Member States
with influence over the parties, all Council members,
all International Syria Support Group (ISSG) members,
and in particular the two ISSG co-chairs, the United
States and the Russian Federation, to rapidly reach
agreement on the security guarantees and operational
modalities for a ceasefire to the fighting in Aleppo and
elsewhere. Not only would such an agreement ease the
suffering of the Syrian people, it could also facilitate
the establishment of an environment more conducive to
the resumption of the intra-Syrian talks.

Before I conclude today, I would like to make a final
note. The United Nations Resident and Humanitarian
Coordinator for Syria, Yacoub El Hillo, drove out of
Damascus today, ending a three-year appointment in one
of the most difficult and dangerous positions that exist
in the United Nations. His tireless work, his bravery
and his exceptional diplomatic skills saved countless
lives. He is not just an exemplary humanitarian, but he
has been the bedrock of our humanitarian response in
Syria, one that many others have been able to build on.
I would like to take this opportunity to sincerely thank
him, on behalf the entire United Nations and the wider
humanitarian ecosystem, for all he has done. We owe it
to the Syrian people he has served and saved to capture
the spirit and practice of his brave, professional legacy.

Finally, I am not going to pretend - as the
humanitarian chief of the United Nations, I am very
angry. The callous carnage that is Syria has long since
moved from the cynical to the sinful. What is happening
in Aleppo today, and throughout Syria over the past five
years, is an outrage against every moral fibre in our
being as human beings, as fellow human beings, with
every Syrian having been caught up in this unending
cataclysm. And it is the failure of politics, of all of
us, which Council members know as members of the
Security Council. So, please, Mr. President, now is the
moment - this instant - to put our differences aside
and come together as one and stop this humanitarian
shame upon us all, once and for all.

