Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the presidency of Malaysia
for convening this open debate.
Bangladesh aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

The potential consequence of weapons of mass
destruction (WMDs), especially nuclear weapons,
falling in the wrong hands is only too vivid to require
reiteration. That possibility has become more and more
real as terrorists and other non-State actors continue
to choose their targets without discrimination, and
accordingly keep evolving their modes of operation
to carry out their heinous acts. Such evolving trends
require us to devise innovative, well-coordinated and
foolproof mechanisms to effectively prevent the illicit
use or transfer of weapons of mass destruction and their
means of production and delivery.

The adoption by consensus of General Assembly
resolution 70/ 3 6, entitled "Measures to prevent terrorists
from acquiring weapons of mass destruction", has been
a right response within the United Nations framework.
It is critical that there be in-depth and evidence-based
discussions on that, involving all Member States, in
order to coordinate international and national efforts,
as appropriate. Focus should be placed on identifying
gaps in national response that may be addressed
through customized international cooperation. The
current review of resolution 1540 (2004) can be quite
critical in that exercise.

Bangladesh recognizes the seminal importance of
resolution 1540 (2004) and its successor resolutions in
ensuring the non-proliferation of WMDs. The varying
levels of capacity among Member States, as identified
through voluntary national reports, deserve to be
addressed with a sense of priority. One response to
that effect would be to consider further strengthening
the capacity-building mandate of the panel of
experts concerned.

We believe the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) remains the cornerstone of
the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. In general,
the NPT has significantly helped limit the horizontal
proliferation of nuclear weaponsHowever, the ongoing
reality is that tens of thousands of nuclear weapons
continue to threaten humankind, while billions of
dollars are being spent to modernize them despite
pressing development needs and challenges all over.
Bangladesh therefore favours a balanced approach, that
is, nuclear non-proliferation pursued in tandem with
nuclear disarmament.

We have no doubt that nuclear weapons are wrong
weapons. Far from securing us, they only endanger
our lives. We therefore consistently stress the total
elimination of those weapons in order to provide an
absolute guarantee against the use, either by design or
by accident, or threat of use of such weapons, and also
against the danger of their falling into terrorists' hands.

We cannot help but note with concern that all
nuclear-weapon State parties to the NPT officially
envisage relying on large, modernized nuclear forces
as a central component of their security postures
for decades to come. Once again, we urge them to
accomplish the total elimination of their nuclear
arsenals in fulfilment of their relevant multilateral legal
obligations and to cease all plans to further modernize,
upgrade, refurbish or extend the lives of their nuclear
weapons and related arsenals.

As an important building-block to that effect, we
call for the urgent commencement of negotiations in
the Conference on Disarmament (CD) for the early
conclusion of a comprehensive convention on nuclear
weapons, pursuant to the mandate given by General
Assembly resolution 68/32. Unfortunately, the CD
has been overshadowed by inertia for more than a
decade. That must change. Otherwise, there will be
initiatives to find solutions through parallel means,
such as last year when the General Assembly adopted,
by an overwhelming majority, a resolution calling
for convening an open-ended working group to take
forward the negotiations on nuclear disarmament .
Bangladesh supported the resolution and has continued
to attend the working group session this year.

Pending the total elimination of nuclear weapons,
we underscore the importance of an effective,
non-discriminatory and legally binding framework for
negative security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon
States. We support the establishment of nuclear-
weapon-free zones in all parts of the world, including
in areas where currently no such arrangements exist.

The recurring outbreak of epidemics and pandemics
makes us all the more aware of the potentially deadly
consequences of the use of biological weapons.
Bangladesh joins the call for resuming multilateral
negotiations aimed at concluding a non-discriminatory,
comprehensive and balanced legally binding
verification regime to further strengthen compliance
with the Biological Weapons Convention.

We remain committed to the cause of the complete
cessation of the development, production, stockpiling
and use of chemical weapons. We join calls for the
universalization of the Chemical Weapons Convention
and for all possessor State parties to ensure the
elimination of their existing stockpiles in a time-bound
manner at the earliest possible date.

Promoting peace and justice is one of the
fundamental goals underlying the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. The challenges of
disarmament and international security have become
increasingly complex and intertwined as countries,
regions and the world as a whole have evolved. We must
invoke the spirit of multilateralism more to revitalize
the United Nations disarmament machinery, and thus
contribute to international peace and development
through effective arms control, non-proliferation and
disarmament.

