I would like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive reports on the developments in the region. I would also like to reiterate Estonia's full support for the work of Special Representative Chambas and the activities of the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) over the past six months. It is with great concern that we follow the overall deterioration in the security situation in West Africa and the Sahel. The growing number of terrorist attacks and the increase in intercommunal violence - most notably in Burkina Faso, but also in Central Mali and in the Liptako-Gourma triborder area - are especially complex. We welcome that those transnational threats are being addressed through multinational efforts such as the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel, which, together with the French-led Operation Barkhane, have conducted successful counter-terrorist operations. Estonia has been actively participating in the joint efforts and will continue to do so. The key to long-lasting stability in the region is full political ownership by the region's States. An effective State presence - that is, State institutions, services and an adequately trained military presence - is of the utmost importance. An integral part of that State presence is the fight against impunity. We urge all countries of the region to strengthen the relevant dispute-settlement mechanisms and effectively address all grave violations and abuses of human rights. All perpetrators of such crimes must be held accountable regardless of their status. We remain very concerned about the increasingly dire humanitarian situation in some areas of West Africa and the Sahel. The coronavirus disease pandemic has added yet another layer to an already complicated situation. It is therefore especially important that humanitarian aid reach all those in need. Understanding long-term grievances and addressing the root causes of the conflict need to remain at the core of national and international efforts. We commend UNOWAS and the Economic Community of West African States for addressing the impact of climate change on security in the region, and we encourage them to continue to do so. Moreover, ensuring the full and meaningful participation of women and youth in the political process will bring the region closer to long-lasting stability. We urge all parties to take further steps in that regard. Finally, it is key that the upcoming elections in the second half of the year in several countries of West Africa and the Sahel be held as planned. We urge all parties to make every effort to ensure that they are inclusive, transparent, credible and peaceful.
