Mr. Begec (Turkey): I would like to start by
congratulating Malaysia on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and thank
its delegation for convening this debate.

Last year's meeting (see S/PV.7466), during which
resolution 2225 (2015) was adopted, which Turkey
co-sponsored, took a bold step in strengthening the
children and armed conflict agenda. However, as
the Secretary-General noted, serious challenges to
the protection of children affected by armed conflict
persisted throughout 2015. The impact of protracted
conflicts on children continued unabated. Turkey has
seen this very vividly in its neighbourhood, especially
in the eyes of millions of displaced children. With the
unfolding, large-scale movement of refugees in the
Mediterranean Basin, the number of refugee children
also saw a dramatic increase.

Regrettably, the international community has not
been able to prevent the deaths and injuries sustained
by thousands of children during attacks and air strikes,
often conducted indiscriminately on schools, hospitals,
marketplaces and internally displaced persons camps.
As long as such unacceptable acts and violations of
international humanitarian law continue, the forced
displacement of children will not cease. Today that
is especially true for thousands of children facing a
dire situation in Aleppo. Moreover, the increasing
involvement of non-State armed groups in violating
the basic rights of children is an issue of concern.
The crimes committed by terrorist organizations such
as Da'esh and Boko Haram must be underlined in
that regard. Nevertheless, there are positive aspects to
the ongoing efforts of the United Nations to diminish
the risks posed by armed conflicts to children. The
Children, Not Soldiers campaign led by the Office
of the Special Representative continues to generate
political momentum around the issue.

A number of important meetings and summits,
including the World Humanitarian Summit, have dealt
with issues relating to the protection of and assistance
for children in conflicts and emergencies.

In the period ahead, a display ofjoint and robust
political determination as well as concerted action will
be our most crucial tool for addressing the issue of
children and armed conflict. The efforts of the United
Nations to provide essential assistance to children,
as well as monitoring and reporting functions that
facilitate better planning, protection and response,
should be supported.

The continued implementation of the Secretary-
General's zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations peacekeeping operations
remains crucial. We should also bear in mind that
tackling terrorism and violent extremism requires a
comprehensive approach that includes the education
of youth.

In the face of the recent waves of displacement in
our region, Turkey has pursued an open-door policy
for Syrians fleeing the ongoing conflict. Turkey has
granted Syrians temporary protection status and
enacted numerous measures in order to alleviate the
harsh circumstances facing adults and children alike.

Around 156,000 Syrian children have been born in
Turkey during the course of the conflict. Free health
care, enrolment in Turkish schools and special measures
for psychosocial support have been provided to Syrian
children. Furthermore, for Syrian students completing
their secondary and high-school educations in Turkey,
there are also higher-education opportunities through
Government-provided scholarships and through
acceptance to Turkish universities.

The education of Syrian children will remain at the
top of our agenda. There are 830,000 school-age Syrian
children, and more than half of them are missing out on
schooling. International support for more classrooms
and educational opportunities for these children is
urgently needed.

We expect Member States to consider these
issues at the 19 September high-level meeting on
large-scale movements.

I would like to underline Turkey's continuing
comprehensive efforts for the rehabilitation of
children suffering from the effects of terrorism in
our region and beyond. Turkey's unwavering support
for all international and regional efforts related to the
protection of children will continue.
I have refrained from taking the Council's valuable
time to respond to the baseless accusations levelled
by the representative of the Syrian regime. Suffice it
to say that we stand by the Syrian people and that our
humanitarian efforts are taking place in cooperation
with our partners and international organizations.

Before I conclude, let me quote the following
excerpts on Syria from paragraph 154 of the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2016/360):

"Air strikes, indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas
and objects, and complex attacks were the primary
causes of the killing and maiming of children
Aerial attacks and the shelling of civilian areas
by Government forces and international forces
supporting the Government killed and injured
531 children, including 133 from indiscriminate
barrel bombs."

