Mr. Sychov (Belarus) (spoke in Russian): I wish
first of all to join other delegations, Mr. President, in
thanking you and the other members of the Security
Council for your initiative to debate the question of
children and armed conflict. The Belarus delegation
 

believes, Mr. Minister, that your presiding over this meeting
will promote the formulation of new approaches to
resolving this complex problem.

We also wish to note the important role of and efforts
undertaken by the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ambassador
Otunnu. We believe that his initiatives and
recommendations deserve the most assiduous attention and
implementation in the practical activities of the United
Nations.

Just over a year ago, when the Security Council was
considering a similar question, the overwhelming majority
of participants in the discussion took note of the alarming
situation. In the statements made by representatives of
member States, pessimism sometimes prevailed over
optimism. In that connection, our delegation takes particular
note of the fact that the Security Council is now devoting
ever closer attention to the problem of the tragic link
between childhood and armed conflict. We are convinced
that, in the final analysis, the entire international community
will become fully aware of the highest priority to be
accorded to the eradication of conflicts, above all as the
cause of the deaths and ruined lives of children, who have
the most direct impact on the future progress of humanity.

Unfortunately, despite the significant efforts of the
United Nations, the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and other international institutions and
organizations, we cannot detect today any substantive
improvement in the situation of children in regions of
conflict throughout the planet. Indeed, children remain the
principal and most vulnerable victims of armed conflict in
various regions of the world. Statistics continue to attest to
growing child mortality as a result of direct hostilities or
the ruinous consequences of such actions.

Clearly, the Security Council has minutely analysed
the reasons for and consequences of the participation of
children in armed conflict in the twilight of this century.
Today, there is a need for practical action to implement the
conclusions and recommendations that have been drafted.
In other words, there must be a new strategy that, to the
greatest possible extent, will mitigate the impact of conflict
on children; exclude minors from the ranks of armed
combatants; ensure the priority access of children to
humanitarian assistance; and provide for the design of
effective mechanisms to prevent Violence towards child
victims of armed conflict.

Among the most important elements of such a
strategy must be the further improvement of the legal
basis for the protection of the rights, needs and interests
of the young victims of hostilities. We are convinced that
this year, as we commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of
the four Geneva Conventions, pillars of humanitarian law,
and the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, this question is of growing and particular
relevance. Belarus, which has ratified all of these
Conventions, is prepared to contribute to the process of
establishing a more effective mechanism for their
implementation, binding - and this is especially
critical - on all subjects of international law. The most
important step in this direction is further work to
strengthen the status of the International Criminal Court,
which will be endowed with the relevant competences to
consider all types of crime against children.

Particular attention should be devoted to sanctions,
which continue significantly to affect the representatives
of the most vulnerable sector of the civilian population:
children. A recent and most convincing confirmation of
this fact is the UNICEF report on the situation of children
in Iraq and Angola. In this respect, as we see it, the
Security Council must make special exemptions of a
humanitarian nature to minimize, in a targeted way, the
impact of measures of economic coercion.

We find continued relevance in the idea of including
in the reports of the Secretary-General and the resolutions
of the Security Council special sections proposing
preventive measures regarding the rights of minors,
starting with measures to disarm armed youth and to
prevent their participation in hostilities, and ending with
humanitarian activities in the post-conflict period.

It is perfectly obvious that the problem of the tragic
involvement of children in conflict will remain topical, to
a greater or lesser extent, until mankind is able to muster
the strength and political will to seek peaceful solutions
to disputes. The Republic of Belarus does not feel that a
world without war or conflict is a utopian ideal. We see
in it the most important objective and an imperative need
for the international community and the United Nations in
the new century.

