Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you, Sir,
for giving me this opportunity to brief my colleagues
on the Council's visit to Somalia, to be followed by
your own briefing on the visit to Kenya and Egypt. 1
want to begin by thanking you for your initiative to
organize the visit to the Horn of Africa, which was an
extremely useful and timely one. I want also to thank
our colleagues from the Secretariat for their role in
organizing extremely valuable programmes, and the
Permanent Representatives and Deputy Permanent
Representatives who went on the trip. My message to
those who did not is: "Bad luck. You missed a good and
very productive visit."

During the Somalia leg of the visit, the Council had
an opportunity to reaffirm its oversight, in detail, of
what is happening in the country and to reaffirm its
commitment to continue the journey with the Somali
people as they progress towards stability and prosperity.
The visit came at a crucial time in an important year for
Somalia. We are halfway between 2012 and 2020. In
2012 the Somali people set out their four-year vision,
entitled Vision 2016, which is due to culminate in
elections in August. By 2020 there will be one person,
one vote elections in Somalia, which will conclude the
transitional phase.

The electoral process is a central part of that
transition and one that, as the Council, we have paid
a lot of attention to over the years. However, when we
arrived in Mogadishu, on Thursday, that process was
in deadlock. The President and the regional Presidents
whom we met had reached an agreement on the electoral
model earlier in the year. but the Parliament had not
been able to endorse the agreement, leading to a delay in
preparations for the August elections. We therefore met
President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud, Prime Minister
Sharmarke and the regional leaders of Puntland, the
South-West administration and Galmudug to express
our concern at that delay and to urge swift adoption of
the model.

The President gave assurances that he would
continue to work for the Parliament's adoption of the
model. He also said that, if that were not possible, he
would use his presidential decree, which is absolutely
within his rights to do, in order to get the model
validated and endorsed. I am very pleased to say
that, shortly after the Council left Mogadishu, in the
early hours of Sunday morning, President Hassan
Sheik Mohamud did indeed take the necessary step of
issuing a presidential decree to ensure that there were
no extension to the constitutionally mandated terms of
Somalia's executive and legislative orders. I think that
was a good outcome of the visit to the central question
of the electoral process in the run-up to elections, which
are due to take place in August. I also think - taking
a step back from the details - that this is an example
of how a Council visit can make a positive difference,
either in terms of preventing things from getting
worse, in terms of preventive diplomacy, or - in this
case - as a way of encouraging a country to do the
right thing and actually to move things forward in a
positive direction. I am very glad that we were able to
do that. That is a summary of what we are discussing
on the political track.

We also spent a lot of time on security issues. We
had a good meeting with the Somali Deputy Prime
Minister, who is in charge of developing the national
security architecture for Somalia. That will provide,
among other things, civilian oversight of the Somali
security forces. We also met the Special Representative
ofthe African Union for Somalia and Head ofthe African
Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), Ambassador
Francisco Madeira, other senior AMISOM. leaders and
the leadership of the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia. Between them, they outlined the scale of
the challenges ahead. I think it was clear to all on the
Council's side of the table that security remained a very
significant concern in Somalia. As such, I want to take
this moment to pay tribute to the men and women of
AMISOM, who are doing sterling work in difficult
circumstances to try to bring stability and security to
Somalia, as well as to the men and women ofthe Somali
national army and the police who, likewise, are doing
all they can to fight Al-Shabaab and to make their
country safe for the future. I think that we owe them a
huge debt of gratitude. Some of them paid the ultimate
sacrifice in that work. We need to continue working
with AMISOM. and the Somali national army and police
in order to create the sort of conditions that will allow
Somalia to become a much more peaceful, stable and
normal member of the international community.

The challenges for AMISOM. are significant and
we will have an opportunity - as we will shortly renew
its mandate - to look at those in more detail. There
are issues related to the desire of troop-contributing
countries to continue, or not, their commitment. There
are also issues related to commander control and
coordination. I think those of us who were on the trip
have come back with a much clearer sense of the scale
of those challenges. Similarly, with the Somali national
army, I was very struck by the scale of what still
remains to be done. A lot of us have done a lot in that
area over the years, but a huge amount remains to be
done in order to allow the Somalis to create a genuinely
effective set of security forces. I think there is a lack
of clear coordination, both on the Somali side and on
the international side. I also think that, between us,
we need to do a better job of coordinating the various
offers of assistance in terms of the security architecture
in order to maximize the impact of that assistance.

I also want to say a word about the broader context.
We were able to talk to United Nations and other actors
who are involved in the region and in other parts of
Somalia's development. We looked at the humanitarian
situation and sustainable development. We were able to
look at both the long-term consequences of the conflict
in Somalia and also some of the root causes. That, in
my view, is an essential part of our work on every issue
facing us on the Security Council's agenda. As part of
that wider work, I was very glad that we were able to
meet representatives of civil society. One of the groups
was made up ofwomen who are active in Somali politics
and in ensuring that the role of women in Somalia
goes from strength to strength. They underlined the
importance of the Federal Government of Somalia
adhering to its commitment to reserve 30 per cent of
seats in both the upper and lower houses for women.
The Security Council voiced its strong support for that
commitment during our visit, as it had done in press
statements earlier this year. The lack of diversity in the
Security Council in terms of gender equality was also
notable, and noticed by those women.
Finally, I want to thank Michael Keating, who is
doing an excellent job as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia. I also thank his
outstanding team in the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, which made the visit ofthe Council
possible and allowed us to take full advantage of the
visit and advance this crucial agenda. I am glad to say
that the Council issued a press statement on Monday
welcoming the progress on the political track. I know
that we will all want to continue to follow developments
in Somalia very closely and to support Somalia
throughout this critical year.

I thank the President of the Council once again for
organizing the visit.

