Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, we would like to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Nickolay
Mladenov, for his valuable briefing regarding recent
developments in the peace process and the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory.

Most of our quarterly open debates on this item
coincide with very important junctures regarding
developments in the Palestinian question, and each
time, Israel, the occupying Power, is the one that has
violated international treaties, conventions and the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The most recent
violation is the excessive and illegal use of force against
the Great March of Return, which was launched on
30 March and will be ongoing for the coming two weeks.

It is a peaceful march where unarmed Palestinian
people call for their right to return to their occupied
territory. The death toll since the beginning of the
March is not less than 37 martyrs, with more than
5,000 injured. In that regard, it is regrettable that the
Security Council has failed to respond in a unified
manner to condemn all those practices and failed to
call for an independent and transparent investigation
aimed at identifying those responsible for using such
force and for killing scores of innocent people. They
must be held accountable for such crimes. We support
any appeal to the General Assembly or the Human
Rights Council ifthe Security Council continues to fail
to take any measures that oblige Israel to put an end
to those grave violations of international humanitarian
law, international human rights law and the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

On the other hand, the State of Kuwait supports
actions and measures that contribute to providing
international protection to the Palestinian people. In
that regard, we reiterate the provisions of resolutions
605 (1987) and 904 (1994) regarding the applicability
of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the developments
in the occupied Palestinian territory and the necessity
of providing the defenceless Palestinian people with
international protection. We do not exaggerate when we
say that the Israeli occupying forces, commanded by the
occupying Power, are constantly defying the will of the
international community. There is ample evidences of
that. One of the gravest challenges facing the Security
Council is Israel's candidature, the occupying Power, to
membership in the Security Council.

How can we imagine that such an occupying Power
could participate in defending international legitimacy
and its resolutions? That occupying Power undoubtedly
lacks all qualifications to run for Security Council
membership as stipulated by the Charter of the United
Nations, because its only credential is a long record of
grave violations against resolutions of international
legitimacy and the principles of the Charter. That is why
the Security Council should be the first to challenge
its candidacy.

The unilateral policies, measures and actions
taken by Israel, the occupying Power, are a source of
concern as it seeks to alter the facts on the ground in
the occupied territory, notably the ongoing settlement
activities and the expansion of the existing settlements,
which is totally illegal and illegitimate and represents
a gross violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016).
The same is true of the relocation of certain diplomatic
missions to Jerusalem, which is a blatant violation of
relevant Council resolutions, particularly resolutions
476 (1980) and 478 (1980), which considered such
unilateral actions null and void, with no legal effect.
We emphasize that such steps, which constitute
violations of international law, will undermine efforts
towards peace, exacerbate tensions, flair the rage and
threaten to push the region into more violence, chaos
and instability.

The State of Kuwait supports the Palestinian call
to give impetus to existing international mechanisms,
such as the Quartet, by expanding its membership to
include other regional parties, which would revitalize
its work, provided this takes place under the umbrella
of the United Nations Peace Process.

We also support all legal and peaceful steps taken
by the sisterly Palestinian State, at the national and
international levels, to consolidate its sovereignty
with respect to Al-Quds Al-Sharif and the Palestinian
occupied territory. We underscore that in order to
achieve the long-desired peace, we must start by
putting an end to the Israeli occupation, whose fifty-
first anniversary is coming up in 39 days. This should
be based on the resolutions of international legitimacy,
the principle of land for peace, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative, adopted by all Arab States at
the 2002 Beirut summit. It should also be based on
the withdrawal of Israel from all Palestinian, Syrian
and Lebanese territories to the 4 June 1967 borders.
It should address all final-status issues and thereby
eventually lead to the Palestinian people realizing all
their political legitimate rights, including their right to
self-determination, and the creation of an independent
State with east Jerusalem as its capital.

The Palestinian people appeals to the United
Nations, especially the Security Council, to fulfil
all of the pledges made towards the maintenance of
international peace and security. In that regard, we
reiterate our solidarity with the Palestinian people
in the defence of their just cause and legitimate
rights, including their historical and principled rights
to Al-Quds Al-Sharif, guaranteed by the relevant
resolutions of international legitimacy. We call on
States to recognize the state of Palestine, with occupied
East Jerusalem as its capital.

