Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): Let me start by
thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2013/254) on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
We also welcome the participation in today's meeting
of the Prime Minister of Serbia, His Excellency
Mr. Ivica Dacic', and thank him and Mr. Thaci for their
statements.
The position of Azerbaijan with regard to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Serbia and the
non-recognition of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of
independence remains unchanged. Resolution 1244
(1999) continues to be the binding international legal
basis for a comprehensive settlement to the political
process and negotiations.

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made at
the meeting of the parties on 19 April in Brussels,
facilitated by the European Union High Representative
for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine
Ashton, where they reached a landmark agreement on
the principles governing the normalization of relations.
We encourage both sides to remain further committed
to reaching agreement on the contentious issues through
mutually acceptable solutions. That is indispensable to
the security, stability and well-being of the region.

UNMIK's activities are of great importance.

The Mission's ongoing collaboraton with all other
stakeholders to enhance the prospects of success
in the political dialogue is noteworthy. UNMIK
should continue to play its key role in ensuring the
coordination of all international efforts on its status-
neutral framework, as envisaged in resolution 1244
(1999).

The general calm that was observed in the overall
security situation during the reporting period is a
welcome development. However, repeated incidents of
violence in northern Mitrovica constituted exceptions
to the general security environment. It is necessary that
these incidents be duly investigated.

The voluntary return of internally displaced persons
to Kosovo again showed few signs of improvement
during the reporting period. We commend the
efforts of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees in monitoring the process and implementing
the necessary policies towards facilitation of their
return. We agree with the Secretary-General that
the promotion of reconciliation and increased trust
among the communities in Kosovo is as important as
the achievement of success in the political process.
Therefore, it should be underlined once again that the
preservation of the region's rich cultural diversity and
spiritual heritage on the basis of ethnic and religious
tolerance is indispensable.

In conclusion, I would like to commend UNMIK,
under the leadership of Mr. Zarif, for its efforts and
important role in maintaining peace and stability in
Kosovo and the entire region.
