We are concerned by reports of renewed violence in north-western Syria, in particular attacks by terrorist groups on the one side and airstrikes and shelling by the Syrian regime and Russia on the other side. We strongly warn the Syrian regime and Russia against a new military offensive in and around Idlib and the humanitarian implications thereof. A new military offensive would only result in civilian casualties, mass displacements and a humanitarian catastrophe. A repetition of what we have seen earlier this year under the pretext of fighting terrorist groups would be absolutely unacceptable. We therefore urge all parties, in particular the Syrian regime and Russia, to uphold and fully adhere to the 5 March ceasefire agreement. We continue to fully support the call of Special Envoy Pedersen for a complete, immediate nationwide ceasefire throughout Syria and stress the central role of the United Nations in reaching such a genuine and sustainable nationwide ceasefire in line with resolution 2254 (2015). This call is all the more important given the fragile security situation, including in the south. The economic and financial situation in Syria has further deteriorated in the past weeks. The responsibility for the economic and financial crisis and the suffering of the Syrian people lies squarely with the Syrian regime. It is the regime of Bashar Al-Assad that has been waging a war against its own people since 2011 and continues to do so. At the same time, the Syrian regime is trying to blame others by claiming that the current situation in Syria is the result of sanctions or lack of reconstruction assistance. That is not only a plain lie; it is also cynical. As the Syrian regime appears to find it increasingly difficult to pay off its supporters, it is looking for scapegoats to deflect from its own drastic failure. Since 2011, the European Union (EU) and its member States have mobilized more than €20 billion in humanitarian aid and stabilization assistance. Germany alone has provided €8.1 billion in assistance since 2012, and in 2020 will again be providing around €600 million in humanitarian aid for Syria and its neighbouring countries. On 30 June, the European Union and the United Nations will co-chair the fourth Brussels Conference on Supporting the Future of Syria and the Region. The Conference will again provide the international community with an opportunity to join forces to mobilize the necessary financial support for those affected by the Syrian conflict both in Syria and in neighbouring countries. The EU and its member States are currently doing a great deal to help Syria. We are helping the Syrian people, but not the Syrian regime. There is a way out of the Syrian crisis: a political process under the auspices of the United Nations, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex). Once a comprehensive, genuine and inclusive political transition is firmly under way, Germany and the EU will assist in the reconstruction of Syria. And when the Syrian regime changes its brutal behaviour and ends its grave violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law, there will also be a lifting of EU sanctions. So if the Syrian regime really cares about the fate of the country and the Syrian people and not only about its own survival, it must finally end its obstruction and start engaging seriously and constructively in the Constitutional Committee, the broader political process and the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). As Russia maintains its claim to be interested in a political solution, we call upon it to finally use its influence over Damascus in that regard. Resolution 2254 (2015) calls for the release of arbitrarily detained persons, particularly women and children. The issue of detainees and missing persons remains a very sad and at the same time important issue, and we thank Noura Ghazi for her briefing today. Since the Council meeting held in August 2019 (see S/PV.8593), there has been no meaningful progress on the situation of detainees, abductees and missing persons despite the commendable efforts and the active engagement of Special Envoy Pedersen with all parties on that issue. We are convinced that the Council needs to do more in order to support Special Envoy Pedersen and his call for the unconditional, large-scale releases of detainees and abductees and more meaningful action on missing persons. The Council should call upon the parties, in particular the Syrian regime, which holds the overwhelming majority of detainees, to finally release arbitrarily detained persons on a meaningful scale, starting with elderly people, women and children and those with health conditions. Furthermore, the Syrian regime must allow immediate, unconditional and unhindered access for the relevant humanitarian organizations to all prisons and detention facilities under its control and ensure adequate medical care and protective measures for all persons in detention. Finally, the Syrian regime must inform the families of the fate and whereabouts of the tens of thousands of missing persons. We remain convinced that national reconciliation and sustainable peace in Syria will not be possible without truth, justice and accountability for arbitrarily detained persons and missing persons and for all other crimes and atrocities committed during the Syrian conflict. Impunity for those responsible for international crimes in Syria cannot be an option. Justice for the victims and for Syria matters if there is to be reconciliation. Accountability will also be one of the key aspects during the fourth Brussels Conference to be held on 30 June.
