Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): It is a great
pleasure, Madam, to have you presiding over this
important debate, which has also attracted such an
impressive number of speakers today. I would like to
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Ambassador
Antonio Patriota of Brazil, Chair of the Peacebuilding
Commission, and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Leymah
Gbowee for their briefings.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be made on behalf of the European Union later today.
In my national capacity, I would like to underline the
following points.

Issues pertaining to the development agenda
naturally fall within the purview of other United
Nations bodies, particularly the Economic and Social
Council. However, as was noted in the Security
Council's presidential statement of February 2011
(S/PRST/2011/4), there is an inherent link between
security and development, and as the Secretary-General
said earlier, when we ignore one pillar, we endanger
the other two. Poverty, exclusion and marginalization
fuel many a conflict, including those on the Council's
agenda. We cannot break the cycle of violence and
build durable peace as long as significant inequalities
prevail and issues relating to economic, political and
social inclusion remain unaddressed.

Inclusivity begins with respect for basic human
rights for all, which in their turn can flourish only
where there is a solid framework built on the rule of law,
democratic governance and accountability. Freedom
of expression and information support transparency,
foster participation and reinforce the necessary checks
and balances within the political system that act as
safeguards against corruption, abuse ofpower, cronyism
and graft. Promoting the fundamental freedoms of
opinion, expression, assembly and association, as
well as supporting free media, is therefore essential to
inclusive development and peace. We are concerned
about the worldwide increase in attacks on and killings of
journalists and social media workers seeking to expose
impunity, corruption and abuse of power. In particular,
their reports from conflict zones expose human-rights
abuse, war crimes and crimes against humanity, and
help to rally the international community in support of
the rights of the marginalized and vulnerable and, by
extension, the protection of civilian lives. We call on
the Council to remain vigilant and actively engaged on
the issue of the protection ofjournalists, human-rights
defenders and civil-society activists.

We have seen time and again that human-rights
violations are often the first early-warning signs of a
conflict to appear. Ongoing, unaddressed human-rights
violations also become an obstacle to reconciliation
and peacebuilding processes, and therefore to inclusive
development. That is why my delegation strongly
supports the Rights Up Front initiative, which, in our
view,shouldlieatthecoreofallpreventive,peacebuilding
and development efforts. Sustainable peace requires
that no social group be discriminated against or left
behind. National reconciliation and peacebuilding
cannot work if certain groups or minorities live in
fear of persecution, are denied the right and ability to
voice their demands and access essential resources, and
are excluded from power-sharing arrangements and
governance. Exclusion and discrimination on whatever
grounds - gender, religion, ethnicity, race, age or
any other reason - weaken societies by robbing them
of their creative and productive potential, reinforce
a sense of injustice, harden lingering grievances and
undermine their very stability and security, thus
threatening to ignite or rekindle cycles of violence and
thwarting development efforts.

In particular, peace and development need women's
full participation and inclusion in all aspects of a
society's life, as equal partners in decision-making
processes and State-building, from conflict mediation
and resolution to reconciliation, peacebuilding, and
post-conflict development. Women's full, unfettered
participation in the political, economic and other
domains of society is a key driving force for societal
transformation and economic prosperity. Numerous
studies have shown that societies where women play
active roles enjoy higher levels of well-being and
development. The Security Council has created a solid
normative base, starting with resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. While notable
progress has been achieved in that respect, we are not
there yet. This year's review of the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the forthcoming
peacekeeping and peacebuilding reviews, offer
important opportunities to move that agenda further,
especially on the implementation side. The Council
must make sure that every single mandate it creates
has a strong women's-empowerment component,
which would definitely benefit people's aspirations for
inclusive development, the focus of today's debate.

Peace and development cannot be sustained
without accountability. The abuse of power, failure to
address lingering grievances, lawlessness and impunity
are deeply corrosive, sowing mistrust, hampering
reconciliation and capable of rekindling conflict at any
moment. In today's turbulent world, such grievances and
abuses are also conducive to alienation, radicalization
and violent extremism, thus compounding the complex
task of fighting terrorism in its many manifestations.
Conversely, the rule of law, which sits at the core of
democratic governance, offers a framework of justice
and fosters empowerment and equality, by providing a
common set of rules for all members of a society and
guaranteeing their equality before the law.

Taking resolute action against impunity is essential
to ensure that victims of abuse can regain confidence in
their society and proceed towards the reconciliation and
durable peace that are so necessary for development.
Such action is also important as a preventive, deterrent
tool, sending a message to would-be perpetrators
that their crimes will not go unpunished. Support for
building the rule of law and national judicial and law-
enforcement capabilities must therefore be addressed
early on, within the context of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts, and systematically sustained
as countries move from conflict to durable peace and
development. We welcome the strengthening of rule-of-
law components in United Nations peacekeeping and
peacebuilding mandates, and call on the Council to pay
greater attention to rule-of-law issues in its debates.

