Mr. McLay (New Zealand): When I last
addressed the Council, I found myself expressing
appreciation for the many statements of support that
had been made in the aftermath of the then-recent
Christchurch earthquake. I now find myself speaking
immediately after the Permanent Representative of
Japan. I would like to express New Zealand's support
and sympathy for the dreadful situation that that
country is facing. Japan gave unstintingly of its active
help when we were in need, and we have been
privileged to do likewise over the past six days.

The Secretary-General's latest report
(S/2011/120*), Special Representative of the
Secretary-General De Mistura's briefing and that of
Ambassador Tanin provide evidence of many positive
developments that have taken place in Afghanistan
over the past three months - the progress of Afghan
institutions towards taking lead responsibility for their
country's security and the inauguration of
Afghanistan's National Assembly being just two
examples. But there have also been setbacks. Afghan
civilians, for example, continue to suffer from the
volatile security situation, and tensions remain between
the executive, the legislature and the judiciary over the
composition of Parliament.
New Zealand welcomes the understanding
between the President and Parliament that allowed the
successful inauguration of Afghanistan's National
Assembly, which will, of course, play a critical role in
Afghanistan's democratic governance. We encourage a
spirit of cooperation between the institutions involved
because that will validate the decision of millions of
Afghans who defied threats and voted in September's
elections. All of those are positive signs of a
progressing democracy.

We look forward to the executive, the legislature
and the judiciary carrying out their functions in
accordance with the Constitution and overcoming their
differences on the status of Parliament. While the
representation issue must be addressed, it should be
done in accordance with the Constitution, thus
ensuring the confidence of the international community
and, most importantly, of those who voted last year.

New Zealand strongly supports the transition
process and welcomes the Afghan Government's
commitment to assuming lead responsibility for all
security by the end of 2014. We look forward to
President Karzai's announcement of the first districts
and provinces that will begin the process of transition
to full Afghan authority.

In Bamyan province, where New Zealand leads
the provincial reconstruction team, we have already
begun the transition to Afghan leadership, and key
milestones have been achieved. Along with our Afghan
partners, we are focused on the need for local capacity-
building and development assistance. New Zealand
regards its provincial reconstruction teams as part and
parcel of building the capability of the Afghan National
Police and enabling development activity to take root
and improve people's lives.

Although Bamyan province itself is relatively
secure, New Zealand is still concerned over
Afghanistan's overall security situation. For Afghan
civilians, the Afghan security forces and international
coalition forces, last year was the deadliest since the
war began, reflecting the increase in suicide attacks
and the use of improvised explosive devices by
insurgents. That reinforces the need for the Afghan
National Security Forces, partnering with the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), to
quash insurgency and consolidate security. Combined
with a push to increase Afghan civilian capacity,
security gains will give space to and opportunity for a

1 1-26621
political solution - an essential ingredient in ensuring
a secure and prosperous Afghanistan.

That solution requires the further isolation of
hardcore insurgency leaders, while those who renounce
violence abandon alliances with Al-Qaida and embrace
the Afghan Constitution are integrated into the
mainstream. Increased pressure on those who disrupt
the peace must be coupled with opportunity for
insurgents who lay down their arms and help make that
peace durable.

Progress towards such a solution is rightly being
led by the Afghan Government, with the support of its
neighbours and the international community.
Accommodation will be required on all sides, but we
strongly urge that it not be at the expense of hard-
fought and hard-won rights and freedoms, especially
those of women and minorities.

Along with Afghanistan, its neighbours and the
international community, the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) plays an
important role in supporting a political solution,
notably through the Salaam Support Group. As
transition intensifies, UNAMA has an increasingly
important role. We welcome its contribution to Afghan-
led electoral reform, which will ensure that
Afghanistan's elections are more cost-effective and
sustainable. We emphasize the importance of those
reforms to Afghanistan's overall democratic future.

It is also important, however, that UNAMA's
mandate reflect the situation on the ground and the
aspirations of the Afghan Government and the
international community. We therefore welcome this
Council's intention to review that mandate and believe
that it should benefit from the outcomes of the second
Bonn conference to be held in December. We look to
the Council to give UNAMA the mandate it needs to
support the Government during the critical period of
transition between now and the end of 2014.

The next three years will be decisive in ensuring
that the Afghan Government takes full responsibility
for its country's security, so that, as ISAF troops are
drawn down, the people of Afghanistan can assume full
control of the destiny for which they have already
sacrificed so much.

