Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The growing confrontation and bloodshed in
the region - in Lebanon and the Palestinian
territories - are causing the most serious concern in
Russia and around the world. The number of victims
among the civilian population is growing, and the
threat of a full-scale humanitarian disaster is
increasingly real.

A comprehensive assessment of the Middle East
situation was provided by participants in the Group of
Eight (G-S) Summit in Saint Petersburg. The United
Nations Security Council, having ended its involuntary
vow of silence, should make its authoritative voice
heard. We anticipate that its members will shoulder
their full responsibilities and will be strictly guided by
the principles of the Charter and by the interests of
establishing a lasting and comprehensive peace in the
region, taking into account the positions of all parties
and existing accords.

Russia has consistently been committed to
vigorously combating terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations. We reaffirm the need for immediate
and unconditional release of abducted Israeli soldiers.
Israel has a legitimate right to ensure its security.
However, the scale of the use of force, the casualties
and the destruction demonstrate that the actions stated
for achieving this purpose go far beyond a counter-
terrorist operation. We believe that there must be strict
compliance with the norms of international
humanitarian law.
Our sense of alarm regarding the fate of the
civilian population in the area of hostilities was
heightened by the fact that there were hundreds of
Russian citizens at the epicentre of the conflict. We
thank the United Nations and other international
partners for helping to evacuate them.

Normalizing the situation in Lebanon and the
Palestinian territories will require a multifaceted effort
by the international community. The most important
requirement at this point is an immediate cessation of
hostilities. We support the appeal made by Prime
Minister Siniora of Lebanon. It is essential that all acts
of violence, including terrorist attacks and acts of
provocation, incitement and destruction, be brought to
an end. A ceasefire would allow civilians to freely and
safely leave the conflict zones and make it possible to
address the relevant problems through political and
diplomatic channels.

That is precisely the current focus of diplomatic
efforts by Russia, which has sent high-level
representatives to the Middle East. We will continue to
work to achieve those goals in cooperation with all
interested parties.

We are certain that there can be no military
solution to this conflict, or to any of the problems in
the Middle East. The thrust of collective diplomatic
efforts must in future be directed towards the search for
practical steps to create conditions for a prompt end to
bloodshed and to place this crisis on the track of a
political settlement.

