Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): As this
is the first time that I take the floor at the Security
Council since assuming my duties as Ambassador and
Permanent Representative of Mali, I am delighted to
convey cordial greetings and profound gratitude from
the Government and the people of Mali for the special
attention paid to Mali by the Council. I am committed
to working closely with the members of the Council to
achieve peace and stability in Mali and beyond.

I would like to warmly congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of the delegation of Mali, on the accession of your
great country, the Russian Federation, to the presidency
of the Security Council for October. I sincerely thank
the delegation of New Zealand for the commendable
work done during its presidency of the Council over the
past month. I must also pay tribute to Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for his deep and unwavering commitment
to peace, security and to the well-being of people
throughout the world and, in particular, in my county,
Mali. I would also like to thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Minister Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, the United Nations system and all of our
other partners for their ceaseless efforts to promote
peace and stability in Mali. On behalf of the President
of the Republic of Mali, His Excellency Mr. Ibrahim
Boubacar Keita, I would like to commend the members
ofthe Council today on reaching consensus in selecting
Prime Minister Antonio Guterres as the next Secretary-
General of the United Nations.

I would like to reiterate the appreciation of the
Government and people of Mali to the People's
Democratic Republic of Algeria, the Chair of the
Follow-Up Committee on the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, the African Union, the Economic
Community of West African States, the European
Union, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, France, Burkina Faso, Mauritania, the Niger,
Chad, the United States of America, Russia, the United
Kingdom and China for their commitment to restoring
peace and stability in our country.

The delegation of Mali takes note of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/819) and commends
Under-Secretaries-General Herve' Ladsous and Atul
Khare for their briefings. The report is focused on
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
econciliation in Mali and on action taken by the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We commend the fact
that the current report refers to the progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement and acknowledges
the efforts made by the Government of Mali, led by
President Keita as the Head of State.
With regard to security, the delegation of Mali is
concerned about the inter- and intra-community tension
in regions in the north of the country, including Kidal.
We share the analysis of the Secretary-General that the
situation in the centre and north of the country remains
of concern given the persistence of asymmetric attacks
perpetrated by extremist and terrorist groups against
Mali's defence and security forces and international
forces. Such factors are the main obstacles to the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

Like the Secretary-General, the Government of
Mali is concerned about the human rights situation
in the country. However, the excessive use of force,
of which the security and defence forces of Mali have
been accused in their fight against terrorism, appears
to be exaggerated. It does not take into account the
efforts undertaken by the Government of Mali in order
to promote and protect human rights in a very difficult
environment, marked by the lack of State authority in
certain parts of the country. Be that as it may, I can
assure the Council that investigations are under way
and proceedings have been opened by the Ministry of
Justice in Mali. I would also like to assure the Council
that the Government of Mali remains fully committed
to promoting and protecting human rights.

You will recall, Sir, that on 16 June, following a
similar exercise, the Prime Minister of Mali informed
the Security Council about actions and initiatives
undertaken by the Government of Mali within the
framework of the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconcilation in Mali. Convinced that
speeding up its implementation is the only viable
political and strategic option in the current situation
faced by my country, the Government has spared no
effort to continue along that path.

More recently, during the high-level ministerial
meeting devoted to the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which was
co-chaired with the Secretary-General on 23 September
here in New York, the Head of State of Mali recalled the
major progress that had been achieved. Also, to express
his personal involvement and his desire to expedite the
process, the President of the Republic informed us of
his appointment of a High Representative responsible
for follow-up to the implementation of the Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement. He also stressed that a total
cessation ofhostilities between the defence and security
forces of Mali and armed groups had taken place since

the signing ofthe Agreement in May/June 2015. Trust is
therefore being restored among Malian parties.

With regard to political and institutional reforms,
the Government of Mali has carried out a review of
the code on local collectivities, the adoption of a new
electoral law and the appointment of governors of new
regions, as well as the setting up of a working group
to review the Constitution with a View to looking at a
number of relevant provisions of the Peace Agreement.

On the development front, the Government of
Mali has adopted an emergency reconstruction plan
for the interim period, which covers 2016-2017, and is
continuing to develop apecific development strategy
for the northern regions of Mali and one for a financial
architecture of a sustainable development fund for
the north. The fund will include almost €457 million
for the period 2016-2018, which is considered to be
our Government's contribution to the peace effort.
We will also establish of a number of regional
development agencies.

In addition to these measures, the President has
announced the convening of the national reconciliation
conference before the end of the current year. This
will be in keeping with the relevant provisions of
the Agreement and its article 5, which calls for the
establishment of the necessary conditions for an
in-depth debate among all the components of our nation
regarding the deep-rooted causes of the conflict. The
objective is to come up with a charter for peace, unity
and national reconciliation. Similarly, the Government
has decided that we will hold communal local elections
before the end of 2016.

In keeping with this momentum, the Head of State
has held a number of meetings and discussions with
the key political and social players in our country. The
President has received the leader of the opposition and
several other political, religious and traditional leaders
to hear their concerns. The overall situation of the
country, particularly in the centre and the north, lay at
the very heart of these exchanges.

With regard to the situation in Kidal, one marked
by inter- and intra-community clashes, which are of
concern to the national authorities at the very highest
level, I would like to underscore that the Government of
the Republic Mali is in no way linked to these tensions
and local rivalries. The Government has no interest in
backing one camp against any other. Given the loss of
life and the consequences of these tensions on the whole
peace process, the High Representative of the President
to follow-up on the implementation of Peace Agreement
has organized a series of meetings in Bamako between
the signatory movements, with the participation of
international members of the Follow-up Committee.
The President will continue to work with the leaders
of the different movements and traditional leaders in
the region to contribute to the return of peace, which is
necessary for trust among the different parties.

Similarly, the Government has given pride of
place to the same approach comprising dialogue and
the search for peaceful solutions in the face of the
deteriorating security situation in the centre of the
country. The Head of State has called upon traditional
mechanisms for resolving inter-communal tensions by
contacting political, religious and traditional leaders to
reduce tensions in the Mopti region. He has also called
to avoid any confusion in the fight against terrorism
and violent extremism. The Government had worked to
finalize a comprehensive action plan to secure, stabilize
and strengthen social cohesion aimed at coming up with
a multifaceted response to the situation in the central
parts of my country.

As can be noted, the Government of Mali, under the
authority of the President Keita, has as its only priority
the welfare of the Malian people, a well-being which
requires peace and reconciliation, which lies at the very
heart of our country. That is why he has committed
himself in a resolved way and in good faith to a full-
f1edged implementation ofthe Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement. However, we will not be able to achieve this
alone. The other Malian parties must fully play their
role in that exercise. They will have to break with all
terrorist movements and organized crime, and commit
themselves in good faith to peace.

I would like to underscore the necessity
of accelerating the process of cantonment and
disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration in
order to isolate those armed groups that have not signed
the Peace Agreement that are affiliated with terrorist
networks, whose presence in the northern regions is
undermining efforts under way there.

Also, to put an end to the untold suffering inflicted
upon innocent people, the Government again calls for
the adoption oftargeted sanctions against all those who
impede the implementation of the Peace Agreement, in
keeping with the relevant provisions of article 54 and the
declaration of the international mediation team during
the eleventh meeting of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee. The international community also has a
great responsibility as guarantor of the implementation
of the Peace Agreement. We would like to renew our
call upon friendly States and partner organizations
to make more concrete the commitments undertaken
during successive conferences on the development of
Mali to enable us to ensure the effective implementation
of the Agreement.

It is also the responsibility of the Security
Council, pursuant to resolution 2295 (2016) - and we
welcome its adoption - to help the Government of
Mali to progressively restore the authority of the State
throughout the national territory, a precondition for
ending the abuse and lawlessness in a number of areas
of Mali. To do this, MINUSMA, as now authorized by
resolution 2295 (2016), must adopt a more proactive and
robust posture. It is therefore important, even urgent,
that MINUSMA be fully equipped and provided with
the necessary means and resources to appropriately
discharge its mandate, which is to stabilize Mali. On
its part, the Government of Mali will fully play its role
within the framework of the new mandate, and is already
working closely with MINUSMA to very rapidly
achieve a common vision regarding its implementation
through the development of quantifiable benchmarks.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the gratitude
of the Government and the people of Mali to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative in Mali
and to all the troop-contributing countries for all the
sacrifices that they have made for a final and lasting
settlement to the Malian crisis. I pay tribute to all
victims of this crisis, civilians and military, foreign and
Malian. I also welcome the outstanding work carried
out by the women and men of MINUSMA, as well as
the Barkhane Force for the stabilization of Mali and the
entire Sahel region.

