Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation has consistently
advocated establishing the truth with respect to the
murder of Rafik Hariri. The perpetrators of that crime
must be brought to justice. We fully share with the
sponsors of the draft resolution their primary objective
of preventing impunity and political violence in
Lebanon. Given the fragility of the domestic situation
in Lebanon, it is essential that the Council take a
balanced and considered decision with a view to
promoting harmonious relations among the Lebanese
people.

Given the deep rift within Lebanese society and
Government structures, this matter must be pursued so
that the practical implementation of the draft resolution
does not face serious difficulties that could lead to
negative consequences for the country and the region
as a whole. During consultations on the draft
resolution, the Russian Federation made a number of
constructive proposals that could have considerably
improved the text. The draft should have focused on
the implementation, under a Council decision, of the
agreement between the United Nations and Lebanon,
not on the entry into force of the agreement.

The arrangement chosen by the sponsors is
dubious from the point of view of international law.
The treaty between the two entities - Lebanon and the
United Nations - by definition cannot enter into force
on the basis of a decision by only one party. The

constituent documents for the Tribunal, imposed by a
unilateral decision of a United Nations body - that is,
a Security Council resolution - essentially represent
an encroachment upon the sovereignty of Lebanon.

We do not believe that the establishment of a
special tribunal by decision of the Council under
Chapter VII of the Charter is warranted. There is no
basis for a reference to Chapter VII in the draft
resolution. United Nations practice in establishing
tribunals shows that Chapter VII has been invoked only
for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and for the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda, which deal with crimes of genocide,
crimes against humanity and war crimes - that is,
international crimes. The jurisdiction of the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon would not cover such crimes. By
its nature, the Tribunal is a mixed body with
considerable Lebanese participation that operates on
the basis of the applicable criminal procedures of
Lebanon.

The Tribunal is being established for Lebanon,
and it is important to heed the views of all the
Lebanese people on this critical issue. In this regard, it
would have been justifiable to have the preambular
part of the draft resolution include a reference not only
to the letter from the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
Fouad Siniora, but also to that from the country's
President, Emile Lahoud.

The language proposed by Russia has not been
reflected in text of the draft resolution. Given that fact,
we intend to abstain in the vote on the draft resolution.
We regret the fact that putting a draft resolution with
considerable legal shortcomings to a vote in such a
hasty manner will not allow the Russian Federation and
a number of other members of the Security Council to
support it.

