Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): It would be a hopeless
understatement for me and my delegation to say that we are
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over this crucial session
of the Security Council. Rather, I choose to remember that
it is granted to but a few individuals in each generation to
have the honour to appear before their mentors and
leaders so that they can measure how far their proteges
have progressed in life. For many years in exile, I was
among the privileged few who heard you teach, as you
did so fervently, that the United Nations was, as it still is,
capable and willing to act decisively at critical junctures
of history when the situation so demands. I believe that
this is the moment when this body must take a stand for
the sake of future generations - that is, the children
caught in vicious wars around the world.

It is for this reason that my delegation would like to
express our appreciation to Namibia for having chosen to
hold the second debate on the situation of children in
armed conflict. We have two basic reasons to believe that
this meeting could not have come at a better time. First,
it is our hope that this important debate will underscore
the continuing need for the promotion and protection of
children affected by conflict. Secondly, we believe that
this debate will help make sure that the Council continues
to be seized of this matter.

During the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly, in 1997, the United Nations adopted the first
study and report commissioned by the United Nations on
the situation of children in armed conflict. This work was
headed up by our former first lady, Ms. Machel, with the
help of the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF).
For the first time, the international community collectively
expressed profound concern that the situation of children
around the world was untenable. Regrettably, since that
historic report was released, more than 300,000 children
under the age of 18 have been forced to fight in conflicts
all over the world.

As we speak, more children continue to be dragged
against their will into war. These abductions are
accompanied by sexual abuse and cruel uses of children
that defy description. Of even greater concern to us is the
plight of the girl child. We continually receive disturbing
reports that young girls are forced into sexual slavery and
other practices that expose them to dreadful diseases such
as HIV/AIDS. This must be stopped. Enough is enough.

In this regard, my Government supports the creation
of zones of peace in situations where children are caught
up in armed conflicts, with a View to protecting these
children and to addressing their special needs. It is our
firm belief that a global catastrophe of this magnitude
requires the resolute will of the international community.
We must implement comprehensive and preventive

 

programmes and activities to arrest and eventually
annihilate this problem.

The recruitment and use of child soldiers is not only
an affront to human values, it is also a fundamental
impediment to socio-economic development. The social and
economic challenges imposed on countries by this practice
have frustrated, are frustrating and will continue to frustrate
socio-economic development and social transformation.

My delegation would like to echo the decision adopted
by the Durban summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, at
which the heads of State or Government expressed their
deep concern about the difficult situation of many children
who are innocent victims of armed conflict. They
condemned the recruitment, organization and employment
of children in armed conflict. The Non-Aligned Movement
summit further urged member countries to put a stop to the
use of children as soldiers and to ensure their
demobilization and reintegration into society.

Because more than 150,000 child soldiers are actively
engaged in military combat all over Africa, African heads
of State or Government adopted the African Charter on the
Rights and Welfare of the Child in July 1990. The African
Charter complements and builds upon the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Also in that Charter
our heads of State or Government codified the
responsibilities of the State, community and individuals in
protecting the human rights of the child. This is the first
regional treaty on the human rights of the child. We hope
that more African States will soon ratify the Charter. We
also call upon all regional intergovernmental bodies to
emulate the Organization of African Unity (OAU), which
has adopted the Charter.

Last July, African heads of State and Government,
meeting at the OAU summit held in Algiers, reaffirmed
their determination to work relentlessly for the promotion
of the rights and welfare of the child. They recommitted
themselves to combating all forms of child exploitation and,
in particular, to putting an end to the phenomenon of the
child soldier.

Prior to the Algiers summit, on 7 June 1999, the South
African Minister of Defence announced that my own
Government had taken a decision to amend its national
defence policy to raise the age of enlistment into the South
African armed forces from 17 to 18. Our policy now
conforms with the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, which we signed on 10 October 1997.

It is worth noting that whilst the 1998 Security
Council presidential statement on this subject was a
welcome development, it was our contention then, and it
still is our contention now, that a Security Council
statement was inadequate. Today again we call on the
Security Council to adopt an action-oriented and
comprehensive draft resolution, such as the one before it
right now, which is necessary to address the plight of
children used as soldiers. If the Council were to fail to
adopt such a draft resolution, it would face the risk of its
inaction being misinterpreted as a lack of decisiveness in
protecting children at this critical stage. We hope that in
its deliberations the Council will reach the conclusion that
on the eve of the next millennium it is time to take a
stand against the abuse of children by those who wish to
make war rather than peace.

South Africa would like to express its strong support
for the mandate and the activities of the office of
Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. His
will and resolve to tackle this issue in a forthright
manner, by involving both State and non-State actors,
enjoy our profound admiration and support.

We look forward with anticipation to the Security
Council's first consideration of the report of the
Secretary-General on the follow-up to the
recommendations made so far for the protection and
welfare of children in situations of armed conflict. We
believe that the report will guarantee that this august body
remains seized of this important matter.

