Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix and Special Envoy
Onanga-Anyanga for their briefings on the latest
developments on the ground in Abyei and along the
South Sudan-Sudan border.

The United States would like to extend particular
thanks to Ethiopia for its contributions to the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).
Without Ethiopia's efforts, the relatively stable situation
in Abyei would not be possible. The United States
recognizes that Abyei is a strategic crossroads between
the Sudan and South Sudan, and resolving Abyei's
political status is needed for a complete and lasting
peace in the region. While the internal political shifts
in the Sudan and South Sudan provide some momentum
towards resolving ongoing disputes, unfortunately
those developments have yet to prompt action to resolve
Abyei's final status.

We remain concerned that UNISFA is not being
allowed to fully implement its mandate. We call on
both parties to ensure that UNISFA can operate as an
effective and efficient peacekeeping mission, including
by granting visas for United Nations police and allowing
the appointment of a civilian deputy.

While insecurity remains contained in Abyei, the
situation is fragile, as evidenced by attacks on UNISFA
personnel, rising criminality and ongoing incidents of
cattle raiding and kidnapping. That is all unacceptable.

In recognition of the vital role that women play
in securing peace and security, we support UNISFA's
efforts to encourage local peace committees to include
women leaders. Their absence limits prospects for
achieving a lasting peace.

The United States welcomes UNISFA's efforts
to stabilize Abyei through supporting local peace
communities, establishing new checkpoints, resolving
local conflicts and disarming the population. We also
commend the work of non-governmental organizations
and United Nations agencies undertaking work in
support of local populations in Abyei.

We endorse the Secretary-General's call for
Special Envoy Onanga-Anyanga and the African
Union to increase their efforts to secure a resolution
of the political conflicts in Abyei. We look forward to
learning more on that.

The United States remains committed to peace and
security in Abyei. Supporting peace there will enable
long-term stability for both the Sudan and South Sudan.

