The Deputy Secretary-General: I would like to
thank the President of the Security Council for this
initiative to mark World Humanitarian Day with a
briefing on the protection of humanitarian workers.
The subject is critical to mobilizing awareness and
action and to improving our response to people caught
in conflicts and disaster.

World Humanitarian Day commemorates the
bombing of the United Nations premises at the Canal
Hotel in Baghdad on 19 August 2003. It is dedicated
to the memory of all staff members and partners who
have made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty
for the humanitarian imperative. Since then, we have
seen shocking tragedies and terrorist acts against
United Nations personnel and premises in places such
as Algeria, Nigeria, Somalia and Afghanistan. Those
appalling incidents remain fresh in our minds.

Humanitarian workers from the United Nations,
the International Committee of the Red Cross,
international organizations and non-governmental
organizations dedicate their lives to assisting millions
of women, children and men affected by conflicts and
natural disasters around the world. Working in some of
the most dangerous places, they take great risks to help
people in desperate need.

Yet all too frequently their safety is compromised
in the most despicable ways: by threats, by attacks and
by the use of illegal methods of warfare that endanger
lives or damage the infrastructure needed for the
delivery of assistance. Such acts are part of the picture
of brutalization that we see in the world today. Parties
to conflict very often ignore international humanitarian
law and target civilians for the sake of political and
military gains. They have used collective punishment.
They have incited ethnic violence. They have impeded
the delivery of humanitarian assistance. And they have
attacked humanitarian actors. What that represents is
nothing less than a deficit of humanity. Regretfully,
that trend is getting worse, rather than better.

Last year more humanitarian workers were
kidnapped, seriously injured or killed than ever
before: 155 were reportedly killed, 171 were wounded
and 134 kidnapped. That represents a 66 per cent per
cent increase in relation to 2012. Thus far in 2014,
79 humanitarian workers have been killed, 33 wounded
and 50 kidnapped, according to the preliminary figures
available at this stage. In Somalia alone, over a dozen
humanitarian staff were kidnapped or detained during
the first quarter of 2014. In recent weeks, several
humanitarian workers have been killed in South Sudan
and Gaza.

The consequences of those crimes are felt not only
by humanitarian workers and their families, but also
by the millions of people who cannot be reached when
assistance is sabotaged by violence. They are felt by the
children who do not get vaccinated. They are felt by
the sick and wounded who go untreated. And they are
felt by those forced from their homes and left without
shelter.

In recent years, the majority of incidents have taken
place in six countries, namely, Afghanistan, Pakistan,
Somalia, the Sudan, South Sudan and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The overwhelming majority of victims are
national humanitarian staff working to save the lives of
their own people.

As we mourn those losses and recall the plight of
the many wounded or kidnapped, we must not accept
such outcomes as the necessary cost of operating in
risky environments. Our shared responsibility is to do
everything we can to provide humanitarians with the
safety and the space they need to do their life-saving
work.

It is essential not to politicize humanitarian action
and to make a clear distinction between humanitarian
actors and political or military actors. That distinction
is important, even when the military objective is the
protection of civilians. If those lines are blurred,
perceptions of humanitarian organizations can
change quickly and radically and further expose them
to violence. For that reason, political and military
actors must respect the need for humanitarian actors
to carry out their work in an impartial, neutral and
independent manner. Dialogue on how best to maintain
that distinction or strike that balance is an ongoing
endeavour.

To misuse humanitarian action for political,
military and security ends is dangerous. That
compromises the integrity of humanitarian operations
and can place the lives of humanitarian workers and
the people they assist in grave danger. Respect for the
humanitarian principles of impartiality, neutrality and
independence is crucial for building acceptance by
parties to conflict and affected communities. That must
include preserving the ability of humanitarian workers
to engage with all parties to conflict. Such engagement
serves humanitarian purposes. I want to stress that it
does not confer legal status or political legitimacy to
non-State groups. In that area, where humanitarian
action is urgently needed in conflict situations, the
Security Council has a clear role to play. That is why we
particularly appreciate the fact that you have organized
this briefing, Mr. President. I would suggest that four
actions are especially important.

First, the Council can routinely call on parties to
conflict to uphold their legal obligations and condemn
parties when they do not. Secondly, the Council
can ensure that measures to safeguard peace and
security, such as the negotiation of peace agreements
or the deployment of United Nations peacekeeping
operations, do not blur the lines between political,
military and humanitarian objectives. Humanitarian
efforts, essential as they are, are no substitute for
political action to resolve the causes of conflicts.
Thirdly, the Council can impose targeted measures
against parties to conflict who violate their obligations
to respect and protect humanitarian workers and the
civilian population. Fourthly, the Council can use all
the tools at its disposal to seek accountability for those
who perpetrate attacks against humanitarian workers
and assets. That means supporting investigations and
prosecutions at the national level, creating special
criminal tribunals or mixed arrangements, making use
of commissions of inquiry and fact-finding missions
and referring relevant situations to the International
Criminal Court. Let us remember that those who commit
such crimes take the civilian population hostage and
consciously spread fear and use intimidation to reach
their goals. They must never be allowed to succeed.

I would like to conclude by stressing that attacks
against humanitarian workers and facilities are part
of a deeply disturbing trend, as I mentioned earlier. I
am thinking here of the increase in unacceptable and
cowardly attacks against civilians in armed conflict
and the sadly growing lack of respect for international
humanitarian law. Let us not accept the growing deficit
of humanity; rather, let us stop it.

Today, on World Humanitarian Day, let us honour
the victims, let us protect the heroes on the front lines
of disaster and war, and let us do everything we can to
help them and to help us all to alleviate human suffering
in a difficult time of turmoil and violence in the world.

