Ms. Velo (Italy) (spoke in Spanish): I would like
to thank the presidency of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for having convened today's briefing, which
will contribute in increasing the attention paid to the
links between natural resources, climate and security.

(spoke in English)

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

As highlighted on the occasion of the first debate
in the Security Council on water, peace and security
last November (see S/PV.7818), water scarcity, together
with other megatrends, such as population growth,
rapid and chaotic urbanization and food insecurity, can
be an instability multiplier and a driver of migration
and conflict. The Secretary-General has reminded us
of this fact today, as he did last week in his speech on
climate action at the Stern School.

I would like to highlight that, in tackling climate
change and implementing the 2030 Agenda in a timely
manner, the Paris Agreement remains a cornerstone
in cooperation among countries. At the same time,
transboundary water cooperation is a powerful tool
for the long-term prevention of conflicts. We consider
today's briefing especially timely because it is taking
place in the light of the renewed focus by the Secretary-
General on preventive diplomacy, which Italy fully
supports, and ofthe crucial impact ofwater issues on the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Sustaining
Peace Agenda where the nexus between peace, security,
development and human rights is clearly established. In
that respect, I would like to develop three main points.

First, a global multilateral framework for
promoting water cooperation and ensuring the
protection and preservation of international
watercourses is fundamental, and we have the tools
to achieve it. The 1997 Convention on the Law of the
Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses
enshrines prevention at its very core. Also, allow me
to recall that the Convention on the Protection and
Use of Transboundary Watercourses and International
Lakes - the first water convention finalized by United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe - was
opened last year to all States Members of the United
Nations, thereby becoming another effective tool for
transboundary water cooperation worldwide. As a party
to both of those instruments, Italy strongly encourages
their ratification and full implementation by Member
States, as they represent a fundamental platform for
the further development of regional frameworks and
conventions on water cooperation. The International
Fresh Water Treaties Database lists over 400 water
agreements: they are the most effective benefits-shared
alternative to confrontation.

Secondly, Europe has long-standing experience in
this field. The Central Commission for the Navigation
on the Rhine and the International Commission for
the Protection of the Danube River are two of the first
examples of water-related multilateral frameworks
in history. Building on that experience, the European

Union has always been committed to promoting water
cooperation in other regions of the world.

Thirdly, I would like to underscore my country's
engagement in addressing water challenges at both the
multilateral and bilateral levels. As a member and host
country of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Italy
has actively participated in the establishment of the
Global Framework on Water Scarcity, whose goal is to
mobilize under a single integrated framework all actors
dealing with water scarcity in its social, environmental
and economic dimensions, with a focus on agriculture
and taking into special account the effects of climate
change. Furthermore, within the Global Framework,
last April we adopted the Rome Statement on Water
Scarcity in Agriculture, which, inter alia, underscores
the importance of water governance and promoting
integrated approaches to watersheds.

At the national level, Italy recently implemented
a new strategy for basin management with the
aim of promoting an integrated approach to water
management and soil conservation. Through shared
governance, public and private stakeholders join
efforts in improving the maintenance of our river
basins, fostering local development to create economic
opportunity and mitigating hydrological risks. Such
a cooperative approach, in a shared legal framework,
is key to preventing water-related disputes. Moreover,
Italy increased its development aid in 201. We will
double that increase in 2017, and triple it in 2018. We
want to ensure that those resources are directed towards
achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and that
they have an impact on capacity-building, including in
the sustainable use of natural resources.

In conclusion, resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake
Chad basin region, recognized the adverse effects of
climate change and ecological changes among other
factors on the stability of the region, including through
water scarcity, and emphasized the need for adequate
risk assessment and risk-management strategies by
Governments and the United Nations relating to those
factors. We supported and co-sponsored the resolution
because we believe in international cooperation,
institution-building and partnerships. Benchmarks in
that regard will allow us to achieve not only international
water-related development goals, such as those set out
in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, but
also to tackle the root causes of conflict and avoid
international confrontation.

Italy remains steadfast in these efforts for prevention
and peacebuilding. Water, which has nurtured life and
the human family, fostered civilizations and inspired
many a creative mind, can also motivate our actions
and be an instrument of peace.

