The President: In my national capacity, I wish to
make some remarks explaining Romania's vote on
resolution 1556 (2004), just adopted.

Romania voted in favour of the resolution. We
believe that the action taken today binds together in a
meaningful way a framework and a process by which
the international community - the United Nations, the
African Union, the European Union, the League of
Arab States, and individual nations from the region and
across the world - may respond effectively to the
crisis in the province of Darfur, the first major
humanitarian challenge of this century. A special
commendation goes to the leadership displayed by the
African Union.

Through this action, the Government of the Sudan
is being engaged with a view to ensuring that it lives
up to its own commitment to secure protection for all
its nationals and to redress the human tragedies on its
territory. Romania hopes and expects that the Council
will constantly review developments on the ground.
The flexibility built into resolution 1556 (2004)
enables it to do so properly and effectively.

We recognize today that all parties concerned
must live up to their respective responsibilities.
We are looking in a comprehensive manner at all
the challenges confronting the Sudan today. We hope to
work in support of a comprehensive solution as well,
opening up prospects for stability, development and
prosperity in the Sudan: prospects we believe are
within reach.

The Sudan is an important country for Romania.
It is also important to respond promptly to the pressing
needs of those who suffer or are at risk there. My
Government is finalizing the delivery of a humanitarian
assistance package. Tomorrow, Romanian Foreign
Minister Mircea Geoana will be in Khartoum and in the
Darfur region. The issue voted upon today is clearly
not an abstract matter for us: Romania does indeed care
about the Sudan and its people.

The international response to the dramatic events
unfolding in the Sudan, in Darfur, shows that
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations is now bolder and more innovative and is
less impaired by artificial lines of separation. The
thematic debate proposed by Romania for the public
meeting of the Council on 20 July (see S/PV.5007)
under the presidency of the Romanian Prime Minister
addressed issues that have clearly gone beyond the
realm of theory to engage with living reality.
Subsidiarity and complementarity among universal,
regional and subregional institutional capabilities for
maintaining peace and security do indeed work.
Romania is therefore optimistic that such a matrix for
cooperation will enable us to pass on to future
generations a world free of conflicts, including frozen
and forgotten ones.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

