Mrs. Natividad (Philippines): The Philippines
associates itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Thailand on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).

We wish to extend our gratitude to the Malaysian
presidency for once again placing the issue of children
and armed conflict at the top of the agenda, especially
at a time when conflicts around the world continue
unabated, affecting children and other vulnerable groups
the most. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2016/360) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, as well as UNICEF, for their presentations.

The Philippines strongly believes that to provide
the greatest protection for our children, we have to
continue our work towards ending conflict and creating
an environment that is conducive for them to grow and
learn unimpeded.

It is for this reason that the Philippine Government,
under a new Administration, is committed to starting
dialogue and ultimately forging peace pacts with
various armed groups.

It remains steadfast in passing the Bangsamoro
Basic Law, based on the Comprehensive Agreement
on the Bangsamoro, signed with the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front on 27 March 2014.
Last month, a comprehensive peace road map was
approved by the President that aims to bring peace and
development by addressing the issue of the Bangsamoro
and the resumption of peace talks with the Communist
Party of the Philippines-New People's Army-National
Democratic Front. Our Congress will have to pass a law
to implement this peace road map.

The Philippines remains committed to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and international
humanitarian law. The Council for the Welfare of
Children continues its work in implementing the
monitoring, response and reporting system for grave
violations of child rights. Local government units
participated in a series of orientation workshops on the
concept of the protocol of the MRRS so that they can
proactively monitor, report and respond to incidents
of grave child rights violations. The Council for the
Welfare of Children established a monitoring, response
and reporting hotline in April, which will be specific to
receiving calls related to grave child rights violations
in situations of armed conflict to provide an immediate
response to the victims.

The Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process, meanwhile, has developed and mainstreamed
the conflict-sensitive peace-promoting manual, which
serves as a guide for national Government agencies
and local government units in ensuring the adoption
of a peace lens in their crafting of policies and in the
implementation of programmes and projects on the
ground, including for children in armed conflict.

For its part, the Department of National Defence
issued a circular in February that prescribed policies
and procedures to protect children from harm during
armed conflict and to prevent the commission of grave
child rights violations by both State and non-State actors
during armed conflict. A bill for special protection for
children in situations of armed conflict and another
one to establish permanent evacuation centres in local
government units are awaiting passage in the Philippine
Congress. Both bills will ensure the continuity of
education during and after an armed encounter.

The Philippines notes the incidents cited in the
Secretary-General's report of violations of children's
rights in indigenous communities. We remain committed
to addressing these concerns and bringing perpetrators
to justice. Our armed forces will also continue to work
with the United Nations on the strategic plan to prevent
and respond to grave child rights violations in situations
of armed conflicts.
Apart from our national efforts, I wish to end by
reiterating the Philippines' commitment to working
with our international partners to ensure the utmost
protection for our children as we strive to resolve
conflicts and achieve lasting peace.

