Sir John Weston (United Kingdom): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union. The
Central and Eastern European countries associated with
the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and
the associated country Cyprus, as well as the European
Free Trade Association country members of the European
Economic Area, Iceland and Liechtenstein, align
themselves with this statement.

On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
express strong support for the role of the Special
Representative as advocate for the protection of children
affected by armed conflict and to commend him for the
inspiring address he has just delivered. The suggestions
he has made deserve our careful consideration.

The casualties of modern armed conflicts are
overwhelmingly civilians rather than soldiers. Among
civilians, women and children are particularly vulnerable,
and consequently they are now among the principal
victims of war. As we have already heard, it has been
estimated that in the last decade alone, 2 million children
have been killed in armed conflict, 6 million seriously

 

injured or disabled, 1 million have been orphaned and some
12 million have been left homeless. Many others have
fallen victim to disease, deprivation, recruitment for
combat, systematic sexual abuse and gender-based Violence.
Anti-personnel landmines and small arms have a
particularly devastating effect on children. That children
should be among the principal victims of armed conflict is
unacceptable.

The European Union believes that the issue of children
and armed conflict is one which deserves a particularly
important place on the international political agenda. While
we recognize that the primary responsibility to protect the
rights of the child under all circumstances rests with States,
we must also reinvigorate international efforts to protect
children. We must ensure the demobilization of child
soldiers and also recognize the importance of action to
promote the physical and psychological recovery and social
reintegration of the child victims of conflict. The
international community must ensure that adequate
resources are devoted to child rehabilitation programmes as
an integral part of planning for post-conflict situations.
European Union development policy already addresses the
plight of children in armed conflicts. In some specific
situations - for example, Sierra Leone - we are focusing
our efforts on the demobilizing and reintegration of child
soldiers.

The European Union supports the work that is in
progress to strengthen international human rights standards
and mechanisms for enforcing international law in respect
of children in situations of armed conflict. The European
Union remains fully committed to the aim of concluding
successfully the negotiations on the draft optional protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. The European
Union is working actively at the Diplomatic Conference for
the early establishment of a permanent international
criminal court. We believe strongly that an international
criminal court is necessary as a means of holding the
perpetrators of war crimes, genocide and crimes against
humanity to account. We support inclusion in the
international criminal court statute of a prohibition against
the use of children in armed conflict.

The European Union is also concerned that whenever
sanctions are imposed in the handling of crises, their impact
on children should be assessed and monitored, and
humanitarian exceptions should be child-focused.

Ensuring that human rights and humanitarian
instruments set adequate standards for the protection of
children in conflict situations is not enough by itself to
safeguard children's interests. The binding commitments
that these instruments entail must be implemented by all.
In that regard, the European Union stresses the particular
importance of the Convention on the Rights of the Child,
which has been almost universally ratified. It is the
responsibility of the international community to ensure
that all sides involved in conflict - governmental and
non-governmental - abide by the relevant principles of
international law in their treatment of children. The
European Union gives its full support to the work of the
Committee on the Rights of the Child and to its mandate
to monitor the implementation of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child in all States parties, including those
affected by armed conflict.

Any meaningful effort to improve the plight of
children affected by armed conflict requires high-level
governmental and international attention, it requires the
mobilization of public opinion, it requires practical action
on the ground by Governments, and it requires
Governments to support the activities of the Special
Representative. The European Union supported fully the
excellent work of the independent Expert, Ms. Graca
Machel, and was actively involved in the creation of the
new post of Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict.
Several European Union member States have made
voluntary contributions to the work of the Special
Representative. The European Union underlines the need
for a close partnership between the Special Representative
and other parts of the United Nations system, in particular
the United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

The Special Representative has demonstrated in his
visits to countries in conflict - Sri Lanka, Sierra Leone,
Liberia and Sudan - that efforts to raise the visibility of
children's suffering can bring results. It is possible to get
significant commitments on the treatment of children in
situations of conflict. It is important that Governments
and armed groups fulfil commitments given to the Special
Representative. The international community must be
vigilant in monitoring implementation of these
commitments.

The Presidency of the European Union held, in
London on 22 and 23 June, a high-level symposium on
children affected by armed conflict, co-hosted by the
Special Representative. Participants resolved to use their
influence to put pressure on all Governments to live up to

 

their commitments under the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and other relevant instruments of international
law. Among other conclusions, participants agreed on the
need for an integrated approach to assist countries emerging
from conflict and for a network of support for the Special
Representative's appeal for resurrecting local norms and
values that protect children from abuse in armed conflict.

The European Union looks forward to working closely
with the Special Representative and relevant United Nations
bodies on the development of this agenda.

