Mr. Goussous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to thank you very much, Mr. President, for
convening this emergency meeting at the request of the
States members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. I should also like to congratulate you
wholeheartedly on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I am profoundly
convinced that, thanks to your experience and skill, the
work of the Council will be successful.

I should also like to thank your predecessor, His
Excellency Mr. Wang Yingfan, for having conducted
the business of the Council with such brilliance during
the course of the previous month.

My country, Jordan, greatly appreciates the
laudable efforts by the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan.
We thank him for his wise guidance and for always
trying to seek to implement the purposes and principles
of the United Nations. We thank him for the tireless
efforts he has made in the service of international
peace and security.

My delegation is highly concerned about the
serious developments in the occupied Palestinian
territories resulting from continued acts of aggression
by Israel against the Palestinian people. These acts are
now posing a very grave threat. My delegation
condemns Israel for waging an increasing military
campaign against the Palestinian people, for using
collective punishment against the Palestinians and for
using combat aircraft and tanks to destroy Palestinian
villages and institutions. This has led to a high number
of casualties among innocent civilians. The policy of
assassination that is under way, the demolition of
houses and the economic and security siege of
Palestine towns and villages are flagrant violations of
international agreements and of relevant international
laws and norms.

We once again condemn the Israeli policy and
Israel's invasion and occupation of areas that are under
full Palestinian authority. The two sides had agreed to
consider the issue of Jerusalem during the final-status
negotiations. The occupation of houses is a flagrant
violation of international law and of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council, inter alia, 252
(1969) and 672 (1990), which consider Israel's
occupation and annexation of Jerusalem null and void.

Jordan firmly believes that the policy being
pursued by the Israeli Government cannot provide
security to the Israeli people. On the contrary, this
policy will lead to more violence and to more victims.
Rather than leading to regional peace and security, it
will threaten the future of the peace process. The
regrettable recent attack in Jerusalem that caused many
victims, including civilians, shows that security
measures, however robust, cannot deter extremist
groups from committing acts of aggression. Therefore,
the only way to provide security is to deal with the
problems facing the fact that the peace process and to
resume negotiations between the Palestinian and the
Israeli sides.

We are fully aware of the fact that the military
option is not a solution to the crisis and that to deal
with this crisis only from a security point of view will
not resolve it and will only increase violence. This
could ignite the entire region. Therefore Jordan
believes that a political solution is the only way to
resolve the crisis.

In this context, we appeal to the Israeli
Government to respond favourably to international
efforts to put an end to the acts of aggression and siege
against the Palestinians. We encourage the Israeli
Government to return to the negotiating table on the
basis of the agreements that provided the foundations
for the peace process.

We believe that the report of the Mitchell Fact-
Finding Committee and the recommendations
contained in it provide a way to resolve this crisis, to
restore trust between the two parties through the
implementation of all the commitments undertaken and
by resuming negotiations where they were left off. The
objective here is to reach a final agreement, put an end
to occupation, restore rights and enable all to live in
peace and security in accordance with the international
resolutions that form the basis for the peace process.

My delegation once again reiterates its appeal to
the Security Council to shoulder its responsibilities
under the Charter by sending international observers to
the occupied Palestinian territories, in accordance with
the recommendations of the G-8 in Genoa, Italy, and
the recommendations of the Mitchell Committee. The
objective here is to ensure the protection of the
Palestinian people in accordance with the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War and in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

We also appeal to the Security Council to urge
Israel to implement international resolutions, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973),
which formed the basis for the peace process. Israel
should also be urged to recognize the legitimate rights
of the Palestinian people, including their right to create
their own independent State, with Jerusalem as its
capital.

In conclusion, my delegation reaffirms the
solidarity of our King, our Government and our people
with the Palestinian people. We want to see to it that
the Palestinian people enjoy their legitimate rights, and
that they meet all their legitimate demands to create an
independent State comprising all of their national
territory, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

