The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of April, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to the
United Nations, for his service as President of the Security
Council for the month of March 2000. I am sure I speak
for all members of the Security Council in expressing deep
appreciation to Ambassador Chowdhury for the great
diplomatic skill with which he conducted the Council's
business last month.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Afghanistan
Report of the Secretary-General (S/2000/205)

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Afghanistan, in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional
rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Farhcidi
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall take
it that the Security Council agrees to extend an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr.
John Renninger, Officer-in-Charge of the Asia and the
Pacific Division of the Department of Political Affairs.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Renninger to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in
its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan
and its implications for international peace and security,
document S/2000/205, and a letter dated 4 April 2000
from the Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) concerning
Afghanistan addressed to the President of the Council,
document S/2000/282.

 

Members of the Council have also received
photocopies of the report of the United Nations Interagency
Gender Mission to Afghanistan, which took place from 12
to 24 November 1997.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. John Renninger, Officer-in-Charge of the
Asia and the Pacific Division of the Department of Political
Affairs, on the situation in Afghanistan. I call on Mr.
Renninger.


