Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, thank you
for convening this open meeting on the draft resolution
on non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD). We accept and respect your technical veto on
statements exceeding four minutes, and we will adhere
to It.

It is fortuitous that your first speaker on the
subject comes from a country that does not produce
WMD and has therefore nothing to proliferate, but
which finds itself under the same obligations as other
countries that do produce and have the capacity to
produce WMD. I believe that a great majority of your
speakers, and of the United Nations membership, is in
this unique position. It is also unique that, while the
measures mentioned in the draft resolution are directed
at non-State actors, the onus of implementing them
rests upon States.

My delegation appreciates, therefore, the
timeliness of this open debate and the value of listening
to the views of the general membership, who would be
implementing the resolution. Those who are bound
should be heard. This is an essential element of a
transparent and democratic process, and is the best to
proceed on a resolution that demands legislative
actions and executive measures from the 191 Members
of the United Nations. In this regard, we welcome the
initiative of the sponsors to present the draft resolution
to regional groups and to discuss with them and other
interested parties what is in the text and what is not in
the text.

We approach the subject through the prism of
measures to combat terrorism, which constitutes a
threat to international peace and security. We believe
that other States also take this approach and that is why
there is a consensus, not only among the members of
the Security Council but also in the general
membership of the United Nations, about the serious
threat posed by nuclear, biological and chemical
weapons falling into the hands of non-State actors and
being used for terrorism.
There is also general acceptance that there is a
gap in existing non-proliferation regimes to address
this threat. Addressing this serious threat now is the
common ground on which we are all building. A clear
and present danger that non-State actors will take
advantage of this gap requires exceptional responses.

We are aware that existing multilateral
obligations on WMD emanate from multilateral treaties
that have resulted from negotiations in which all parties
have closely examined those treaties and have agreed
to be committed to their provisions. This resolution
deviates from time-tested modes of creating
multilateral obligations but my delegation essentially
regards it as an exceptional measure to address a new
and urgent potential threat not covered by existing
treaty regimes. The Council is moving to a new phase
of combating terrorism and, if it is to play a crucial
role, as it should, in combating this threat to
international peace and security, its members will have
to display extraordinary degrees of flexibility and
realism on the issue.

We note the positive elements of the draft, which
have been stressed by the sponsors and which will help
us support it, namely, the incorporation of the
fulfilment of obligations in relation to arms control and
disarmament, peaceful settlement of disputes and non-
retroactivity of the resolution. We are also assured that
the draft does not preclude multilateral agreements on
the subject, that it does not infringe on existing treaty
regimes nor hamper international cooperation in
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes, and that it does not ipso facto authorize
enforcement action against States that fail or are unable
to comply with the obligations imposed by the
resolution. We accept these as articles of faith.

However, we seek further clarity in the definition
of the mandate of the proposed committee. Based on
the divergence of ideas on the time frame of the
committee, it is clear that the sponsors have different
ideas on the scope of the role of the committee. We
believe that the time frame of the committee will be
more easily decided once the mandate is clarified and
agreed upon.

Finally, we hope that the draft resolution on this
item can be adopted by consensus to signify the
seriousness and strong desire of the Council and of the
international community to counter the threat posed by
WMD falling into the hands of non-State actors. An
authoritative pronouncement exerts an independent
influence on State behaviour, even as it imparts a
strong message to its intended recipients - the non-
State actors. The Council's efforts to address the
proliferation of WMD will enjoy a greater resonance if
the general United Nations membership can own such
efforts. In this way, the law on the books will be the
law on the ground.

