Mr. Al Harthy (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate the United States on
presiding over the Council for this month and thank its
delegation for holding this meeting.

Oman aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the representative of Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States.

Oman believes that the Palestinian question is
essential to stability in the Middle East. Without ajust
and satisfactory solution to such a question, it will be
very difficult to establish normal relations among the
States and peoples of the region. Unfortunately, we
now feel that the Palestinian question and other issues
in the Middle East are falling lower on the agenda of
the international community because attention is being
given to other, potentially more urgent issues. However,
we should not forget the plight of people who have been
living under occupation for more than 70 years and
still hope to attain their right to self-determination by
establishing an independent country within the borders
of 1967, with Jerusalem as its capital, in accordance
with international decisions and resolutions.

Israel is taking advantage of the extraordinary
situation in the region to establish and expand
settlements. That will complicate international efforts
to find a solution to the Palestinian question and will
kill hopes for peace and the two-State solution. We
call for serious negotiations to reach a comprehensive
and lasting settlement that will uphold the rights of all
parties to live in peace, side-by-side. We call on the
international community to support all efforts that
will help to achieve that noble goal, aspired to by all
peace-loving countries.

In Oman, peace and dialogue have been key
principles since the opening of Oman, which began on
23 July 1970. We believe that dialogue is the principal
means by which to deal with all disputes. Nations
can achieve rapprochement through joint visions. We
are fully convinced that dialogue is the best way to
resolve differences peacefully, as opposed to through
confrontation and conflict. Based on that principle,
and with respect to current issues in the region, such
as those in Yemen, Syria and Libya, Oman has been
working to achieve convergence and to encourage all
adversaries to renounce their differences and come to
the negotiating table. Oman has hosted many meetings
in that respect.

In relation to Yemen in particular, we have no
doubt that developments there have exacerbated
already deteriorating economic and security conditions

for the Yemeni people. We highly commend the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Yemen for his work to restore peace and stability
in that brotherly country. We call on all Yemeni
political parties to support such efforts by engaging in
a meaningful dialogue to reach a political solution that
would bring the crisis to an end.

I would like to stress that Oman is ready to assume
its role in attaining that goal by cooperating with all
parties concerned. I also stress that my country will
continue to provide humanitarian assistance to Yemeni
refugees and internally displaced persons. We call on
all regional and international entities and organizations
to support these efforts.

In conclusion, we would like to stress that the
Middle East suffers from a great many crises and new
conflicts. It cannot withstand any escalation. We believe
that dialogue on political and peaceful solutions is the
best way to find lasting and permanent resolutions to
all of those issues.

