Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I wish
to begin by extending our thanks to you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate at such a critical
juncture. The situation on the ground, particularly in
the Gaza Strip, has reached a disastrous point and the
people living there are subject to untold Israeli crimes
and are enduring a humanitarian catastrophe
unprecedented in the past several decades.

In the past several weeks, the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories has further deteriorated
as a result of the continued illegal Israeli policies and
practices. Military attacks against Palestinian civilians
and property, the demolition of homes and other
property, targeted killings, the unlawful construction
and expansion of settlements, colonization measures,
the transfer of settlers, the imposition of a permit
regime and of other severe restrictions on movement in
the occupied Palestinian territories, and the
construction of the unlawful apartheid wall are a few
examples of the criminal Israeli activities that have
continued unabated and have even accelerated.
Moreover, all forms of inhumane and unlawful
measures are imposed on the Palestinian civilian
population, particularly in the Gaza Strip.

Israeli settlers' heinous violence, terrorism,
harassment and racist acts against Palestinian civilians,
their properties and agricultural land have increased.
The recent shocking and condemnable events in
Al-Khalil, where extremist Israeli settlers set fire to
Palestinian homes and orchards and killed Palestinian
civilians in cold blood, display a pre-planned campaign
of terror and intimidation in order to make life there
even more miserable for the innocent Palestinian
civilians.

The world community is today witnessing the
unprecedented tragic situation that the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip are facing as a result of the
atrocious crimes of the Israeli regime. The
international community is witnessing the perpetration
by the Israeli regime of some of the most horrendous
crimes ever committed against innocent people in the
history of mankind. More than 1.5 million people in
the Gaza Strip are starved, massacred and subjected to
collective punishment. They are deprived of the most
basic goods, medical supplies and services that are
necessary to keep them alive.

The Israeli regime has turned a deaf ear to
numerous calls by the international community and is
practically eliminating a whole population before the
eyes of the world community in a criminal move that
has been termed a crime against humanity by United
Nations human rights officials.

For the founders of the United Nations it would
have been certainly impossible, a few decades ago, to
imagine that in the twenty-first century a whole
population would be subject to such horrendous crimes
against humanity and starved to death by a criminal
regime while the Security Council remained idle. But it
is unfortunately happening now. It is long overdue for
the United Nations and the Security Council to take
urgent and meaningful action in order to counter these
atrocities and war crimes against the Palestinian people
and to help alleviate the suffering and pain of the
people in the Gaza Strip.

Silence on the part of the international
community is not an option, nor is it justifiable.
Hundreds of thousands of people, including women
and children, are looking to the United Nations and the
international community at large in anguish and
disillusionment while constantly subject to the threats,
intimidation and abhorrent crimes of the Israeli regime.
We should not leave them alone. The Security Council
must live up to its responsibility and move quickly to
protect the innocent civilians facing collective
punishment in the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli regime continues its brutal occupation
of, and unlawful acts in, the occupied Syrian Golan,
too. It also continues to occupy parts of Lebanese
territories and persists in its daily violation of
Lebanese airspace, in blatant breach of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). There are other
showcases of the Israeli regime's contempt for the
Council and for its decisions, and they should be
addressed in a serious manner.

Undoubtedly, inaction on the part of the Security
Council, which is in turn due to the unqualified support
extended by a permanent member of the Council to the
Israeli regime, has emboldened that regime in its war
crimes and crimes against humanity. The Israeli regime
not only continues its abhorrent crimes against the
Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip and other parts of
the occupied Palestinian territories with full impunity,
but it also persists in its intimidation and harassment of
United Nations agencies and human rights officials and
in its vicious threats against the nations who show
sympathy to the innocent Palestinian people. The
unconditional support extended to the Israeli regime by
a permanent member of the Council cannot but be
regarded as explicit support for the war crimes and
unlawful activities persistently pursued by the Israeli
regime.

I wish to conclude by rejecting the baseless
allegations that the representative of the Israeli regime
made in her statement against my country. Needless to
say, it was another example of that regime's futile
efforts to divert attention from its own State terrorism
and atrocities in the region by engaging in smear
campaigns against others. It was also unacceptable to
hear the delegation of Croatia, in its national capacity,
making certain unwarranted references to my country.
That is, in our View, irresponsible, since those
references, which amount to baseless allegations and
are rejected, have been made on the basis of some
distortions fabricated by the Israeli regime.

