Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I would like first
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on Kuwait's
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of June. I would also like to wish you, Sir,
an Eid Mubarak. We also wish to extend our thanks to
Indonesia for its presidency during the month of May.

I would like to start where my South Africa left
off, namely, by praising the work of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA) and of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Fall.
We see him very much as a catalyst, in particular for
regional cooperation. Many ofmy colleagues - notably,
the representatives of France and Cote d'Ivoire - have
emphasized the importance of regional cooperation
because the problems that we face can be resolved only
through such cooperation.

I also see Special Representative Fall as a catalyst
for bringing together the various United Nations actors
in a coherent way. I therefore welcome what he said
about cooperation with Mr. Chambas. I also see him
as a catalyst for the transformation of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
into a more effective organization and praise what
he has been doing in that regard. There are plans for
ECCAS to be more effective. We really hope that that
will become a reality because ECCAS is needed as
a regional organization that can look at the conflict
between herders and farmers that has been described
and has been exacerbated by climate change, which has
a significant impact on the region. I can only subscribe
to what our colleague from the Dominican Republic
just said on the issue.

We see the Special Representative as a catalyst
for all the efforts with regard to disarmament and
security sector reform in the region and in enabling
the Peacebuilding Fund to become more engaged there.
The Peacebuilding Fund is ready for that. We highlight
the role of the Special Representative in furthering the
participation of women in the various processes, which
our Polish colleague mentioned. IfI may suggest, in
the next report of the Secretary-General there could
perhaps be a section on the role that women play in the
various organizations that UNOCA works with and the
different processes that it follows.

I would also like to reiterate what my South African
colleague said with regard to the cooperation between
UNOCA and the African Union (AU) and the role that
the AU plays. I would add - I think my South African
colleague did not mention it - the cooperation with the
European Union, which I believe to be very important.

With regard to the situation in the Central African
Republic, I can only echo what my French colleague
said earlier, namely, that we all hope that the Political
Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation remains in
place. However, we are very alarmed about the attacks
against civilians, which we condemn.

The humanitarian situation is dire in countries
across the region - in the Central African Republic,
the Lake Chad region, Cameroon, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Burundi. Germany has
pledged $100 million this year. It is important that
humanitarian workers have access, and perhaps there
is something that the Special Representative can do to
that end.
Lastly, let me turn briefly to the situation in
Cameroon. Our United Kingdom colleague mentioned
the Arria Formula meeting that we held a couple of
weeks ago, where the most important issues were
discussed. I think that it was a very significant meeting
that highlighted the conflicts and at which there
was very good civil society representation. There
is a need for a peaceful resolution and dialogue. The
humanitarian situation, the effects of climate change
and the terrorist activities all have an impact. There are
reports of human rights violations. Political dialogue is
needed. We appreciate that fact that the Prime Minister
has offered to enter into a dialogue with the Anglophone
communities. I welcome that offer but it is extremely
important that those words be translated into actions
and deeds.

