Mr. Mukerji (India): Madam President, let me begin
by congratulating you on presiding over this high-level
meeting of the Security Council. Cooperation between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations in maintaining international peace and
security is an important and topical issue. We commend
the concept note (S/2013/446, annex) prepared by the
delegation of Argentina on this subject.

India supports the role of regional and subregional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security, as well as their cooperation with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Article 54 of the Charter enjoins
such organizations to keep the Security Council
fully informed of their activities for the maintenance
of international peace and security. We therefore
welcome the participation of, and the briefings by, the
representatives of various regional organizations in
today's meeting.

The Charter provides a broad framework for United
Nations cooperation with the regional organizations
while clearly underscoring the primary responsibility
of the Security Council for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

It is important to underline here that cooperation
by the United Nations, particularly the Council, with
regional organizations should be in full compliance
with all other provisions of the Charter. The principles
of national sovereignty, political independence, and
unity and territorial integrity must be respected. It
is important that the peculiarities of each situation
be kept in mind. Also, cooperation with one regional
organization should not come at the cost of cooperation
with another.

We believe that the objective of the peaceful
resolution of conflicts should imbue the actions of the
United Nations in general and of the Security Council
in particular. It is important that Member States guide

all United Nations activities, including its cooperation
with regional organizations.

While acting under Chapter VIII of the Charter,
regional and subregional organizations should make
every effort to assist their member States to achieve
the pacific settlement of disputes, in cooperation with
the United Nations, as appropriate. Such cooperation
should encompass all relevant issues related to
international peace and security, including the fight
against terrorism.

As many as two thirds of the active items on the
Security Council's agenda concern Africa. About three
fourths of the Council's time is spent on African issues.
It would therefore be no exaggeration to say that the
success of the Council's cooperation with regional
organizations will be determined in significant measure
by its cooperation with the African Union (AU), as an
example. In that connection, it is important for the
Council to listen to Africa and its organizations, so that
the Council's activities are not only based on Africa's
needs but also complement the efforts of African
countries and organizations.

We think that such an important partnership
should be based on long-term strategic and
operational perspectives, taking into consideration
the complementarity of the strengths of the United
Nations and the African Union. Our focus should be
on building the capacity of the African Union's Peace
and Security Architecture, so that the AU can become
a more effective and capable partner of the United
Nations system.

In conclusion, we reiterate that there is a pressing
need to further strengthen the existing capacity of the
United Nations system to help regional and subregional
organizations in order to significantly ensure the
maintenance of international peace and security.

