Mr. Oshima (Japan): We would like to express
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for having
convened this public meeting today. We would also
like to thank the Deputy Foreign Minister of South
Africa, Mr. Aziz Pahad, for his statement, in which he
gave us an insightful assessment of the situation in
Cote d'Ivoire from the point of View of the African
Union's efforts to implement the peace plan. We also
thank the Principal Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Alan Doss, for his
informative briefing. We welcome the presence of the
Secretary-General.

We share the deep concern about the existing
stalemate in the political process in C6te d'lvoire,
where, according to paragraph 81 of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2005/186), "There is a very real
danger that events may spin out of control with
incalculable consequences for the people of Cote
d'Ivoire and the subregion as a whole."

Regrettably, the strong will of the Ivorian parties
for a negotiated solution seems sorely lacking. The
attacks in Logouale in February, for example, have
shown how precarious the situation is and how easily it
can deteriorate into something much more serious. The
way in which the armed youth involved in the attacks
were subsequently handled casts serious doubt on the
Ivorian parties' political will to advance the peace
process.

In these difficult circumstances, the efforts of the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS), although they have
yet to produce tangible results, become all the more
important, and we strongly support their continued
engagement - in particular President Mbeki's
mediation effort - as a clear demonstration of the
African ownership in peacemaking for C6te d'lvoire.
These African initiatives must be encouraged and
should be supported with appropriate action by the
United Nations system and decisions of the Security
Council. I would like to highlight three points in this
connection.

First, we hope that the mediation effort of
President Mbeki will be intensified in the following
weeks, as explained by Deputy Foreign Minister Pahad
in today's statement. It is important that the Council
continues to be informed by the AU and President
Mbeki's team about how they assess the evolving
situation and what they expect of the United Nations
and the Security Council in helping to advance the
peace process in Cote d'Ivoire. For this purpose, it is
critically important to strengthen the information
exchange and the coordination and cooperation efforts
between the AU and President Mbeki's team and the
United Nations on the ground.

Secondly, all Ivorian parties must be made fully
aware that any failure to cooperate in the facilitation of
President Mbeki's efforts will render them subject to
the sanctions regime, in accordance with resolution
1572 (2004). Human rights violations, acts of
provocation and attacks against the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) and the Licorne,
and incitement to hatred must not be allowed to
continue. If the current obstruction of the peace
process continues, the Security Council must show its
readiness, in consultation with the AU, to immediately
apply sanctions against those individuals responsible
for the sabotage. That would send a clear message from
the international community to the Ivorian parties that
sabotaging the peace process will not be tolerated.

Thirdly, we strongly commend the efforts made
by UNOCI and the Licorne to ensure security and
stability in the context of the fragile situation in Cote
d'Ivoire, and we recognize that UNOCI is playing an
increasingly important role in Cote d'Ivoire. On the
other hand, we believe that, given the degree of
interconnectedness among the conflict situations in the
region of West Africa, it would seem appropriate to
review the operational concepts of the various United
Nations peace missions deployed in West Africa with a
View to promoting inter-mission synergies among them
for their flexible and effective operational use. In this
connection, we noted with interest the observations in
the Secretary-General's report, issued in March, on
inter-mission cooperation among the peacekeeping
missions in West Africa. We would like to encourage
the further exploration of that idea.

As for the appropriate force level of UNOCI
itself, we look forward to further discussions in the
Council, including on how we can best optimize the
peacekeeping operation assets and resources that are
deployed and available in the subregion of West Africa
as a whole.

The strong determination and commitment of the
parties concerned is essential. Without it, neither
initiatives for the peace process nor the peacekeeping
operation presence will result in a lasting solution to
the problem. While the peace and reconciliation
process is at an impasse, the socio-economic and
humanitarian situation of the country continues to
deteriorate, directly affecting the people of Cote
d'Ivoire. United Nations and other international
humanitarian relief efforts must be supported. Now,
more than ever, the Security Council and the
international community must seriously consider
taking steps to regain the commitment of all Ivorian
parties to the peace process.

