Mr. Ould Deddach (Mauritania) (interpretation from Arabic): I wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council,
and to thank you for chairing today's open debate, which
in our view is of the greatest importance. I wish also to
thank the other members of the Security Council for
agreeing to convene this meeting to discuss the new Israeli
plan to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem. This
situation shows once again that the United Nations and the
Security Council must shoulder their responsibilities for the
maintenance of international peace and security in the
sensitive region of the Middle East.

The decision taken by the Israeli cabinet on 21 June
1998 to expand the municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to
include adjacent settlements and large tracts of the West
Bank would change the characteristics of Jerusalem and
alter its status as a city that is sacred to all revealed

 

religions. It would tighten Israel's grip on the city,
eradicate its Arab identity and change its demographic
composition and its character. This would be a violation
not only of international law - including the Hague
Rules of 1907 and the fourth Geneva Convention, of
1949 - but also of Security Council resolutions 252
(1968), 476 (1980) and 478 (1980). By all of these,
Israel's measures in Jerusalem are deemed to be without
legal basis and are therefore invalid.

Members no doubt recall the decision adopted by
Israel early last year to establish a new settlement at J ebel
Abu Ghneim in East Jerusalem. This led to tensions in
the occupied Palestinian territories and to the stalling of
the Middle East peace process. As the Security Council
was unable in the course of two meetings to adopt a
resolution on this item, the General Assembly convened
its tenth emergency special session on 24 April 1997, and
adopted a resolution calling for the immediate and full
cessation of the construction in J ebel Abu Ghneim and of
all other Israeli settlement activities, as well as of all
illegal measures and actions in Jerusalem. In view of
Israel's lack of compliance with that resolution, the tenth
emergency special session was resumed on three
occasions, when the Assembly adopted further resolutions
condemning the settlement policies.

Israel's continued defiance of the will of the
international community and its continued refusal to
implement the resolutions of the tenth emergency special
session, added to its new plan to expand the boundaries
of Jerusalem, oblige the international community to adopt
additional measures to compel Israel to respect
international law and United Nations resolutions, in
accordance with the Charter.

We call for the adoption of an unambiguous position
reflecting the will of the international community, which
rejects these policies and the settlements policy. We call
for the convening of an international conference of parties
to the Geneva Convention on measures to enforce the
Convention in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
Jerusalem, in accordance with the resolutions of the tenth
emergency special session.

The dangerous deterioration of the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem, and
in the Middle East in general threatens to destroy all
efforts to bring about a just and lasting peace. Mauritania
supports a comprehensive, just peace in the Middle East
based on the outcome of the Madrid Conference, on the
principle of land for peace, and on binding international

 

resolutions. We call upon the co-sponsors of the peace
process to shoulder their responsibilities and to prevail upon
the Israeli Government to respect the agreements it has
signed, and to make efforts on all tracks of the peace
process. This is imperative both for the region and for the
world at large, and we should all work to achieve it.

