Mr. Corman (Turkey): We thank Under-
Secretaries-General Malcorra and Pascoe, as well as
the Permanent Representative of Somalia, for their
presentations.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
taking the initiative to convene this important and
timely meeting. The Horn of Africa is once again at a
critical juncture. The future of Somalia proper and of
peace and stability in the region as a whole rests in the
balance. The Transitional Federal Government (TFG),

09-3985]
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) and
all civilians in Somalia today are together faced with
an extremist armed threat that is determined to remove
any remnant of stability, normalcy and prosperity and
to remodel this already wartorn country in its own
narrow mindset.

At this delicate time, it is crucial for the Security
Council to keep abreast of developments and apply
pressure in order to help ensure that peace and stability
in this fragile region are restored. In this context, I
would like to underscore that all the elements
contained in the Council's presidential statement of
18 May 2009 (S/PRST/2009/15) are equally valid and
relevant today and have the full support of Turkey.

While important progress has been made in the
implementation of the Djibouti peace process over the
past six months, the TFG is still faced with an
existential challenge. Moreover, to a large degree the
conflict has lost its Somali identity, as outside forces
are taking the lead in efforts to destabilize the country.
It is clear that the extremist armed groups and foreign
elements that are targeting both the TFG and AMISOM
are aiming essentially to undermine the reconciliation
process and bring about the collapse of the TFG and
the Djibouti peace process. This cannot be allowed to
happen.

AMISOM. has a pivotal role to play in the days
and months ahead. Turkey welcomes the ongoing
commitment of the African Union (AU) to AMISOM,
and we applaud those nations that contribute to
AMISOM. for their valour. Turkey believes that once it
reaches its authorized strength, AMISOM. will be able
to help turn the tide and assist the TFG in expanding
the areas it controls. In this context, it will be
important for those nations that have expressed their
intention to provide troops to AMISOM. to follow
through on their promises and for the United Nations to
keep providing its support, as outlined in Security
Council resolution 1872 (2009).

Turkey attributes great importance to the calls
made by the African Union and other regional
organizations with regard to Somalia. The statements
and decisions issued at the 13th AU Summit in Sirte,
Libya, have made the commitment of African leaders
to Somalia abundantly clear, and that is crucial.
Ultimately, while international support is crucial and
must continue unabated, the comprehensive solution to
the conflict in Somalia must be an African one, with
the AU as its main pillar.

In moving forward, the effective implementation
of the arms embargo on Somalia and preventing the
entry of foreign elements into Somalia are clearly an
urgent priority. If Somalia is to cease being a source of
instability for the Horn of Africa, all regional actors
need to become a part of the solution and not the
problem.

On the other hand, while evaluating possible
options on how to develop a pragmatic and concrete
framework for further helping Somalia, Turkey
believes that a results-oriented approach that takes into
consideration past experiences with regard to this
country and the region will be the most effective one.

The Transitional Federal Government has and
will continue to enjoy the full support of Turkey as the
only legitimate authority in Somalia. We recently
contributed to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Somalia and stand ready to train AMISOM. troops in
Turkey. We are also in the process of evaluating how
we can help train Somali national forces.

On the other hand, the scourge of piracy and
armed robbery off the coast of Somalia continues to be
a serious threat to international maritime safety, in
particular to seafarers and international trade, as well
as to the security and prosperity of the countries in the
region. Suffering from this scourge, Turkey deplores
and condemns these illegal acts and continues to
contribute to counter-piracy efforts at sea with two
frigates deployed in the region through Combined Task
Force 151 and Standing NATO Maritime Group 2.

Turkey also fully supports the work of the
Contact Group on Somali Piracy, which was
established pursuant to resolution 1851 (2008). Yet, we
fully recognize that a lasting solution to the problem
can be found only if anti-piracy efforts are supported
and complemented by concrete policies and measures
that will contribute to the establishment of law and
order in Somalia, as well as to sustained economic
development in the region.

Needless to say, as in the past, our significant
commitment to Somalia will continue.

