Mr. Wehbe (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): The Syrian Arab Republic will vote against
the draft resolution before us because the sponsor of
the draft resolution insists on using language that
deviates from the main purpose of the draft resolution,
which is to condemn the act of international terrorism
carried out in Kikambala, Kenya, which led to the
death of a number of innocent civilians. We would like
to state that Syria was among the first to support the
two earlier Security Council resolutions, resolutions
1438 (2002) and 1440 (2002), which condemned the
tragic events in Bali and in Moscow respectively.

It was our hope that a draft resolution on the
events that occurred in Kenya would be unanimously
adopted by the Council, and that it would be on the
pattern of the two aforementioned resolutions, rather
than having its scope expanded to include elements that
imply direct intervention in the internal affairs of the
country where the events took place. are concerned
also about the unacceptable political references that
reflect negatively on the situation in the Middle East
region, including the situation in the occupied Arab
territories. Such references do not accord with our
understanding of, or position on, the situation. Nor
does the attempt to link Israel to efforts to combat
terrorism; this exploits the international campaign
against terrorism.

During the consultations on this draft resolution,
Syria expressed its wish that its sponsors would take
into consideration our view that the draft resolution be
amended along the lines of the resolutions adopted on
Bali and on Moscow. Regrettably, our efforts and those
of many other Council members to that effect did not
yield the desired results.

In order to further clarify our position, we wish to
emphasize the following. First, Syria unreservedly
condemns the terrorist attack perpetrated in Kikambala,
Kenya, which led to the deaths of a number of innocent
civilians and reaffirms its sincere solidarity with the
Government and the people of Kenya in the face of
such terrorist attacks. Secondly, Syria reiterates its
condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and reaffirms its commitment to
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001) and its
commitment to combating international terrorism.

Finally, Syria will vote against the draft
resolution before us because it cannot accept its
repeated mention of Israel in a manner that is not in
keeping with the wording of the resolutions on Bali and
on Moscow. The draft resolution repeats the name of
Israel at a time when Israel is practising the worst
forms of terrorism and daily committing crimes against
humanity in the occupied Arab territories, the latest of
which killed 10 innocent Palestinian civilians in the
Boreij refugee camp on 6 December and five innocent
civilians in Gaza this morning - on the very day when
we are about to vote on this draft resolution - not to
mention the fact that Israel has killed three United
Nations international civil servants during the past two
weeks alone.

Those considerations oblige us to vote against the
draft resolution.

