Mr. Haroon (Pakistan): My thanks go to you,
Madam President, for convening this very important
meeting. I would like thank Lynn Pascoe for his
valuable insights. But unfortunately, what we are
looking for - something new to work with - has not
been forthcoming.

At the outset I would like to associate myself
with the statements made by my friend the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and by the representative of Syria on behalf
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

The situation in the Middle East is as old as the
United Nations. It has been debated in the Security
Council for many years, and we have passed countless
resolutions and presidential statements calling for a
settlement. Even today that settlement eludes us, and
unfortunately, the plight of the Palestinian people in
the occupied territories under conflict and violence
remains.

We are now in the seventh decade of our
collective failure to enforce peace in the Middle East. I
call for collective action to facilitate a long-term
political settlement, which must create a viable
Palestinian State. We may prioritize this action into
two areas.

First, we must unequivocally call upon Israel to
end what most here consider a repressive policy of
occupying forces - repressive because those forces
have converted the Palestinian land into a maze, a
myriad of checkpoints, road blocks, military siege and
separation walls. It has started to look more like a
Times crossword puzzle.

The Middle East Quartet statement of 21 June
2010 has called the next important aspect, the blockade
of Gaza, "unsustainable, unacceptable and not in the
interest of any of those concerned". Now that is a key
point. We are thinking from both sides. The recent
measures by Israel to ease the blockade of Gaza are
what are unfortunately categorized as a little too late
7

and far too little to work with. The outside world and
the freedom-loving people of the world find this
unacceptable.

The situation in occupied Jerusalem is not much
different. Illegal separation walls, settlements and
checkpoints even here block the integrity and unity of
this age-old city - a city where, I may add, the
Muslim Turkish sultans, when acting for the Muslim
world, invited the much troubled Spanish diaspora of
the Jewish nation to return and take a seat on the
council of Jerusalem so that they could participate in
the working of Jerusalem. That remains something
outside the purview of the recent and current Muslim
minority of that city.

Second in priorities is the requirement to stem the
continuation of settlement activity. It is not only
considered contrary to international law; it also a
departure from the pledges made by Israel from time to
time on the issue. This settlement activity is seen by
much of the international community as a way and
means for a major provocation. Settlement activity of
recent times has accrued numerous patterns, the most
worrying of which is the trend around East Jerusalem,
where the status of centuries-old prayer places,
mosques, churches and cemeteries of the Palestinian
people is being altered in the name of excavation and
creating new housing space.

I would say proudly here that when the last Jew
left my city of Karachi in Pakistan and sold the
synagogue for a condominium, a lot of us got together
to stand and protect, until today, the Jewish cemetery
in Karachi and ensure that none of it is ever violated.
Nobody asked us to do that, but we feel a commitment
to do it.

Only last Tuesday, Israel destroyed at least six
Palestinian buildings in East Jerusalem. That is
violence, and it continues with encouragement to some
of the more enthusiastic settlers, who continue many
forms of offense without any check or culpability. The
recent self-imposed hiatus in settlement activity, which
was never observed by Israel itself, is ending in
September. That is hardly helping the cause of peace in
the region. In itself the threat of settlements continues
to cast a shadow on any meaningful peace process.

The plight of Palestinian people must end. The
world cannot be a bystander to their miseries. Many
international experts of the region have noted that the
constituency for peace among the Palestinian
8
population is constantly shrinking. It is being pointed
out that more and more Palestinians see little
justification in pursuing unequal peace with an unequal
partner.

The present Israeli policies of blockades,
separations and checkpoints can lead to the
imprisonment of the entire Palestinian population as
and when that may be deemed necessary. That
continues to kill the peace process, as peace cannot be
achieved between a prison guard and a prisoner. Israel
must seize the fleeting opportunity for peace and
convert the ongoing proximity talks into direct and
meaningful negotiations with the aim of reaching a
two-State solution.

I will take this opportunity to express concern at
the lack of credible independent investigations of the
Israeli aggression against the freedom flotilla in
international waters of the Mediterranean Sea. Those
people had embarked upon a noble mission, and,
beyond all that has been said, that flotilla could have
been escorted into an area where it could have
disembarked peacefully and peacefully given up the
goods that had been brought on board. We have no
doubt of the humanitarian nature of that convoy, and to
cast aspersions on its noble intentions is misleading.

I believe that the Turkish people, who were most
of those affected, have been friends to Israel in the
Muslim world and have worked hard to try to break
this impossible impasse. For them to suffer such a
consequence is, in my mind, unfortunate and, to say
the least, not in the interest of friends who try to help.

It is a very simple thing: power knows no
limitation. Normally, in the law of the jungle, when an
elephant prevails and becomes overpowering and
becomes an absolute killer, it is called a rogue
elephant. No matter what one call it, the jungle moves
away from it. Nature is divided; nature cannot bring
together its forces of peace, harmony and existence.
That is what is essential to understand - that power by
itself must not be the goal of all means possible. In a
civilized world it must be expressed in a way that is
beneficial and not destructive.

I conclude by reiterating Pakistan's support for a
lasting peace for the Arabs, Israelis and all the
inhabitants of the region. We have a strong
commitment to the realization of an independent,
promised sovereign and viable State of Palestine, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, living in peace with
10-45934
all its neigbours. We hope that, despite its reputation,
this Council will bring us nearer to that objective.

