Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): I would like to start
by expressing my gratitude to the Secretary-General
for his briefing and recent report (S/20l3/133) on the
situation in Afghanistan and the current activities of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I also thank Ambassador Tanin of
Afghanistan for his statement. I would also like to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Australia, Denmark and Finland.

Azerbaijan welcomes the adoption of resolution
2096 (2013) today, which extends the mandate of
UNAMA for another year. In light of the challenges
of the foreign military drawdown in Afghanistan, the
United Nations should continue its important work
in promoting peace and stability in the country and
supporting the realization of the Afghan Government's
priorities. The significant impact of budget cuts on
UNAMA's presence throughout the country and its
ability to deliver on its mandated tasks will require
certain adjustments to its working methods and
approaches. We underline the necessity of allocating
adequate resources in order to enable the Mission to
effectively carry out its core tasks.

During the reporting period, the Government
of Afghanistan continued to progress towards the
achievement of the objectives of the transition process.
We welcome the Government's increasing assertion
of ownership over peace and reconciliation in the
country, as well as the ongoing efforts of the High
Peace Council to establish conditions conducive to an
inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned reconciliation
process. UNAMA's support to the Council's activities,
the implementation of the Afghanistan Peace and
Reintegration Programme, and regional dialogue are
important to the promotion of a unified vision among
all Afghans on the peaceful future of the country.

The implementation of the Tokyo Mutual
Accountability Framework requires a vigorous and
sustained engagement on the part of the Government
and the international community in order to deliver on
their respective commitments. The endorsement of the
aid management policy and additional four national
priority programmes by the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board is a welcome development that
will provide for the more rational allocation of donor
resources in line with the Government's priorities.

The period under review marked the continuation of
the quantitative decrease in security-related incidents.
We note the successful operations by the Afghan and
international security forces to prevent terrorist attacks
in Kabul. The decrease in civilian casualties for the first
time in six years is positive news, although the numbers
are still high, largely due to targeted attacks against
civilians by anti-Government elements. It is incumbent
on all parties in Afghanistan to take maximum measures
to avoid civilian casualties. Insurgents must denounce
the tactic of targeting civilians, which contravenes
religious and humanistic tenets and seriously
undermines the ongoing reconciliation efforts.

The enhanced cooperation between Afghanistan
and its neighbours and other counterparts within
bilateral and multilateral mechanisms on a wide range
ofissues - including peace and reconciliation, regional
security challenges, development and humanitarian
assistance - is vital to the long-term stability of the
country and the region. In this regard, we underline
the particular importance of the Istanbul Heart of Asia
Process on Regional Security and Cooperation for a
Secure and Stable Afghanistan, which has already
taken practical shape, while its activities have expanded
significantly.

As a co-leader in counter-narcotics confidence-
building measures (CBMs), Azerbaijan convened
its meeting on 25 January in Baku. On 6 February,
we hosted the fourth senior officials meeting of the
Istanbul Process, which endorsed the implementation
plans for all CBMs. We emphasize the need for the
timely realization of all CBMs, and look forward to the
next ministerial meeting of the Process, to be held next
month in Almaty.

Afghanistan occupies a special place in Azerbaijan's
foreign policy. My country has for many years been a
part of international efforts in Afghanistan. It joined
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) at
its inception and has increased its military participation
therein. Last year, we took a decision to continue our
partnership with NATO in the post-2014 training,
advice and assistance mission in Afghanistan.

Azerbaijan provides its land and airspace to ISAF
countries for transits to Afghanistan. This accounts
for more than 35 per cent of all non-lethal transit.
As the planning for the withdrawal of ISAF forces
and equipment from Afghanistan is under way, the
role of Azerbaijan as a transit country becomes more
significant. The completion of new regional and
national infrastructures, such as the Baku-Tbilisi-Kars
railroad and the new Baku International Sea Trade Port
will further enhance Azerbaijan's capacities.

Azerbaijan actively participates in relevant
international and regional political initiatives aimed
at promoting peace and stability in Afghanistan,
including the Istanbul Heart of Asia Process, where we
co-chair counter-narcotics and regional infrastructure
confidence-building measures.

Determined as we are to stand by the Government
of Afghanistan and its people in their legitimate
aspirations to become a secure, self-reliant and self-
sustaining State, Azerbaijan has been increasing
its bilateral assistance through financial support
and capacity-building programmes in military and
other areas in Afghanistan. Last year, we earmarked
€2 million for the Afghan National Army trust fund.

We attach great priority to assisting Afghanistan
through the implementation of existing and the
development of new capacity-building and training
programmes and initiatives in non-military spheres,
including the civil service, law enforcement,
mine action, border control, customs, health and
rehabilitation, transport and information, and
communications technologies (ICT). Our continuous
dialogue and interaction with our Afghan counterparts
in these areas - in particular, the frequent visits in
recent months to Baku and Kabul by high-level officials
from various agencies ofboth countries - have further
strengthened our bilateral relations. I am pleased to
note that the Azerbaijan International Development
Agency recently earmarked $150,000 for the United
Nations Development Programme in support of the ICT
sphere in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to express my country's
continued support for Afghanistan's sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity, and to reaffirm our
resolve to further support the efforts of the brotherly
Afghan people to build a better future.

