Mr. Imbali (Guinea-Bissau) (spoke in Portuguese; English textfurnished by the delegation): I
feel particularly honoured to have the privilege to take
the floor on behalf of my country in the Council
gathered today for a special meeting on Guinea-Bissau.

Allow me first, Madam President, to convey to
you the warmest greetings from His Excellency the
President of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau,
Mr. Kumba Yala, who cannot be with us today,
although he is with us in spirit.

The broad-based coalition Government - made
up of the Party for Social Renewal and the Resistance
of Guinea-Bissau-Bafata Movement - resulting from
the last elections assumed the responsibility for the
destinies of our people in a most unique situation. The
bloody political and military conflict of 7 June 1998
worsened the structural difficulties that have marked
our country throughout the last 25 years.

The historical origins of these difficulties are
linked to the adoption, immediately following
independence, of a strategy of growth based on the
central management of the economy. The strong
governmental intervention in economic life distorted
the allocation of resources and obstructed the adequate
development of the farming potential of the country.
Accordingly, the economy grew slowly and the country
became dependent on international aid, aggravating the
level of poverty of our population.

To correct internal and external imbalances at the
end of the 1980s, Guinea-Bissau initiated its first
structural adjustment programme, supported by two
Structural Adjustment Facility agreements and two
Structural Adjustment credits from the International
Development Association. The results of these reforms
were unsatisfactory, causing social indicators to
continue to decline and relegating Guinea-Bissau to the
group of the poorest countries in the world, with an
extremely low human development index.

However, between 1997 and 1998, with the
deepening of the reform process and the adoption of
the African Financial Community Franc (FCFA) after
the accession of the country to the West African
Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) on 2 May
1997, the largest macroeconomic imbalances were
reduced, internal production accelerated, primarily in
the agricultural sector, inflation was reduced and the
private sector began to grow and play a more dynamic
role in the economy. Having been able to achieve an
important economic performance in the short period of
time allowed the country to regain the confidence of its
development partners, the country saw a significant
impact on its social indicators. The successful
conclusion of the implementation of the triennial
agreement with the Enhanced Structural Adjustment
Facility (ESAF) at the beginning of 1998 created the
necessary conditions for the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) to consider
Guinea-Bissau eligible for the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries (HIPC) Initiative in April 1998.

Guinea-Bissau was three months from the HIPC
decision point when the conflict of 7 June 1998 broke
out. The conflict's deep-rooted causes were: the
inadequate management of the demobilization and
reintegration process of ex-combatants from the war of
independence; the incapacity of the democratic process
to gain roots and the frequent and unpunished
violations of the Constitution; the blocking of the
institutions that maintain the balance of power and of
the mechanisms that guarantee transparent public
management; the personalization of power, its
exclusive service in the interest of groups and chronic
internal instability with subregional repercussions; the
postponement of local elections foreseen to complete
the cycle of democratic consultations, which would
have given the citizens greater participation in the
management of the country; and the serious social
crisis aggravated by the growing gaps between the rich
minority, who took advantage of the opportunities
created by their government positions, and the rest of
the nation, impoverished and with lessening prospects
of ameliorating their situation.

The consequences of this conflict were
catastrophic, since, besides the loss of human life, the
people of Guinea-Bissau were deeply traumatized by
this civil war in a country with low population density
and complex family ties. The level of poverty was
further exacerbated. The use of heavy artillery caused
the massive destruction of the socio-economic
infrastructures, provoking the collapse of such essential
services as health care and education. The destruction
of the economic infrastructures and the decapitalization
of the private sector are today considered to be sources
of social ills linked to the decline of employment and
the reduction of purchasing power.

One of the major effects of the armed conflict
was undoubtedly the increase in the number of people
living in poverty, the planting of an estimated 15,000
mines throughout the territory and the distribution of
an undetermined number of light weapons within civil
society.

To face the grim situation resulting from the war,
the Government of National Unity, whose mandate was
short-term, concentrated its efforts on the social and
economic recovery of the country, the reconciliation of
the people of Guinea-Bissau and the creation of
conditions for the return of democracy through free and
transparent elections. The round-table conference that
took place in Geneva from 4 to 5 May 1999 was a way
for the Government of National Unity to mobilize
resources for its emergency programme.

The international community's pledge to donate
an estimated $200 million to Guinea-Bissau has not
materialized to this day. Nevertheless, the good
intentions of some development partners have enabled
the partial financing of the programme to demobilize
combatants, the efforts to revitalize the private sector
and the holding of free elections, allowing Guinea-
Bissau to return to democracy with the creation of
democratic institutions.

The broad-based coalition Government has a
solid parliamentary base and, conscious of the
challenges and difficulties posed in the light of the
post-conflict situation and the high expectations of the
people of Guinea-Bissau who voted massively for
change, has elaborated a legislative programme based
on earlier efforts at post-conflict reconstruction and
reconciliation, choosing as its primary objectives good
governance and the fight against poverty.

During the nine months of its rule, the
Government has given priority to the following: the
creation of institutional conditions for the transparent
management of state affairs, including the
establishment of an office for public tenders; the
international auditing process of state accounts; a
diagnostic of public finances that was undertaken in
October this year by an independent consultancy; the
reorganization and strengthening of the Court of
Accounts and of the High-Level Inspection Against
Corruption and the development of a national
programme of good governance; the reorganization of
the armed forces through the adoption of a series of
laws and a programme on the demobilization and
reintegration of combatants; the implementation of the
necessary reforms for the re-establishment of
macroeconomic stability, with customs and fiscal
reforms in line with efforts for regional integration
converging with the West African Monetary Union and
the West African Economic and Monetary Union; the
ad referendum agreement on a triennial programme
(2000-2003) with the International Monetary Fund; the
elaboration of an interim document on the National
Strategy for Poverty Reduction on the basis of
consultations with representatives of civil society, the
private sector of the armed forces and development
partners; and the reorientation of public spending,
investing in social sectors and focusing on the need to
guarantee stability, justice and public order.

I have the pleasure to announce that human rights
are respected in Guinea-Bissau, a fact that can be
confirmed by the President of the League of Human
Rights of Guinea-Bissau, who is present in this room
today. That institution has, in the past few months,
developed joint actions with the Government for the
promotion and protection of the rights and fundamental
liberties of citizens. An example of such action is the
training by the League of 250 police officers in human
rights and citizenship.

A true separation of power exists in Guinea-
Bissau, evident in the recent election of the President
of the Supreme Court. There is also freedom of the
press. However, government efforts have been
overshadowed by two major factors: the insufficiency
of financial resources to address the country's post-
conflict problems; and the constant interference by a
military group led by Brigadier Ansumane Mane, who
has never hidden his intentions against the formation of
democratic armed forces, but did conceal his intentions
to overthrow the constitutional power, in complicity
with some political parties, which culminated in the
unsuccessful coup d'etat of 22 November 2000. During
this attempted coup, our armed forces mobilized
themselves in defence of democracy, returned freedom
to our people and submitted to constitutional order and
the rule of law, in a rare example of stability in Africa.

Today more than ever, we are determined to fight
for the development of our country. It is in this light
that we appeal to the international community for help
in overcoming the following challenges. First, our
armed forces require reorganization. An important step
has already been taken in this regard with the
previously mentioned legislative package on the armed
forces and national defence. However, the root of the
problem concerns the current number of military
personnel. The conflict of 7 June caused their numbers
to triple, weighing heavily on the national budget. To
face this situation, the Government is implementing,
with funds from the World Bank, a programme for the
demobilization and reintegration of combatants.
Unfortunately, the credit provided by the Bank does not
cover the more delicate issues of the programme,
requiring the mobilization of additional financial
resources. If this complex problem is not resolved, it
will affect the Government's ability to mobilize
resources for the social and productive areas.

The second challenge is the crippling debt
burden, now exceeding $800 million, with debt-
servicing costs at close to $34 million. A recent
analysis of the sustainability of Guinea-Bissau's
external debt, made in consultation with the technical
bodies of the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, indicates that, even with favourable
levels projected for exports, the relation between the
updated level of debt and Guinea-Bissau's exports,
after the application of the traditional debt-relief
measures, remains, in the medium term, substantially
above the levels of debt sustainability in the context of
the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative.
The Council will agree that, in the face of this grave
situation, and without special treatment and the
exemption of the traditional conditionalities of this
debt, all efforts in the fight against poverty will be
futile. It is in this light that we are working on a
package of reforms and are making intense contacts
with our bilateral and multilateral partners, hoping to
receive from them the necessary assistance for that
debt relief, within the context of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Debt Initiative.

The final challenge is peace and security at the
subregional level, in particular in Casamance. The
President of the Republic, Mr. Kumba Yala, has always
said, "Guinea-Bissau is not and will never be part of
this conflict, but it will be part of its solution". I would
like once again to reaffirm to the Council my country's
firm position in that regard.

The painful experiences of the war of
independence and the recent political and military
conflict of 7 June 1998, and its collateral effects, have
taught us that war is not the best way to resolve a
conflict. Bearing this in mind and respectful of the
principle of good-neighbourliness, we are certain that
true stability in Guinea-Bissau and in the subregion
will not be possible without peace in neighbouring
Casamance. We therefore make ourselves available to
participate in a peaceful search for peace in the
subregion, fully respecting the principles of national
sovereignty and territorial integrity and the United
Nations Charter. The contacts made by His Excellency
the President of the Republic during his trips to
Senegal, Gambia, Nigeria, Libya and the Republic of
Guinea testify to his desire for peace.

Today, my country is considered the most stable
in the subregion. For that reason, and because of its
history, Guinea-Bissau intends to play a front-line role
in the search for peaceful solutions regarding the
resolution of conflicts and guarantees of stability in the
subregion.

We sincerely believe we are following the right
path. The challenges ahead are great, but they can be
faced realistically. The Government and the people of
Guinea-Bissau appeal to the international community
to help us in the fight against poverty, in the
consolidation of democracy and in assuring sustainable
development for our country. Allow me to reaffirm our
intention to continue to focus our efforts on
guaranteeing the transparent management of the State
and the rational and careful use of the resources placed
at our disposal.

In closing, I would like, on behalf of the people
of Guinea-Bissau, to express our most sincere thanks
and our greatest appreciation for all that has been done
for my country by the international community.

