Mr. Mladenovie (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia): I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Guehenno for his briefing on the elections in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Soon it will be five years since the signing of the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement, the key document for
the maintenance of peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It reflects a delicate balance of the interests of its three
peoples and two entities. It is therefore of great
importance for its successful implementation and for
the preservation of peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that all signatory parties and guarantors of
the Dayton/Paris Agreement respect their obligations.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is one of the
signatories and guarantors of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement. Following the major democratic changes in
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, conditions are
being created to View the problems and outstanding
issues related to the implementation of the Agreement
in a new, democratic way.

The President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, Vojislav Kostunica, and the new Federal
Government pointed out on a number of occasions that
they accept the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement and that
they would call for its successful implementation. This
Agreement is the only realistic basis on which a
sovereign and democratic State in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be built. I would like to stress that the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has no territorial
claims against its neighbours, including Bosnia and
Herzegovina. One of our main foreign policy priorities
is the normalization of relations with all former
Yugoslav republics. We are ready to conclude, as soon
as possible, an agreement on the establishment of
diplomatic relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina and
to demonstrate our commitment to the pursuit of a
foreign policy based on peace, good-neighbourliness
and constructiveness. I would like to recall that Bosnia
and Herzegovina was the first country President
Vojislav Kostunica visited upon his election. On 12
October he conducted talks with the members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

I wish to point out that the most important issue
at this moment is to secure a consistent and full
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Agreement.
Various requests or proposals aimed at changing or
revising the Agreement are unacceptable for the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It is therefore very
important for the international community to
unequivocally support the implementation of the
Dayton/Paris Agreement.

The victory of democratic forces in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the strengthening of
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina will help
strengthen our mutual relations. The Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia will also work towards establishing
special relations with Republika Srpska, which is in
accordance with the Dayton/Paris Agreement.
Naturally, as one of the constituent peoples in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Serbs have every right to
maintain close links with the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. I assure you that those links will not be
detrimental to the respect of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to
the establishment of diplomatic relations.

We are pleased to note that the general elections
in Bosnia and Herzegovina were held in a safe
environment, without incidents, and that they could be
called truly democratic, free and fair. All three
constituent peoples in Bosnia and Herzegovina have
proved that they are ready to assume responsibility for
democratic development, for their own future and for
the commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to Europe.

We are convinced that normalization of relations
among the countries of South-East Europe is a conditio
sine qua non for peace, stability and development in
the region and the shortest way for all its countries to
take their rightful place in the European family of
nations.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia considers
that one of the first priorities in the implementation of
the Dayton/Paris Agreement is the return of refugees
and displaced persons. I emphasize that in View of the
fact that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is the
country that provides shelter to the greatest number of
refugees in Europe today. There are currently 286,600
refugees from Bosnia and Herzegovina, 337,000 from
Croatia and 269,500 internally displaced persons in
Yugoslavia receiving humanitarian aid. This
humanitarian, economic and political problem can
hardly be solved without support, cooperation and
understanding by the international community.
Therefore, all existing means and possibilities should
be used, and new solutions should be sought, in order
to alleviate this problem. Above all, this approach
serves the interests of refugees and displaced persons
and is aimed at strengthening stability in the region.

The question of the economic reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the success of the
transition process is also very important for the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in View of the complementary
and interdependent nature of the economies of the two
countries. We are convinced that significant
breakthroughs will soon be made in this area as well.
The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is a strong
advocate of an open market economy. Economic
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina is therefore
very high on its agenda.

As I already stated, in a few days we are to mark
the fifth anniversary of the signing of the Dayton/Paris
Peace Agreement. The five years of peace have shown
all the advantages of peace over war, conflict and
division. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia calls,
therefore, on all sides in Bosnia and Herzegovina to
recommit themselves, with new enthusiasm, full
openness and dialogue to an efficient implementation,
primarily of the civilian part of the Dayton Agreement.
As a signatory and guarantor of the Dayton/Paris Peace
Agreement, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia is
prepared to render its full support to the democratic
process in Bosnia and Herzegovina and, by the same
token, to the stabilization of the region of South-East
Europe as a whole.

