Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Your
presence here today, Mr. Minister, once again reflects
your country's continued great interest in questions
affecting the African continent. My delegation is very
pleased to see you presiding over this meeting on the
situation between Eritrea and Ethiopia, and even more
so because your country and you yourself have devoted
special attention to addressing the crisis there. My
delegation welcomes the many efforts that have been
made towards a fair settlement of the conflict.

We are duly awaiting the forthcoming
announcement of the decision of the independent
Boundary Commission, which is responsible for
demarcation of the border between the two countries.
We welcome recent statements by the two parties
reaffirming that that decision will be final and binding.
But the period following the announcement of the
decision could be fraught with uncertainties, and the
necessary measures must be adopted to ensure that the
parties meet their commitments, with a view to
bringing about the peaceful completion of subsequent
phases. In that regard, a mechanism is quickly needed
to facilitate the demining of the area so that the
Boundary Commission can proceed without delay to
the demarcation and delimitation of the border.

While the demining operation falls under the
responsibility of the two States, it seems clear that, due
to a lack of financial resources, it cannot be carried out
effectively without outside assistance. We believe that
this task must be entrusted to the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), on the basis
of the "no exit without strategy" principle. We are
convinced, Mr. President, that your country, which has
already made so many diplomatic and financial efforts
to bring the two parties closer, will play a leading role
in this regard.

Moreover, my delegation appeals to the various
actors of the peace process to further strengthen their
relations with the authorities of the two countries to
promote a constructive dialogue that is capable of
strengthening confidence-building measures.

My delegation is convinced that the effective
implementation of the Algiers Agreement will not only
contribute to bringing about a lasting settlement of the
conflict, but will also allow, we hope, the traditional
ties between the Ethiopian and Eritrean peoples to be
strengthened. We encourage the donor community to
continue its efforts for the urgent mobilization of the
means necessary to cover the enormous humanitarian
needs resulting from this fratricidal conflict.

I wish to say, in conclusion, that the Guinean
Government fully supports the recommendations of the
Security Council mission report and wishes to express
its thanks to Ambassador Kolby for the effectiveness
with which he conducted the mission.

