The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Lebanon, in which she requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/ 147, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1701 (2006). Members of the
Council also have before them document S/2007/207,
which contains a letter dated 13 April 2007 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of the
Security Council.

I should also like to draw attention to document
S/2007/199, which contains a letter dated 11 April
2007 from the Charge d'affaires ad interim of the
Permanent Mission of Israel to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls all its
previous resolutions on Lebanon, in particular
resolution 1701 (2006), 425 (1978), 426 (1978),
520 (1982), 1559 (2004) and 1680 (2006), as well
as the statements of its President on the situation
in Lebanon, in particular its statement of
12 December 2006 (S/PRST/2006/52).

"The Security Council reiterates its full
support for the legitimate and democratically-
elected Government of Lebanon, calls for full
respect of the democratic institutions of the
country, in conformity with its constitution, and
condemns any effort to destabilize Lebanon. The
Security Council calls upon all Lebanese political
parties to show responsibility with a view to
preventing, through dialogue, further
deterioration of the situation in Lebanon. It
reaffirms its strong support for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity, unity and political
independence of Lebanon within its
internationally recognized borders and under the
sole and exclusive authority of the Government
of Lebanon.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General of 14 March 2007
(S/2007/ 147) on the implementation of resolution
1701 (2006). It notes with appreciation the
indication by the Secretary-General that further
progress has been made towards the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). It
reiterates its attachment to the full
implementation of all provisions of this
resolution and urges all concerned parties to
cooperate fully with the Security Council and the
Secretary-General to achieve a permanent
ceasefire and a long-term solution as envisioned
in the resolution.

"The Security Council welcomes the
completion of the second phase of the
deployment of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), expresses it strong
appreciation to Member States that contribute to
UNIFIL and commends the active role of the
force, notably of its Commander, as well as of the
Special Coordinator of the United Nations for
Lebanon.

"The Security Council, taking note of the
Secretary-General's observation that more can be
done to consolidate the cessation of hostilities,
urges the Israeli and Lebanese Governments to
07-31004
approve the temporary security arrangements for
the northern part of the village of Ghajar and to
further close liaison and coordination
arrangements with UNIFIL, notably through
tripartite meetings. It also encourages the parties
to cooperate with UNIFIL to visibly mark the
Blue Line, notably in sensitive areas in order to
prevent inadvertent violations.

"The Security Council welcomes the
measures taken by the Government of Lebanon,
with the assistance of UNIFIL, to establish
between the Blue Line and the Litani river an
area free of any armed personnel, assets and
weapons other than those of the Government of
Lebanon and of UNIFIL, and encourages the
Government of Lebanon to strengthen its efforts
to this end.

"The Security Council, reiterates its deep
concern at the continuing Israeli violations of
Lebanese airspace, appeals to all parties
concerned to respect the cessation of hostilities
and the Blue Line in its entirety, to refrain from
any act of provocation and to abide scrupulously
by their obligation to respect the safety of the
UNIFIL and other United Nations personnel,
including by avoiding any course of action which
endangers United Nations personnel and by
ensuring UNIFIL is accorded full freedom of
movement throughout its area of operation.

"The Security Council, in this context,
expresses its serious concern at mounting
information by Israel and another State of illegal
movements of arms across the Lebanese-Syrian
border in violation of resolution 1701 (2006). It
welcomes the determination expressed and the
measures taken by the Government of Lebanon to
prevent such movements in conformity with
relevant resolutions, notes that the Government of
Syria has stated that it has taken measures and
reiterates its call on that Government to take
further measures to reinforce controls at the
border.

"The Security Council, taking note of the
letter of the Secretary-General to the President of
the Council of 13 April 2007 (S/2007/207),
welcomes the Secretary-General's intention to
evaluate the situation along the entire border and
invites him to dispatch at the earliest, in close
liaison with the Lebanese Government, an
independent mission to fully assess the
monitoring of the border and to keep the Council
informed on his contacts with the Lebanese
Government, and to report back to the Council,
before his next report, on its findings and
recommendations in this regard. The Security
Council urges all parties to cooperate fully with
this mission.

"The Council urges again all Member
States, in particular in the region, to take all
necessary measures to implement in full
paragraph 15 of resolution 1701 (2006) to enforce
the arms embargo, and expresses its intention,
upon reception of the Secretary-General's
recommendations, to take further concrete steps
to achieve the goals set out in this paragraph.

"The Council welcomes any request by the
Government of Lebanon for assistance to enhance
Lebanon's border security capacities, including
by supplying equipment and training. It
welcomes in this regard the ongoing assistance
provided by the Federal Republic of Germany,
the United Arab Emirates and others, and
encourages Member States, as suggested by the
Secretary-General, to consider further assistance.

"The Council, while commending the steps
taken by the Government of Lebanon to exercise
its monopoly of the use of force throughout its
territory, takes note with concern of reported
activities of unauthorized armed elements outside
of UNIFIL's area of operations and reiterates its
call for disbanding and disarmament of all
militias and armed groups in Lebanon. It
expresses its deep concern at the report of recent
statements made in this regard by the Hizbollah
Secretary General, notably with regard to the
seizure by the Lebanese authorities of a truckload
of arms on 8 February 2007, and underscores that
these statements are an open admission of
activities which would constitute a violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). It expresses concern at
any allegation of rearming of Lebanese and non-
Lebanese armed groups and militias and reiterates
that there should be no sale or supply of arms and
related materiel to Lebanon except as authorized
by its Government.
"The Security Council expresses deepest
worry at the presence in very high numbers of
unexploded ordnance in south Lebanon, including
cluster munitions. It deplores the death and injury
of dozens of civilians, as well as of several
deminers, caused by those munitions since the
cessation of hostilities. It supports in this context
the Secretary-General's request to Israel to
provide to the United Nations detailed data on its
use of cluster munitions in southern Lebanon.

"The Security Council notes with profound
concern that there has been no progress on the
issue of the return of the two Israeli soldiers
abducted by Hizbollah on 12 July 2006 despite
further intense efforts by the Secretary-General
and his facilitator, and reiterates its call for their
immediate and unconditional release.

"The Security Council further encourages
efforts aimed at urgently settling the issue of the
Lebanese prisoners detained in Israel.

"The Security Council commends the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his facilitator
towards an early resolution of those issues and
reiterates its call on all parties concerned to fully
cooperate with the Secretary-General to this end.

"Bearing in mind the relevant provisions of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701
(2006), in particular paragraph 10 of resolution
1701 (2006), on the delineation of the Syrian-
Lebanese border, the Security Council notes in
this context the progress recently made by the
senior cartographer appointed by the Secretary-
General in reviewing relevant material and
developing an accurate territorial definition of the
Sheba'a Farms area. Noting the Secretary-
the

General's expectation that the technical work will
be completed by mid-June and his intention to
report more fully at that time, the Security
Council invites all parties to cooperate with the
cartographer by providing any relevant material
in their possession.

"The Security Council also reiterates its
appreciation for the process launched by the
Secretary-General to investigate the implications
of the interim proposal contained in the seven-
point plan of the Government of Lebanon
regarding the Sheba'a Farms area. It looks
forward to the early completion of this task in
liaison with relevant parties and to further
recommendations by the Secretary-General on
this key issue.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support to the Secretary-General in his efforts and
dedication to facilitate and assist in the fulfilment
of all provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).

"The Security Council stresses the
importance of, and the need to achieve, a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the
Middle East, based on all its relevant resolutions,
including its resolutions 242 (1967) of
22 November 1967 and 338 (1973) of 22 October
1973."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2007/12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 8.30 p.m.
07-31004

