Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
A great deal has been said already, and there is really little
for me to add to the arguments that have been made today.
We agree with what has been said and, indeed, we can
understand our African colleagues when they emotionally
and very convincingly speak about the need to take urgent
decisions. We can also understand those delegations that
see the need to establish the necessary conditions for that
to be done.

But I believe that no one has denied the need for the
parties to the Lusaka Agreement strictly to comply with the
provisions therein. It seems to us that this is a very
important element of the consensus that we are attempting
to reach here in the Security Council.

I would recall, as my colleagues have, that Security
Council resolution 1279 (1999) lays the foundation for the
swift deployment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
of up to 500 United Nations military observers, who would
require the necessary support elements. The Security
Council thereby has clearly stated its willingness to proceed
with this deployment, on the basis of subsequent
recommendations from the Secretariat that would take
account of the conclusions of the technical survey team
currently in the area. We are deeply concerned at the fact
that the technical team - through no fault of its own -
has not been able to complete its work on time. But its
conclusions and the relevant recommendations of the
Secretary-General will, we trust, enable the Security
Council to take the appropriate decision.

Right now I believe that there are two decisive factors:
the willingness of the parties to the conflict to comply in
good faith with their commitments, and their cooperation
with the United Nations, primarily with respect to practical
matters relating to the work of the technical survey team.

Many here have spoken about double standards,
which, in View of the experience of Srebrenica and
Somalia, is understandable. My delegation would not use
the very tragic experience of Somalia and Srebrenica as a
pretext. It would not be right if those two failures were to
stand in the way of further United Nations peacekeeping
operations. There are lessons we must learn, and one of
them, particularly with respect to Somalia, is that when
the Security Council authorizes an operation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, it will be necessary
to find countries that are willing to provide contingents.
But it is not just a question of the security of the
contingents and the need to minimize risks to the extent
possible. We must also be sure that the contingents will
be paid and that the costs of United Nations peacekeeping
activities will be provided for.

We know that in the case of Somalia, the United
Nations has not yet paid the troop-contributing countries,
and there still remain outstanding debts related to the
United Nations Operation in Somalia (UNOSOM). Just
because Somalia was a mistake does not mean that one
does not have to pay for one's mistakes. Incidentally,
Russia has debts - arrears on the Somalia operation. But
these are the only arrears that Russia has vis-a-vis the
United Nations, and we are committed to paying them.
About an hour ago, I gave the Secretary-General a check
for $25 million in payment of our arrears under
UNOSOM.
I say this because the question of financing United
Nations peacekeeping operations is very closely related to
the matter we are discussing today. It is necessary to bear
this point in mind in dealing with the specific aspects of
a future operation in the Congo.

I should like also like to support those who have
drawn attention today to the particular importance of the
swift organization of a national dialogue in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as provided for in the
Lusaka Agreement. We would very much like to see, as
soon as possible, concrete steps taken to organize that
dialogue.

Finally, I would like once again to reaffirm Russia's
support for the holding, under the auspices of the United
Nations and the Organization of African Unity, of an
international conference on peace and security in the
Great Lakes region. Of course, a consensus among
participating countries on the objective of such a
conference would first be necessary. But it is clear to us
that the agenda for such a conference could not be
confined to the question of providing assistance in the
rehabilitation of the region. We believe that it must have
a very strong political component, which would make it

 

possible to consider the key issues of the strengthening of
peace and security in the region as a whole.

