Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): After several weeks of discussions and
negotiations, the members of the Council have decided
to extend the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS)
for another year, thereby expressing the commitment
of the United Nations to continuing to participate in
the process of resolving the political and institutional
crisis in Guinea-Bissau. The efforts of the international
community to find a peaceful solution to the crisis must
persuade the leaders of Guinea-Bissau to give clear
signs of their willingness to overcome their differences
and restore sustainable democratic governance.

My Government, led by his Excellency Mr. Obiang
Nguema Mbasogo, continues to reiterate the need for
the political actors to fully implement the Conakry
Agreement. The appointment of Mr. Arturo Da Silva as
Prime Minister continues to be questioned and rejected
by the Parti africain pour 1'independance de la Guinee
et de Cabo Verde, which makes it difficult, on the one
hand, to form an inclusive Government, and on the other
to do the necessary updating of the electoral census
and hold the election by the Assembly National of the
members of the National Electoral Commission, which
are preconditions to holding the democratic elections in
2018 and 2019.

The extension of UNIOGBIS is justified by the
need to provide technical assistance to the national
authorities and to expedite and reform the legislation
necessary for the maintenance of the constitutional
order, the promotion and protection of human rights
and the organization of legislative and presidential
elections. The United Nations team should continue
to provide strategic advice and support to the national
authorities and stakeholders in the implementation of
justice reform strategies, with a View to establishing
civil, military and penitentiary systems, in accordance
with international standards, and in fighting the drug
trafficking and transnational organized crime affecting
the subregion.

Regional and subregional initiatives play an
important role in resolving the political stagnation in
Guinea-Bissau. Equatorial Guinea again commends the
role of mediation assumed by the African Union and
the series of consultations carried out in mid-January
by the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) with the main political actors to assess
the implementation of the Conakry Agreement, and
supports the measures taken by ECOWAS against
certain individuals who are obstructing a peaceful
solution to the prolonged crisis.

However, Equatorial Guinea stresses the fact that
there is no open military confrontation in Guinea-
Bissau but a deep misunderstanding among the political
actors that has led the country to an institutional
blockade. In such an environment, it is difficult to
achieve consensus among all parties, as stipulated in
the Conakry Agreement, as we are seeing in the case
of the recent appointment of Prime Minister Arturo
Da Silva.

Equatorial Guinea, as a member of the Security
Council, the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union and the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, and as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2048 (2012) concerning Guinea-
Bissau, is of the view that sanctions should not be the
only way to unblock the current situation in the country.
There must be pragmatic and direct involvement to
help the political actors reach a compromise solution
that will pave the way towards the preparations for
this year's upcoming legislative elections. To that end,
the delegation of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea
proposes that the members of the Security Council
maintain close contact with the political actors of that
country with a view to finding a committed solution
to end the impasse created by the lack of consensus in
decisions taken by the parties.

The year 2018 should bring a sense ofrenewed hope
and the reaffirmed commitment of the international
community to continue helping Guinea-Bissau and its
people and prospects for economic growth. I conclude
by acknowledging ECOWAS, the African Union and
UNIOGBIS for their efforts to find a solution to the
crisis in that brotherly country.

