Mr. Seek (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal is pleased to see you,
Mr. President, presiding over this important briefing on
the situation in Libya - a situation that your country
is right to define as a top priority during its presidency
of the Council. I also welcome the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Mohamed Siala, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Libya, whose statement we look forward
to hearing.
I should like to turn to my Ambassador Skoog,
on my left, and congratulate him on the outstanding
work that he and his country are doing at the helm of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya.

The current situation in Libya is of particular
concern to us. The glimmer of hope kindled by the
recent efforts of Mr. Salame' and countries such as
France and Egypt has been threatened by the recent
resurgence of violence. We are also concerned because
its effects on the civilian population and throughout
Africa have been catastrophic. For us Africans, the
protraction and aggravation of the Libyan conflict
continues to have an especially devastating effect on
the entire continent, but especially the Sahelo-Saharan
region. Weapons continue to circulate, terrorist groups
are proliferating and human trafficking is flourishing,
with its scourge of grave violations of international
humanitarian law.

The evolution of the situation in Libya will depend
partly on the successful implementation of several
important initiatives under way, such as the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the promising
Group of Five for the Sahel process and the Alliance
for the Sahel, promoted by France and Germany.

My delegation wishes to underscore that there are
no military solutions to the Libyan crisis. We therefore
encourage all Libyan parties to consider only the
national interests of their country and to make every
effort to overcome political differences and work
together for the establishment of peace and security
in order to preserve the national sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of their great
African country.

Senegal also urges Libyans to exercise restraint,
put an end to violence and confrontations, and work in a
spirit of compromise on the basis of the Libyan Political
Agreement. Although of course certain amendments
need to be introduced - as Mr. Salame mentioned
earlier - the Agreement is the only viable framework
accepted by the majority of Libyan actors in order to
complete the political transition in the country through
an inclusive process led by the Libyans themselves.

The challenges related to the current situation in
Libya and its neighbouring countries remind us of the
need to work towards the unification and reconstruction
of the institutions in Libya, including the military and
security forces, in accordance with the Libyan Political
Agreement. Therefore, the implementation of the action
plan proposed by Mr. Salame deserves to be supported,
while also taking advantage of the better coordination
of numerous initiatives for the resumption of internal
dialogue and Libya's geopolitical situation. That is
why the work of UNSMIL, which has been led in an
outstanding manner by Mr. Salame on the ground, is
essential and deserves our full support.

