Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
you, Minister Judeh, for dedicating today's meeting to
a crisis that so urgently demands the world's attention. I
also thank our briefers, Under-Secretary-General Amos,
High Commissioner Guterres, Executive Director
Cousin and Special Envoy Jolie, for their appropriately
stark, firm and extremely moving briefings.

The United States would also like to recognize
the dedicated humanitarian workers serving in United
Nations agencies and other organizations who are
putting their lives on the line to get assistance to people
in the worst humanitarian crisis of our time. They are
people like the two Syrian Arab Red Crescent workers
who were killed on 3 April while retrieving bodies of
the deceased and preparing shelters for the displaced in
Idlib, and people who are constantly looking for ways
around the seemingly endless obstacles to delivering
vital aid, like the World Health Organization staff
members who took advantage of a six-hour ceasefire
last month in Aleppo to deliver medical supplies across
the lines. They reached 5,000 people - using pull-
carts.

In Deir ez-Zour, approximately 228,000 residents
are caught between the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), which has encircled the city and
systematically cut off humanitarian access, and regime
forces, which are preventing people from leaving.
On 13 April, a one-year-old infant reportedly starved
to death, and non-governmental organizations are
receiving reports of young girls trading sexual acts for
bread. While the International Committee of the Red
Cross was able to reach Deir ez-Zour with three airlifts
in recent days, the first aid deliveries to the besieged
city in nearly a year, residents of all ages remain on the
brink of starvation.

As ghastly as it is, the situation in Deir ez-Zour is
not an outlier. We are all well aware of the ongoing crisis
in Yarmouk, where many thousands of Palestinians
are still trapped and cut off from vital assistance.
In Yarmouk, it is regime forces that are doing the
blockading, as they have done for more than two years.
Since moving into Yarmouk weeks ago, ISIL and other
armed groups have only exacerbated the suffering of
residents by further limiting their movements.
As several of the briefers noted, the United Nations
estimates that 440,000 civilians in Syria are living in
besieged areas where most aid cannot get in and most
people cannot get out. Only 4 per cent of people living
in besieged areas received food deliveries last month.
Health assistance reached less than one-third of 1 per
cent - that is, 0.3 per cent of the civilians living in
besieged areas.

Siege is just one tactic used to prevent vital
humanitarian aid from reaching people in need.
According to the most recent United Nations report
(S/2015/264), nine World Health Organization
requests to deliver health assistance to locations in
Aleppo, Dar'a, Idlib and other governerates have gone
unanswered by the regime. While life-saving medical
supplies sit in warehouses, people die on operating
tables in crowded, ill-equipped field hospitals and
even in their homes, all from wounds and illnesses that
could be treated with adequate resources. Meanwhile,
19 requests for inter-agency conveys, which sought to
reach the hardest-hit areas, are still pending approval
by the regime. Many have been stuck in limbo for
months, exacerbating suffering and even causing death
by bureaucratic delay. What possible excuse is there
not to respond to a United Nations request? There is
no excuse.

Such tactics demonstrate the immense gap between
the demands of the Council and the actions on the
ground by the parties to this conflict, particularly
the Al-Assad regime. Security Council resolutions
2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014) direct all Syrian parties
to enable the immediate and unhindered delivery of
humanitarian assistance by the United Nations and
their implementing partners. Yet, the regime and ISIL
are deliberately blocking such aid. Rather than fulfil
their obligation to protect civilians, both ISIL and the
regime deliberately target civilians to advance their
aims. We are past the point ofhighlighting or lamenting
that enduring gap. We must come together to close it.
The survival of millions of Syrians demands it, not
to mention the credibility of the Council's word. Our
resolutions are currently being ridiculed by the Syrian
regime.

In the immediate term, aid must be allowed to
reach besieged areas, and people must be allowed to
leave besieged areas. Imagine being trapped. Just
imagine being a parent and being trapped. International
monitoring is crucial to ensuring that civilians leaving
such areas are not arbitrarily detained, separated from
their families or harmed in any way as happened on
14 February 2014, when hundreds ofpeople disappeared
as they passed through Government-controled areas
while leaving the besieged city of Homs.

Syria's neighbours have shown remarkable
generosity in helping those trapped in Syria, as well
as those who have managed to escape. Of the nearly
4 million people who have fled Syria, Turkey has taken
in a staggering 1.7 million refugees. One in every
four people in Lebanon is a Syrian refugee, and this
unprecedented influx has demanded that countries take
robust measures to accommodate the new populations.
In Jordan, for example, where the population of some
northern cities has doubled since the arrival of more
than 620,000 Syrian refugees, the Government has
worked with development and humanitarian groups
to come up with a comprehensive plan to respond to
refugees' diverse needs, from health and education to
security and drinking water.

While Syria's neighbours have already welcomed
unprecedented numbers of refugees, we strongly urge
those countries to keep their borders open and ease
restrictions that prevent the most vulnerable from
reaching refuge. If the international community is going
to ask more of Syria's neighbours e neighbours that
have already done so much - we cannot allow them to
shoulder the impact of sheltering millions of refugees
alone. That is why, in addition to the $556 million that
the United States has provided to Jordan to support
refugee programmes and host communities since the
start of the Syrian conflict, we announced our intention
in February to increase annual bilateral assistance from
$660 million to $1 billion over the next three years,
given the extraordinary needs generated by this crisis
and the extraordinary generosity of Syria's neighbours.

In addition to helping Syria's neighbours, all
countries, including the United States, must welcome
displaced Syrians in greater numbers. As the recent
catastrophes involving refugees - many of whom have
been Syrian - attempting to cross the Mediterranean
demonstrate, people are willing to take tremendous
risks to escape the brutal violence in their countries.
Just this week, Turkey's coast guard rescued 30 Syrians
aboard a sinking boat trying to reach Greece.

The disparity between what the international
community is providing and what the Syrian people
need is growing. At the end oflast month, the Secretary-
General convened a conference, together with the
Government of Kuwait, to raise funds toward the
$8.4 billion that the United Nations needs to respond
to the crisis. Only $3.6 billion has been pledged toward
that goal. It is critically important that all countries,
including members of the Council, make more
substantive contributions, and it is important that those
countries that have pledged actually deliver promptly.
The United States announced a new $507 million
pledge in Kuwait last month, which brought our
total contributions to Syria since the crisis began
to $3.2 billion. Today, in response to the devastating
crisis in Yarmouk, we are announcing an additional
$6 million in aid to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to
provide urgent assistance, both for the many thousands
still trapped in Yarmouk and for other Palestinians and
Syrians receiving a lifeline from the Agency.

Even as we seek to fill those gaps, we must not lose
sight of the foundational reason that Syria's population
needs humanitarian assistance, and that is the Al-Assad
regime: a regime that continues to torture, gas, barrel-
bomb and starve its own people; a regime whose brutality
fed the rise of ISIL and other violent extremist groups
in Syria; a regime that, according to the Syrian Network
for Human Rights, killed an average of five children
per day last month alone. Let us be clear: ISIL could
disappear tomorrow and the regime would still block
United Nations conveys, ignore United Nations appeals
and Security Council resolutions, torture detainees in
its prisons and use barrel bombs and chlorine-based
chemical weapons to attack civilians. Partnering with
a regime of that kind would not help us defeat violent
extremist groups; it would only strengthen their appeal.
The only Viable political solution to the crisis is one
without al-Assad in power. A political push at the
highest levels and a sincere and united effort to secure
a political transition are urgently needed and, of course,
long overdue.

In conclusion, National Geographic magazine
recently organized a photography camp in Jordan
for teenage refugees from Syria - 20 children, ages
13 to 15, spent a week, using cameras and words to tell
their stories. A slide show of some of their photos is
available online, and I urge everyone to look at it. A
common thread cuts across the testimonies of the young
Syrians - they want to go home. One participant,
l4-year-old Abdullah, fled to Jordan from Dar'a three
years ago. For an assignment to take a self-portrait, he
took one with his face covered - a way, he said, to
make himself anonymous. Speaking about his future,
Abdullah said,

"I hope to become an engineer and rebuild Syria,

house by house, and build the biggest hospitals,
the biggest mosques, the biggest schools, build
bakeries and rebuild our home. I hope to become a
good engineer, God willing, we will rebuild Syria
the best we can. We are going to make Syria the
most beautiful country and restore the life in it."

Abdullah and so many young people from his
generation are waiting to go home and rebuild. Who
would deny them that opportunity? Who better than
Syria's young to motivate and unite us, the members
of the Security Council, to work relentlessly to enforce
our own resolutions in order to mitigate the suffering of
the Syrian people and to find a political solution to this
devastating conflict?

