Mr. Prica (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Allow me
at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on your
successful presidency of the Council for the month of
December 2005. I wish also to express my sincere
gratitude to Judge Fausto Pocar, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and to take this opportunity to
congratulate him on his appointment to his important
position. I also express my sincere gratitude to
Judge Erik Mose, President of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), to Ms. Carla
Del Ponte, Chief Prosecutor of the ICTY, and to
Mr. Hassan J allow, Prosecutor of ICTR.

It is of paramount importance that all indictees be
brought to justice in order for the ICTY to successfully
complete its work. Only then would genuine
reconciliation of the Western Balkans be possible, thus
opening the road to lasting stability and prosperity of
the whole region within the European mainstream.

Today, we are here also to assess the progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in cooperation with the ICTY.
Since the Chief Prosecutor's last report, the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities have undertaken positive steps
towards improving cooperation with the ICTY. In the
meantime, the number of extraditions of persons
accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity has
significantly increased. Cooperation by the entities
with the ICTY has significantly improved, in particular
by the authorities of the Republika Srpska. Access to
all requested documentation has been provided, and the
War Crimes Chamber has started its work.

Bosnia and Herzegovina reiterates its strong
commitment to the principle that all those indicted for
war crimes perpetrated on its territory, as well as on the
rest of the territory of the former Yugoslavia, have to
be brought to justice. Since the beginning of its work
in 1993, the Tribunal has charged 161 persons for war
crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia. To date,
proceedings against 88 persons have been completed.
Six indicted persons, all of them at large, are still to be
tried before the court closes. I would like to remind the
Council that there has been a dramatic increase in the
number of indicted persons transferred to the
Tribunal - indeed, 24 since the end of last year.

The War Crimes Chamber of the State Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Special Department of
the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor's Office were
opened on 9 March 2005. They are now in a position to
accept cases that the Tribunal's Referral Bench decides
to give to the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina
for further processing. This confirms that Bosnia and
Herzegovina has already met its international
obligations and has become a full partner with the
ICTY. This is the result of coordinated efforts of the
Council of Ministers and other relevant institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Office of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Tribunal and the international community. It also
confirms the ability of the War Crimes Chamber to
perform its tasks, in spite of difficulties that range from
a shortage of funds, to a shortage ofjail space, to the
problem of dual citizenship of indictees, which has
already been brought to the court's attention.

We are sure that the War Crimes Chamber will
shortly earn the complete respect of all. We are sure
that the proceedings will be conducted with diligence
and fairness, and that the best European practices, as
well as the technical facilities of the Chamber, will
ensure that its work is carried out with maximum
effectiveness.

The War Crimes Chamber tries two categories of
cases. The first category, in accordance with rule 11 bis
of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence of the ICTY,
includes confirmed accusations, and the second
category comprises cases in various stages of
investigation. In addition, the War Crimes Chamber
will prosecute domestic cases of war crimes.

At the end of September 2005, under rule 11 bis,
the ICTY transferred the first case to the Bosnia and
Herzegovina State Court's War Crimes Chamber. This
is the first time that the ICTY has given over a case to
the jurisdiction of a domestic court in one of the
countries of the former Yugoslavia. It was a result of
the assessment of the ICTY that the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Court could meet the highest international
standards of justice in such difficult and sensitive
criminal cases.

Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the
apprehension of General Ante Gotovina in Spain and
his transfer to The Hague. After nearly four years of
searching, the Republic of Croatia has shown the
difference between procrastination and determination.
We awaited that development with anticipation, and we
are particularly pleased that the road to Croatia's full
European Union membership is now wide open.

As you are aware, Mr. President, this year we
celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. The Presidents of our two neighbouring
States participated actively in those negotiations and
signed the Agreement as guarantors. Even though our
relations with them have improved dramatically, our
recent history makes us feel uncomfortable, that we are
between a rock and a hard place. We will certainly feel
much more comfortable once we enter the Partnership
for Peace, and we will definitively be at ease once we
become full members of NATO. The only remaining
condition to fulfil that goal of vital importance is the
apprehension of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic,
the two most notorious and highest-ranked indictees. It
is only fair to say that Bosnia and Herzegovina does
not hold the key for the fulfilment of that condition.

Allow me to conclude by quoting the words of
Secretary-General Kofi Arman on the occasion of his
visit to the ICTY on 3 March 1997: "Impunity cannot
be tolerated, and will not be. In an interdependent
world, the rule of law must prevail."

