Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): My delegation
is pleased with the unanimous adoption of resolution
2173 (2014).

The Security Council and the international
community have not stood by with indifference with
respect to the ongoing deterioration of the security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur. Chad expresses
its deep concern over the tenuous security situation
impeding the daily operations of humanitarian agencies
on the ground and compromising the distribution of
humanitarian assistance and food to needy people. Chad
welcomes the efforts undertaken and the sacrifices
made by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) as it carries out its
mandate, in particular with respect to the protection
of civilians, facilitating the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, providing security for humanitarian workers
and undertaking mediation in the intercommunal
negotiations.

In order to enable the mission to contribute to the
protection of civilians and promote peace and security,
the Peace and Security Council ofthe African Union, in
its 9 July communique, decided to extend UNAMID's
mandate for 12 months and called on the Security
Council to act in a similar manner. While we welcome
the adoption of resolution 2173 (2014), Chad regrets
that the Security Council did not take into account
the request of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in its totality. We nevertheless believe
that, with the adoption of this resolution, the prevailing
humanitarian situation in Darfur will be improved due
to the mobilization of additional resources.

In addition, Chad calls on both Councils to
continue to work together in future as partners and
to take decisions to avoid controversies on issues of
key importance. Moreover, Chad believes that it is
important to continue to deal with the crisis in Darfur
in its regional dimension, in view of the repercussions
that it could have on the stability of neighbouring
countries. We welcome the fact that the resolution just
adopted takes those concerns into account.
We have always said that there is no military
solution to the crisis in Darfur and that we need to
promote a national dialogue, given that there has been
progress and hope. From that perspective, we call on
all players involved to refrain from any action that
could compromise the planned national dialogue and to
undertake a transparent, inclusive and holistic process
that makes it possible to promote peace and stability in
the Sudan.

