We thank Special Representative Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and the commendable work she is doing with her team as Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). First, we welcome the steps taken by Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to move forward the political process and hold elections in June 2021, as well as his determination to ensure that they will be free, credible and fair. To that end, the electoral assistance provided by UNAMI is imperative. We hope that the House of Representatives will soon reach consensus on the finalization of the electoral law and that the corresponding budget will be set up ina manner that facilitates the work of the Independent High Electoral Commission and allows for the development of the logistics for organizing early elections. We welcome the Government's plans to adopt a national development plan to encourage women to hold high-level decision-making positions. We also welcome the fact that the Government intends to adopt a law against domestic violence, given the considerable increase in the number of related cases during the coronavirus disease pandemic. We applaud the advocacy initiative between United Nations agencies and Iraqi Ministries to ensure that school-age children have access to education, without restrictions, given the high percentage of them who have met with myriad challenges in enrolling or advancing to the next level due to the lack of documentation. With regard to security, we are particularly concerned about escalating regional tensions with a direct impact on Iraq. We reiterate our call on the parties to show restraint and resolve differences through dialogue. At the same time, all States must respect the sovereignty, territorial integrity and airspace of Iraq and refrain from using Iraqi territory as a stage for confrontation. With respect to human rights, we strongly condemn the targeted killings of human rights defenders during the month of August, the violence against activists and protesters and the arbitrary arrests of journalists. We therefore continue to call on the authorities to respect freedom of expression and the right to peaceful demonstration. Despite the initial steps taken by the Government, which we support, there is a need for greater efforts by the population to ensure accountability. Impunity significantly undermines efforts to achieve peace and restore public confidence in the authorities. Therefore, the demand that cases of violence be thoroughly investigated so that the perpetrators are brought to justice cannot fall on deaf ears. We also deplore the increase in the number of terrorist attacks perpetrated by the Islamic State in various parts of the country, as well as the various attacks on diplomatic missions. Efforts to combat terrorism cannot be allowed to wane. We continue to encourage the international community to strengthen cooperation in this regard. With regard to the issue of missing Kuwaiti nationals and property, we welcome the recent progress made by the members of the Tripartite Mechanism that led to the formal handover by Iraqi authorities of the human remains of alleged Kuwaiti nationals. We acknowledge the commitment of the Iraqi Government and encourage the parties to continue to strengthen collaboration and cooperation until this issue - one of great importance to the people of Kuwait and the families of the missing - is resolved. In conclusion, we welcome the commitment of Prime Minister Al-Kadhimi to addressing Iraq's economic, social and political challenges and the measures taken to combat corruption, terrorism and the health crisis. We hope that, with the assistance of UNAMI, the strengthening of relations at the regional and international levels and, above all, national reconciliation among political actors, Iraq will open the door to the development, peace and security sought by its people.
