Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): It is a pleasure for
my delegation to join others in congratulating you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of January. Please allow me also
to congratulate the new members of the Council:
Bulgaria, Cameroon, Guinea, Mexico and the Syrian
Arab Republic.

Allow me also at the outset to extend my
delegation's profound condolences and sympathy to the
Governments and the peoples of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Republic of Nigeria for
the loss of lives and mass destruction of property due
to the recent volcanic eruption in the Congo, in Goma,
and the ammunition-dump explosions in Lagos,
Nigeria.

I would like to commend the delegation of
Mauritius for its initiative to convene this open
meeting devoted exclusively to the situation in Africa.
Coincidentally, two years ago, the month of January
was described as "the month of Africa" in the Security
Council.

The guidelines for today's meeting suggest that
notwithstanding the interest that the Council has shown
in the past, we are not getting the desired overall result
for solving Africa's problems. It appears that most
parts of Africa are in a state of permanent crisis.
Therefore, my delegation believes that this meeting is
timely. It provides another opportunity for the Security
Council to take stock of recent developments and
possible shortcomings that affect the continent, and to
remind the international community that Africa is still
part of our interdependent world.

We agree that it is necessary for the Council and
the international community to refocus attention on
Africa. The reason is clear. We are at the stage where
Africa's problems 4 serious problems that still result
in considerable loss of human lives on a daily basis 4
could be submerged in the flood of other developments
on the international scene. We agree that the Security
Council should be more proactive in the search for
urgent solutions to the problems facing the most
disadvantaged continent in the world today.

The guidelines for this meeting raise a number of
pertinent questions. Allow me to focus on two, which
in the view of my delegation, are germane to the issue
of why the Council and the international community
have not achieved the desired results as far as Africa is
concerned. First, why are the responses of the
international community, including the Security
Council, in addressing African conflicts so slow?
Secondly, what has been the international community's
response to intra-State instability and other conflicts in
Africa, and what actions have been taken to prevent
such outbreaks?

Let me briefly examine these two questions in the
context of the situation in my country, Sierra Leone.
Just over a week ago, with the assistance of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), the
process of disarming some 42,000 ex-combatants was
completed. It was a remarkable accomplishment. For
this we are grateful. It has laid a solid foundation for
peace and stability not only for Sierra Leone but also
for the West African subregion.

But the question is, could the international
community have responded earlier to the critical
situation in Sierra Leone and helped save the lives of
thousands of people? Could the Security Council and
the international community have acted much earlier to
save the limbs of thousands of victims of rebel
atrocities over the past 11 years? These are some of the
questions President Kabbah had in mind when, in his
address to mark the end of the demobilization process
in Sierra Leone, he said,

"We must confess, though, that there were
times in the course of the armed conflict when
many of our people thought that we were being
abandoned, or that our cry for help was perhaps
not loud enough to prod the world to provide the
quality and quantum of response that our
precarious situation required."

Judging from the gravity of the situation and the
humanitarian emergency facing the country, the
response was, if not late, then relatively slow. On
several occasions the Security Council commended the
efforts of the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and the ECOWAS Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone, and appealed for
resources, including much-needed logistical support to
help ECOMOG maintain an effective peacekeeping
presence in Sierra Leone. The response was inadequate
and often slow. Indeed, we recall that at one crucial
stage the withdrawal of ECOMOG posed a serious
security problem for us.

On the humanitarian side, the incidence of rebel
atrocities could have been greatly reduced if the
international community had responded to the crisis
much earlier. We recall that on one occasion, following
reports of rebel atrocities, the Security Council hinted
that all allegations of such violations should be
investigated with a view to bringing the perpetrators to
justice. In Security Council resolution 1313 (2000),
UNAMSIL was mandated, among other things, within
its capabilities and areas of deployment, to afford
protection to civilians under threat of imminent
violence.

One wonders whether, if such assurances of
civilian protection had been given, in 1998, for
example, we would not have helped save the limbs of
innocent Sierra Leoneans, including nursing babies,
who subsequently became victims of gruesome acts of
amputation and mutilation.

Also on the humanitarian aspects of the conflict,
we recall that responses to consolidated appeals for
assistance often fell short of their targets.

The situation in Sierra Leone, typical of what
prevails in many other conflict areas of Africa, has
taught us that the concept of intra-State conflict is
misnamed. Most of the so-called civil or internal
conflicts are international in character and dimension.
This is because the conflicts continue to be fuelled and
financed by international networks of illicit arms
traders and the illicit transfer of diamonds and other
precious minerals. The principal beneficiaries of these
illegal transactions are thousands of miles from the
theatres of the African conflicts.

So, there is an international responsibility for
curbing the flow of illicit arms to Africa. The curb
itself is a contribution to conflict prevention. Unless
the international community, led by the Security
Council, deals effectively with this purveyor of death
and terror, as we have witnessed in Sierra Leone and
other parts of Africa, there can be no stability or peace
in our continent.

Using the experience of Sierra Leone as an
example, I would like to conclude by stressing the role
of the Security Council in peace-building. Peace-
building is also a means of conflict prevention. Armed
conflicts could flare up again if the international
community fails to provide timely and adequate
resources for the reintegration of ex-combatants.

Based on our own experience in the area of
conflict, we suggest that the Security Council
establish- and, where they exist, strengthen-
monitoring mechanisms for the implementation of arms
embargoes and take the lead in ensuring that small
arms and light weapons are not transferred to non-State
entities.

Secondly, we suggest the Council support the
dispatch of more United Nations missions for inquiries
or fact-finding in potential conflict areas as early as
possible, to investigate, inter alia, any breaches of
international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, the Council should strengthen peace-
building efforts by mandating appropriate measures
that would empower relevant United Nations bodies to
provide adequate and timely resources not only for
disarmament and demobilization, but also for the
reintegration of ex-combatants.

This meeting should send a strong reminder to the
international community that Africa should not be
forgotten. In the midst of a rapidly changing
international environment and global responses to
changes, we should not forget Africa and its problems.
Responses to the questions posed in the guidelines for
this meeting suggest that the problems that confront
Africa, numerous as they are, are well known. What we
need now is a speedy global response to those
problems. And I emphasize the words "speedy" and
"global".

