Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Madam President, I would like to begin by welcoming
you to New York, as you preside over this meeting. We
appreciate the efforts made by the delegation of the
Netherlands in organizing this meeting. We also
welcome the presence of the Vice-Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Guinea-Bissau and of the
Executive Director of the World Bank. I would like to
thank them both for their presentations.

With the end of last week's turmoil, the situation
in Guinea-Bissau has moved towards tranquillity. This
short episode clearly shows that there is still a long
way to go before peace can be consolidated in Guinea-
Bissau. The international community should remain
involved in the affairs of that nation, provide it with
support and help it achieve peace, stability and
development.

We support the popularly elected Government of
Guinea-Bissau and call upon the members of the
former military junta to respect the choice of the
people and cease interfering in the political process.
We reiterate the importance and urgency of carrying
out the process of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration in a timely and comprehensive manner.
We also urge the parties concerned in Guinea-Bissau to
actively participate in the process.

Guinea-Bissau faces a formidable task of
rebuilding in all areas and needs the international
community's urgent assistance. This morning the
representative of the World Bank described to us the
work done by the relevant agencies to help Guinea-
Bissau overcome its difficulties and start reconstruction
at an early date. We appreciate these efforts. We hope
that the international community will continue its
efforts in this area and that the donors' round table to
be held in Geneva next February will achieve
substantial results. We believe that in assisting post-
conflict peace-building in Guinea-Bissau, the United
Nations system and related agencies should, in
accordance with their own mandates, strengthen mutual
cooperation and coordination so that the efforts
undertaken of the international community in Guinea-
Bissau achieve effective results.

In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank the United Nations Peace-building Support
Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) for its successful
efforts. We support the work of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sinkam,
and his team. We hope that the Office will play its due
role in coordinating post-conflict peace-building work
in Guinea-Bissau so as to make further contributions to
the cause of peace and development in that country.

