Mr. Powles (New Zealand): It is a particular pleasure
to address a Security Council over which you, Sir, are
presiding.

New Zealand is pleased to join with other Members
involved in the United Nations Mission in East Timor
(UNAMET) in welcoming the proposed decision of the
Security Council today on the interim phase of its operation
in East Timor.
We are approaching the day of the direct ballot. The
campaign period concludes today, leaving a two-day
cooling-off period. On Monday, the people of East Timor
will have the opportunity to determine their own future.
They have shown, by their determination to register for the
ballot in overwhelming numbers, that they want to have this
say.

For the boldness of vision in creating this opportunity,
President Habibie's Government can take great credit. The
United Nations Mission can also take great credit. It had to
move quickly, in difficult circumstances, to establish a
presence in East Timor and to prepare for the popular
consultation. This was UNAMET's primary task, as
mandated under resolution 1246 (1999) of 11 June 1999.
New Zealand is confident that UNAMET will continue to
carry out its responsibilities in managing the consultation on
30 August capably, efficiently and with absolute
impartiality.

It is right that the Security Council should now look
to the next stages of this important process. There can be
no cooling-off period for UNAMET. Today's decision
will provide an assurance to the people of East Timor that
the United Nations is committed to their future; it
underlines the continuing commitment of the United
Nations to the process, until the Indonesian Parliament is
able to give effect to the outcome of the popular
consultation, whatever that may be.

During the interim phase immediately following the
ballot, UNAMET will face a range of different tasks. Its
structure has to reflect these new demands, and New
Zealand welcomes the revised composition of UNAMET
set out in the draft resolution.

New Zealand has given steadfast encouragement to
the United Nations tripartite negotiations that produced
the 5 May Agreement. We have been an early contributor
to UNAMET and will increase our support in the second
phase of the operation that the Security Council will
approve today. We will be doubling the number of New
Zealand Defence Force military liaison officers from
5 to 10 and increasing the number of civilian police
officers from 10 to 15.

The future of East Timor now lies with the East
Timorese. There should be no winners and losers. As the
draft resolution highlights, the United Nations needs to
continue to reassure all groups that they will have a role
to play in the political life of East Timor after the ballot.
Work towards reconciliation and the establishment of
confidence between all groups will be critical over this
interim phase.
In this regard, it will be very important to get clear,
public and ongoing commitments from leaders of both the
pro-autonomy and pro-independence sides to respect the
outcome - in all parts of East Timor.

The Government of Indonesia has a key role to play
in this process, not least because of its continuing
responsibility to maintain peace and security in East
Timor. New Zealand is confident that Indonesia has the
capacity to ensure that the ballot is conducted in a safe
and secure environment. We believe that it is possible for
both sides to accept the ballot result without resorting to
violence. Those who are predicting bloodshed also have
in their power the ability to prevent such an outcome.

But there is no hiding the fact that the requirement
for ensuring a secure environment devoid of violence or

 

other forms of intimidation, as a prerequisite for the holding
of a free and fair ballot, has not been fully met. As ballot
day approaches, there has been an upsurge in violence by
pro-autonomy militia and a disturbing number of attacks
directed specifically at UNAMET staff, facilities and
residences.

Members will know of New Zealand's initiative in
bringing to this Council some years ago our concerns about
the safety of United Nations personnel. These concerns
have not diminished. We urge Indonesia, particularly the
military authorities in Indonesia, to redouble their efforts to
ensure security and calm in the run-up to the ballot and the
period thereafter.

New Zealand's views on the importance of adequately
funding Security Council-mandated operations, such as
UNAMET, are also familiar. The United Nations capacity
to bring peace and security to areas of conflict around the
world is significantly influenced by decisions on funding.
As a founding Member of the United Nations, we
recognized from the outset the importance of Article 17 of
the Charter and the obligations flowing from it. Ad hoc
voluntary arrangements can be no credible or reliable
substitute.

Finally, we would like to reiterate our appreciation and
respect for the manner in which the Secretary-General and
his officials are carrying out their responsibilities on the
question of East Timor.

