Mr. Alrowaiei (Bahrain) (spoke in Arabic): I
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting on such a vital topic, shedding light on the
progress achieved since the adoption of resolution
2550 (2015), the first Security Council resolution to
focus on youth in the context of peace, security and
sustainable development.

I would like also to thank Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth; Mr. Graeme Simpson, lead author of the
progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86); and Ms. Sophia Pierre-Antoine,
Member of the Advisory Council of the World Young
Women's Christian Association, for their valuable
briefings and for the progress study. We are thankful
for the progress achieved since the adoption of the
aforementioned resolution.

The Kingdom of Bahrain confirms the need
to address the root causes of the exploitation and
recruitment of youth to serve terrorist and extremist
groups by empowering young people in all fields and
involving them in the development process in their
countries so as to use their potential in the service of
their countries' construction and development.

The Kingdom ofBahrain believes in the importance
of investing in youth. Our world has technological and
scientific assets that would allow youngpeople to become
active and productive in their countries, particularly as
this group accounts for 2 billion people - equivalent
to one third of the world's population. We therefore
recognize the importance of the role that youth can play
in the implementation of the Sustainable Development
Goals so that we can live in a world in which justice,
tolerance and peace prevail.

We note that national initiatives focusing on youth
allow institutions to eliminate stereotypes that have
long linked young people to violence and extremism.
At the national level, the Kingdom of Bahrain
operationalized its national youth strategy in 2003,
and last year the Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs
organized a Youth Forum on Peacebuilding to promote
the potential of Bahrain's youth as peacemakers in the
face ofviolence and terrorism. The Forum shed light on
the concept of world peace, debated that concept from
different perspectives and provided an opportunity to
learn about the expertise and efforts of participating
States and international organizations in the field of
peacebuilding. It also promoted the culture of tolerance
and moderation in society drew up a future blueprint to
promote peace and fight terrorism.

The Kingdom of Bahrain realized the importance
for Government organizations, private and public
institutions, international organizations and individuals
to participate in empowering youth. In cooperation
with the United Nations Development Programme and
the Economic and Social Council, it organized the King
Hamad Award to empower young people to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals. This is the first award
of its kind in the region, aiming to incentivize sectors
around the world to focus on youth and prioritize them
in national programmes of action.

The Kingdom of Bahrain has also launched
pioneering initiatives for youth around the world as
a means of providing the necessary environments in
which to share ideas and shed light on their creative
initiatives. The Ministry for Youth and Sports Affairs
also launched the global Nasser Bin Hamad Youth
Creativity Award, in which young people from over
112 countries around the world participated. The award
focuses on the creative achievements of young people
in scientific and technological fields and promotes their
participation in competitions.

The progress study on youth, peace and security,
contained in the letter from the Secretary-General,
refers to the fact that youth-led peace and security work
is noticeably innovative and resourceful in using art,
sport and media. I note that the Kingdom of Bahrain
recently hosted the first Arab Conference on Sport,
on the role of sport in achieving the Sustainable
Development Goals in the Arab world. The Conference
was organized by the Ministry of Youth and Sports
Affairs, in cooperation with the United Nations
Development Programme in the Kingdom and the
International Council for Health, Physical Education
and Sport, with emphasis on the role of sports as a
gateway to peace.

In this context, we would also like to mention
that the increased use of social media by young
people is positive. Societies have become more open
to each other and it has become easier to make new
acquaintances and exchange ideas, concepts and
experiences. Social media sites have become a bridge
for dialogue on various topics and a tool allowing
youths to participate freely in their countries and make
their voices heard by officials in their own countries. It
is therefore most necessary to preserve cyberspace as a
tool for the positive development ot'societies, and not to
use it for destructive ideas.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of Bahrain will
continue to pursue this approach in encouraging
national and global initiatives in order to allow young

people to play their due role in achieving sustainable
peace and security. We shall also continue to work with
the international community to share our best practices
in this field.

The meeting rose at 6.30pm.
