Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), and Judge Erik Mase, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), as
well as Prosecutors Carla Del Ponte and Hassan
Bubacar Jallow for their thorough reports on the level
of progress achieved in the work of the two courts, as
well as on the difficulties that are prevailing.

Almost 10 years after the establishment of the
ICTY and the ICTR, there is no doubt about the
importance of their contribution to international law.
They can be seen as a successful example of the
commitment of the international community to
ensuring that those responsible for the most heinous
crimes, which offend the very essence of human
dignity, answer to them in public trials meeting the
highest standards of international justice and due
process.

As acknowledged in the report presented by the
President of the ICTY to the Security Council, the
international community faces the challenge of
adapting the inherent limitations of ad hoc judicial
arrangements to the principle of due process and to the
rights of both victims and those accused, as well as to
the overall objective of bringing an end to impunity. It
is necessary that the Tribunals remain committed to the
goals set forth by resolution 1534 (2004), while
concentrating resources and efforts to make sure that
the most senior leaders suspected of being responsible
for crimes within the jurisdiction of the courts be
prosecuted.

In our View, the transfer of cases involving lower-
ranking officials to local courts, in accordance with
rule 11 bis of the Tribunals' rules of procedure and
evidence, should reflect the actual conditions of those
judicial instances to provide independent judgements.
In addition, given the difficulties in implementing the
completion strategy, we believe that insisting on rigid
deadlines as set out in the completion strategy may
frustrate justice rather than assist the international
community to end impunity. The Council may
eventually need to adjust those timetables in order to
enable the Tribunals to fulfil their mandates.

We are seriously concerned over reports
regarding a lack of cooperation with the Tribunal on
the part of interested countries. It is not acceptable that
United Nations Members disregard their obligations
under the Charter, the Tribunal Statutes, the rules of
procedure and evidence and the relevant Security
Council resolutions. We urge Member States directly
involved in the Tribunals' work to fully cooperate with
them, ensuring the prompt surrender of fugitives and
access to pertinent documentation.

Moreover, it is essential that the Tribunals
continue to rely on adequate resources and personnel to
perform their functions. Financial difficulties present a
threat to the accomplishment of their duties and to the
ability to meet the completion strategies.

