Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): We wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate on
United Nations peacekeeping operations, bringing
together troop- and police-contributing countries.
Interactions such as this between troop- and police-
contributing countries will further enhance our
understanding of the dynamics of peacekeeping and the
planning, coordination and implementation of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

We thank Mr. Alain Le Roy, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, and Susana
Malcorra, Under-Secretary-General for Field Support,
for their presentations. In this regard, we wish to
commend the initiatives of the Secretariat in preparing
the New Horizon command paper. We also commend
the efforts of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, the initiative of Canada and the Center on
International Cooperation, the review process launched
by the United Kingdom and France within the Security
Council, and the work of the Security Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations in the
ongoing debate on peacekeeping.

The number and scope of the United Nations
peacekeeping operations are at the highest level ever,
stretching the system's capacity. The reality is that for
many people out there where the United Nations has a
peacekeeping operation, the arrival of United Nations
peacekeepers brings the hope that the horrors and
insecurity they had to endure would be no more. We
know that while in some parts of the world the United
Nations has been successful in meeting the hopes and
dreams of the affected populations, in others it has not
been as successful.

Where peacekeeping has not been successful, part
of the reason is that it has been overwhelmed by the
task, or has lacked the appropriate mandate or adequate
troops, or has even lacked assets and, sometimes,
resolve. Ultimately, where peacekeeping has not been
successful, a holistic approach to handling the
challenges at hand has been lacking.

It is a fact that recent operations have highlighted
the gap between demand and supply in some of these
areas. Where the United Nations has not met the
expectations of the people, the result has been an
affected population with mixed feelings of hope,
frustration and even hostility to the United Nations
presence. As we discuss peacekeeping operations,
therefore, we must conduct a reality check so that
together the entire international community learns
some of the lessons from our successes and also from
our failures.

That underscores the importance of the relationship
between the Security Council and the countries that
contribute the men and women who serve on United
Nations missions, and the need to strengthen the
existing mechanism for engagement. Although there
are mechanisms for this interaction, there is a need to
strengthen the existing arrangements to improve the
dialogue between those who plan and mandate United
Nations peacekeeping operations - that is, the
Council - and those who implement the mandates on
the ground, where they often face considerable risks.
Thus we are convinced that this debate is timely and
will further strengthen United Nations peacekeeping to
meet the needs of contemporary challenges.

A common understanding is needed about what
United Nations peacekeeping should be mandated to do
and what it can do. In recent years there has been a
shift towards more robust and comprehensive United
Nations peacekeeping, such as in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In addition to maintaining
peace and security, peacekeepers are increasingly
charged with assisting in political processes,
supporting humanitarian efforts, reforming justice
systems, training law enforcement and security forces,
and disarming former combatants and foreign armed
groups.

Given these challenges, it is indeed imperative to
address such issues as the degree of robustness of
modern United Nations peacekeeping, how protection
of civilians mandates can be best implemented, and
what peacekeeping tasks should be undertaken by
United Nations peacekeepers and for how long. This
requires a clear understanding of the situation on the
ground before mandates are designed.

Clear entrance and exit strategies should also be
elaborated with the principal actors concerned. To that
end, we support the revitalization of the Military Staff
Committee, with the participation of all members of
the Council, so that it can play a more active role in
providing the relevant technical input. All these issues
require a strong understanding between contributor
countries and the Council as to what is expected of
peacekeepers and what they require to fulfil these
objectives.

Developing peacekeeping capability depends on a
combination of political will and the availability of
resources on the part of Member States. The lack of
political will undermines the credibility of the United
Nations; lack of resources compounds the problem by
limiting the ability of any peacekeeping mission to
implement its mandate. The United Nations should
therefore endeavour to broaden the contributor base by
working with partners at the regional and subregional
levels and by taking advantage of their capacities.

The complexity of modern peacekeeping clearly
indicates that no single organization, not even the
United Nations, is capable of tackling challenges of
such magnitude alone. Security challenges require a
collective approach, which should seek to establish
coordination at both the strategic and the programmatic
levels. The United Nations should therefore take
maximum advantage of the strengths that respective
organizations, especially regional organizations such as
the African Union, can contribute. However, that will
require the establishment or strengthening of strategic
relationships that may exist with regional organizations.

Effective peacekeeping is an objective that we
share. To that end, the Council and the troop- and
police-contributing countries have an important role to
play. We need to focus on strengthening their
relationship and interaction during the different stages
of a peacekeeping mission, especially early in the
planning stages of a new mission or whenever there is
a change in the mandate. We also need to give
attention to the coordination of the various initiatives
of United Nations peacekeeping in order to reinforce
complementarities and avoid the duplication of efforts.

Uganda therefore supports a stronger convergence
in United Nations peacekeeping, with a clear set of
achievable goals in the immediate, medium and long
terms so as to meet the challenges of today and
tomorrow. We also support the aim of strengthening the
unity and cohesion of all stakeholders, enhancing the
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping, and
building its capacity with a view to making it more
predictable and adaptable to emerging challenges, such
as that in Somalia. We recommend that the Working
Group of the Whole on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations undertake an in-depth consideration of the
proposals made during our debates, and report to the
Council before the end of the year.

Finally, Uganda pays tribute to the men and
women of the United Nations for their tireless
sacrifices in helping to make our world a safer place in
which to live. We especially remember and honour
those who have made the ultimate sacrifice in the
service of peace.

