Mr. Zarif: During the last briefing to the Security
Council, in February, Assistant Secretary-General
Edmond Mulet urged it to see 2012 as a year for fresh
re-examination of the international effort in Kosovo
(see S/PV.6713). He suggested that 2012 would offer
both opportunities and risks to the goals of peaceful
resolution and longer-term stability in Kosovo and in
the region. That was borne out by developments during
the first quarter of the year and is well documented in
the report (S/2012/275) before the Council today. Some
of the developments during the reporting period give
us reason for cautious optimism and satisfaction.
Others are stark reminders of the persistent fragility
2
and instability that remain far too close to the surface

some 13 years after the adoption of resolution 1244
(1999).

I believe that the stage is now set for more
decisive efforts from the international community to
tackle fundamental issues before the end of 2012.
Accordingly, alongside the report of the Secretary-
General, I wish to implore the members of the Council
to consider anew the possibilities for greater political
consensus and harmony of effort in the application of
resources. As matters stand today, business as usual is
not only proving inadequate to guarantee stability, but
it is also expensive and often inexcusably inefficient in
achieving progress towards a more durable peace in the
region.

Before briefly highlighting a few key trends
during the latest reporting period, I wish to
acknowledge an important development that took place
only eight days ago in Serbia and in Kosovo. Voting in
the Serbian general and presidential elections was
facilitated safely and calmly in Kosovo on 6 May. Even
though political agreement from the parties came very
late, a highly professional facilitation operation was
organized and carried out by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), in line
with the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

The OSCE engagement with Serbia was
instrumental in diminishing tensions related to
controversies about voting in Kosovo in the Serbian
elections. The OSCE's exemplary performance was
greatly assisted by the contributions of the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) and the Kosovo
authorities, which provided essential support and
helped to ensure that voting proceeded without major
incident.

That successful operation demonstrates how the
international community, by operating in a united
manner, can effectively manage sensitive issues and
support the emergence of peaceful solutions supported
by all sides. OSCE facilitation efforts for the second
round of voting in the presidential election will again
be conducted on 20 May. I call on all concerned to
show on that occasion the same sense of responsibility
and cooperation as that which was demonstrated on
6 May.

There were further positive developments during
the reporting period that I would like to present briefly
12-33797
to the Council. Ties between the Western Balkans and
the European Union took significant steps forward with
the decisions to grant candidate status to Serbia and
launch a feasibility study in Kosovo. The organization
of institutional presences of the European Union (EU)
on the ground since February have been consolidated
under the fresh leadership of the EU Special
Representative in Kosovo, Mr. Samuel Zbogar, who
has moved swiftly to prioritize activities on the ground
and has already formed close working partnerships
with other key stakeholders.

In spite of the fact that two municipalities in
northern Kosovo proceeded with plans to conduct their
own local elections outside the framework of
resolution 1244 (1999), both Belgrade and the
international community have taken unambiguous
positions on that matter, leaving no doubt about the
question of legitimacy. I have impressed upon local
leaders in the north that they will need to pursue a
different path if they wish to attain such legitimacy. I
am currently leading a consultative process to explore
possibilities for promoting more legitimate and viable
local representation, and will call upon support from
the Security Council for any emerging consensus in the
future.

In spite tensions in the north, including in relation
to the matter of elections, there has been some progress
in that area, which is noteworthy. In the preceding
reporting period, EULEX had reached a point at which
it enjoyed almost no freedom of movement in the
north. Since then, it has implemented new outreach
strategies, including more regular dismounted patrols
and other modes of direct communication, which are
having an impact, although so far not in the area of
Zubin Potok. Our own institutional presence in the
north is operating in close collaboration with KFOR,
EULEX and the OSCE, among others, to ensure
common messaging and outreach towards the
communities.

Regrettably, some negative trends have also
continued during the reporting period. The most
important of those trends has been a concentration of
serious security and criminal incidents throughout
ethnically mixed areas, but particularly in the north,
which was documented during the period; such
incidents were occurring before and have continued to
occur since the Serbian election. While the occurrence
of any such incident could significantly inflame
tensions, a greater concentration and frequency of
12-33797
incidents in the reporting period is ample evidence that
the status quo is not a stable one.

Unfortunately, incendiary and opportunistic
political rhetoric has been the frequent response to
incidents by local politicians on all sides. Rather than
assuming responsibility for reducing tensions, they
instead make choices to inflame passions in what
amount to efforts at short-term political point-scoring.
These continue to exact a high price on the prospects
for achieving far more serious goals. The tit-for-tat
police arrests during the reporting period, directed
from both Pristina and Belgrade, illustrate the same
fundamental problem.

The power of the EU perspective for the region,
as an incentive for the parties to overcome differences
and to be able to enhance their prosperity and political
futures, is absolutely critical. Regrettably, this
incentive is itself sometimes undermined by a
demonstrable absence of unity of purpose among key
international actors. In such circumstances, the results
obtained from substantial international investments,
primarily in the mandated international presences, will
continue to be less than what they could or should be.

As the European Union steps forward in more
institutional leadership roles, its room for manoeuvre
and effectiveness will depend heavily upon strength or
lack of broader international consensus. Closer
cohesion of efforts among international actors,
including members of the Security Council, may help
to facilitate efficient the rationalization of efforts on
the ground. A clearer sense of perspective and common
purpose is therefore necessary to improve the overall
efficiency of the use of limited international resources.

For example, the European Union is currently
considering an important review of activities and plans
for EULEX, which operates under the overall authority
of the United Nations. I hope that this opportunity will
be used to take full stock, in a coordinated manner, of
the challenges that lie ahead. In this context, the
disposition of stewardship over the key executive
powers given under resolution 1244 (1999), and
subsequently entrusted to EULEX, need to follow a
careful analysis of the implications for progress
towards the original objectives set for the mission.

I also continue to stress that our common efforts
should not flag on issues that are fundamental to
reconciliation and the protection of the rights of
minority communities throughout Kosovo. These
3
especially include progress in determining the fate of
the missing, creating conditions for safe voluntary
returns, the fair adjudication and resolution of property
claims, and the full and effective implementation of the
legal frameworks for the protection and preservation of
the cultural and religious heritage. And I reiterate my
call on the Kosovo authorities to improve their
outreach messages and efforts, and to clearly
demonstrate their intention to listen to and take into
account the concerns of the Kosovo Serb community
north and south of the River Iber/Ibar.

With the conclusion of elections in Serbia, we
expect a new Government soon to be in place in
Belgrade, with a fresh mandate also to look into
matters related to Kosovo. Importantly, general
elections in Kosovo are not foreseen for the next
18 months. Accordingly, we are approaching a period
in which it may be possible to explore avenues of
political engagement more removed from the
rhetorically charged atmosphere of the frequent
political campaigns and elections.

To the extent that the parties can increasingly find
ways to put the past behind them and focus instead on
shared interests in prosperity and stability, new space
may open for settling some of the differences that have
remained hitherto unresolved. Lessons and limitations
exposed in the current framework of technical
dialogue, especially concerning follow-up and
implementation, should be used to inform
improvements during the next phase.

The international community now faces
opportunities alongside the familiar risks. Achieving
better results will require, in practice, not only renewed
energy and focus on the part of those working on the
ground and around the region, but, I would submit,
also from the members of the Council and all among
the international community who have invested heavily
in Kosovo.

I wish to thank the Council members for their
continuing support of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo, and ask them to
assume a proactive approach to the continuing
challenges. I urge them to use their authority and
influence with the parties to encourage them to engage
in good faith - something which is, in the end, very
clearly in their own interests. And above all, I ask for
Council members' support in forging increased unity of
purpose that may help the sides and all of us to deal
with unfinished business and to reach substantial and
sustainable solutions sooner rather than later.

