Mr. Serry: We are at a moment of renewed hope
in the search for peace in the Middle East. After
months of proximity talks, Prime Minister Netanyahu
and President Abbas came together on 1 and
2 September in Washington DC, under the auspices of
President Obama and Secretary Clinton, to launch
direct Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, and conducted a
second round of talks on 14 September in Sharm
el-Sheikh and 15 September in Jerusalem with the
participation of Secretary Clinton. The Secretary-
General commends the leaders on these important first
steps, thanks President Obama, Secretary Clinton and
Envoy Mitchell for their commitment, and welcomes
the personal support to the process of President
Mubarak of Egypt and King Abdullah of Jordan.

Prior to the talks, the Quartet reaffirmed on
20 August its full commitment to its previous
statements, including on 19 March in Moscow, and
provided that direct, bilateral negotiations that resolve
all final status issues should

"lead to a settlement, negotiated between the
parties, that ends the occupation which began in
1967 and results in the emergence of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian
State living side by side in peace and security
with Israel and its other neighbours".

The Quartet also expressed its determination to support
the parties throughout the negotiations, which can be
completed within one year, and the implementation of
an agreement.

In Washington DC, Prime Minister Netanyahu
affirmed that President Abbas was his partner for
peace, while President Abbas condemned violence and
stated his desire to see a permanent end to the conflict.
The leaders agreed to seek a solution based on two
States for two peoples. They agreed that the
negotiations could be completed within one year and
that their aim was to resolve issues concerning borders,
security, refugees, Jerusalem and all other core issues.
They decided to meet every fortnight and to work on a
framework agreement on permanent status. This would
be not an interim agreement, but one that would
embody the fundamental compromises necessary to
achieving a comprehensive peace treaty to end the
conflict and establish a lasting peace between Israel
and the Palestinians, creating a democratic and viable
Palestinian State alongside a secure State of Israel. In
the second round of talks, the leaders began a serious
discussion ofthe core issues.

On 31 August, as the leaders were preparing to
launch negotiations, four Israelis were killed at near
point-blank range while driving in a car in Area C of
the West Bank. This attack was widely condemned.
Hamas claimed responsibility for it and for a
subsequent attack using similar methods on
1 September that injured two other Israelis. I commend
the reaction of both leaders to this attack. President
Abbas condemned it, and Palestinian security forces
conducted interrogations and arrested four individuals
allegedly involved. Prime Minister Netanyahu moved
ahead with direct talks, stating that, while Israel seeks
security guarantees, it will not allow terrorists to deter
it from pursuing peace. It continues to be important
that the parties each act to rein in extremists on their
own side who will seek to undermine the political
process.

I strongly remind Hamas that the path of
non-violence, Palestinian unity and acceptance of basic
principles of the peace process is the only one through
10-53852
which legitimate Palestinian aspirations can be
attained.

Nine and a half months ago, Prime Minister
Netanyahu commendably instituted a partial settlement
restraint, which has had a positive impact on the
ground. The Secretary-General joins President Obama,
Secretary Clinton and European Union foreign
ministers in calling for an extension of the moratorium
beyond its scheduled expiry at the end of this month.
Indeed, we reaffirm the United Nations position that
settlements are illegal under international law and the
Quartet's call on Israel to freeze all settlement activity,
including natural growth, in accordance with the Road
Map. We count on the continued leadership of Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas to refrain
from provocative actions and to work as partners to
create an environment conducive to successful
negotiations.

I also stress the importance of the regional
context. I encourage concrete steps of support from
regional countries as the process moves forward. I also
encourage Israel and Syria, and Lebanon too, to
respond positively to efforts to explore the way
forward on the regional tracks of the peace process. All
parties should work to realize the full promise of the
Arab Peace Initiative.

To review progress in the Israeli-Palestinian talks
and in the overall search for a just and lasting peace in
the region, the Secretary-General will host Quartet
principals on 21 September - next Tuesday -
followed by a meeting with members of the League of
Arab States F ollow-Up Committee on the Arab Peace
Initiative.

Members of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee will
also meet in New York on 21 September to review
progress and chart the way ahead in the economic and
institution-building sphere. I draw to the Council's
attention the conclusion of the World Bank in its report
for the Committee's meeting that "if the Palestinian
Authority maintains its current performance in
institution-building and delivery of public services, it
is well-positioned for the establishment of a State at
any point in the near future". I strongly share that
assessment.

On 29 August, the Palestinian Authority (PA)
presented its "Homestretch to Freedom" document,
which charts the path to the completion by August
2011 of the Palestinian Authority's two-year agenda of
ensuring institutional readiness for statehood. It
commits to concrete deliverables, clear roles and
responsibilities, and transparency and accountability
for results. It also provides direction and focus for
international assistance. To sustain this agenda, the
PA's recurrent budgetary needs and a mounting
liquidity crisis must be urgently addressed. I welcome
recent commitments from donors of additional funding
and encourage further commitments in order to meet
the remaining critical gap in external financing.

The World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund report solid economic growth in the West Bank
and Gaza this year, with growth for 2010
conservatively projected at 8 per cent. In the West
Bank, private sector confidence continued to be
bolstered by sound PA management and reforms
supported by donor aid, improvements in security
conditions, and fewer controls on the internal
movement of goods and people than in early 2009.
However, the World Bank warns that unless action is
taken in the near future to address the remaining
obstacles to private sector development and sustainable
growth, the PA will remain donor-dependent and its
institutions, no matter how robust, will not be able to
underpin a viable State. This means that, as the PA
seeks to roll out the basis for its State, measures of
occupation must be rolled back.

In this regard, we continue to urge a reduction in
incursions, a further easing of obstacles to movement
and the expansion of the security remit of the
Palestinian Authority. The number of obstacles to
movement throughout the West Bank remained roughly
constant at around 500, which is about 70 fewer than at
the beginning of the year. Citing security concerns,
Israeli security forces injured 22 Palestinians and
arrested 162 in 279 incursions in the West Bank, in
which six Israeli soldiers were also injured. Today,
Israeli forces killed a Hamas militant in an operation in
the West Bank city of Tulkarem.

Several demolition and eviction orders are
pending against Palestinian communities in Area C and
we urge the Israeli authorities not to implement those
orders or issue new ones.

The situation in East Jerusalem was largely quiet
during the reporting period. A deplorable exception
occurred on 26 August, when a reported attempt by
Israeli settlers to forcefully enter a mosque in the East
Jerusalem neighbourhood of Silwan triggered clashes
between Palestinian demonstrators and Israeli police
forces.

The status of the four Palestinian Legislative
Council members from the Hamas-affiliated Change
and Reform bloc remains unresolved, and we urge a
sensible resolution of this unsustainable situation.
While Ramadan passed in the city without major
disturbances, the majority of the Palestinian population
continues to be unable to access Friday prayers at holy
sites in East Jerusalem. However, access to the city
was more orderly this year than in previous months of
Ramadan, and on average some 80,000 people crossed
the four authorized checkpoints from the West Bank
into East Jerusalem on Fridays during Ramadan.

I remain heavily engaged with the parties in
seeking to shift dynamics regarding Gaza, within the
framework of resolution 1860 (2009). In this regard, a
recent upsurge in violence is alarming and can only set
back efforts to make progress in Gaza. During the
reporting period, Palestinian militant groups fired 10
rockets and 22 mortars from Gaza into Israel, injuring
two Israelis and hitting close to residential areas in
southern Israel. Israeli forces conducted 10 air strikes
and 18 incursions into Gaza, killing seven Palestinians
and injuring four others. Three Palestinians also died in
tunnel-related incidents.

In a tragic incident on 12 September that raises
serious concerns, Israeli tank fire killed three
Palestinian civilians. The Israel Defense Forces
subsequently acknowledged that the three may not
have been involved in militant activities. I strongly
reiterate my call for full observance by all parties of
their obligations regarding the protection of civilians
under international humanitarian law and for
observance of calm.

I am also deeply concerned at the continued
denial of the basic human rights of Israeli Staff
Sergeant Shalit, to whom no international access has
been granted despite more than four years in solitary
detention. We reiterate our call for access and for his
release.

During the reporting period, an average of 988
truckloads entered Gaza from Israel per week - a
slight decrease over the previous period and about half
of the weekly levels before June 2007. Most imports
were food items, but some raw materials and
machinery used by industries also entered. Movement
of people remained severely restricted. Tunnel trade
has dropped in items being provided through Israeli
crossings, but continues in other items. Egypt
continued its effort to counter the smuggling of
weapons, closing a number of tunnels, uncovering
militant structures and missiles in the Sinai, and
making arrests. The Rafah crossing remained open for
humanitarian purposes and transfer to other countries
for foreign visa holders and for religious pilgrimage.

The partial easing of the Israeli blockade has
helped generate 16 per cent growth in Gaza in the first
half of this year. There are now 1,365 industrial
establishments operating in Gaza, up from 117 in 2008,
but still only a third of the 3,900 that were operating
before June 2007. While some progress has therefore
been made, restrictions on the entry of construction
materials and on exports are severely limiting private
reconstruction and the revival of the private sector. I
believe that it is possible and desirable for more to be
done to ease these constraints, as well as to enable
Gazans to move more freely, consistent with legitimate
Israeli security concerns. I continue to support efforts
to enhance the presence of the Palestinian Authority at
crossings.

I am pleased that genuine headway has been
made in approvals of international projects in Gaza,
and I appreciate Israel's cooperation in this regard.
Israel approved $100 million of construction works in
Gaza in the first six months of 2010, just under
$60 million of which were for United Nations projects.
Since the announcement of its revised policy on Gaza
in June, Israeli authorities have approved 31 further
construction projects, including $15 million for
projects of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA).

The United Nations continues to consult closely
with the Palestinian Authority on priority areas of work
necessary in Gaza, and has now presented to the
Government of Israel a 12-month programme of
construction and reconstruction work worth $250 million.
I expect that this programme of work will receive
timely approval by the Israeli authorities and that the
procedures for the entry of material will be simplified
to enable implementation.

Regarding the cargo from three vessels of the
31 May flotilla, arrangements have now been finalized
for the use of the construction materials in United
Nations projects in Gaza. I underscore the exceptional
10-53852
nature of this arrangement. We continue to believe that
the appropriate way to meet needs in Gaza is through
legitimate crossings.

The United Nations has actively supported local
efforts to resolve internal Palestinian differences over
electricity revenue collection, which have been causing
heavy electricity shortages. Following an
understanding reached last month, revenues collected
from electricity bills have been transferred to the
Palestinian Authority to purchase fuel for the Gaza
power plant. As a result, power cuts were reduced by
about a half.

I am concerned at the purported approval of
legislation by the de facto authorities in Gaza that will
undermine the independence of a national human rights
institution operating in Gaza. Since the last monthly
briefing to the Council (see PV.6340), the Secretary-
General's Panel of Inquiry on the 31 May 2010 flotilla
incident has convened for the second time, on 2 and
3 September. On 15 September, the Secretary-General
received the initial progress report he requested from
the Panel. This report was largely procedural in nature,
explaining the Panel's understanding of the tasks at
hand and the working methods it has unanimously
adopted in order to carry out its mandate.

The Panel indicated that it had received an
interim report with annexes and related material from
Turkey on the progress with respect to its national
investigation. The Panel agreed that it would discuss
and review the interim reports, once it had also
received a report from Israel. The Secretary-General
stated that he looked forward to the Panel's substantive
treatment of the flotilla incident. He was encouraged
that the Panel reported that it had conducted its
proceedings in a positive and collegial atmosphere.

I have already stressed the importance of progress
towards regional peace. On the ground, the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan remained stable, although
settlement activity continued. I am pleased to report
that, during the reporting period, a delegation of 220
women and 480 men received permits from Israel to
visit families in Syria.

Turning to the situation in Lebanon, clashes
broke out on 24 August in the Beirut neighbourhood of
Burj Abi Haidar between supporters of Hizbullah and
of Al-Ahbash, a Sunni group. Three people, including a
senior Hizbullah official, were killed in street battles,
which rapidly spread to surrounding areas and lasted
for several hours. Leaders of Al-Ahbash travelled to
Damascus the day after the incident and subsequently
met with Hizbullah leaders. Both sides agreed that the
confrontation should be regarded as an isolated
incident that they vowed would not be repeated. An
investigation into the clashes, which led to the arrest of
at least 23 individuals, is ongoing. In response to the
incident, the Lebanese Cabinet announced a
reinforcement of the presence of the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the internal security forces in Beirut.

Prime Minister Hariri travelled to Damascus on
29 August for a meeting with President Al-Assad. Over
the past month, there has been increased political
tension in Lebanon, linked to speculation on
prospective potential indictments that the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon might issue. The National
Dialogue met again on 19 August. Participants agreed
to pursue discussions on the national defence strategy
and to meet again on 19 October.

The amendments to the employment legislation
adopted by the Lebanese Parliament on 17 August
represent a step in the right direction in terms of
providing Palestinians in Lebanon with greater rights.
The United Nations looks forward to the practical
application of those new entitlements, under the
leadership of the Lebanese Ministry of Labour. The
changes, although crucial, will need to be
complemented by further steps to lift Palestinians out
of poverty.

Funding shortfalls for the reconstruction of the
Nahr el-Bared camp remain an issue of serious
concern, with 64 per cent of the total funds needed for
the complete reconstruction of the camp still
outstanding. We urge donors to remain committed to
providing generous financial support for the
reconstruction efforts, as well as for UNRWA's work
throughout the region.

Turning to the situation in the area of operations
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL), on 3 September an explosion occurred on
the first floor of a house in the village of Shehabiyeh,
causing a fire in two rooms of the house and an
adjacent garage. UNIFIL immediately launched an
investigation into the incident, which is ongoing.
During the month, air violations took place on an
almost daily basis.

Let me now conclude. With renewed peace talks,
the opportunity is great and the stakes are high.
Making peace will not be easy and carries risks, but the
dangers of not trying are much graver. Both leaders
have shown that they recognize that. Having
summoned the courage to begin, they must now sustain
the courage to progress and find the wisdom and
statesmanship to lead their Governments and peoples
to a peace agreement.

Our collective task is to support those
negotiations and maximize prospects for success. The
international consensus is and must remain strongly
behind that process to ensure that it is seen through to
the end. The Secretary-General will continue to fully
discharge his responsibilities in that regard.

