Mr. Onanga-Anyanga: I thank you, Sir, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on progress
in the implementation of resolution 2046 (2012)
concerning outstanding bilateral issues between the
Sudan and South Sudan and the conflict in South
Kordofan and Blue Nile states.

Before proceeding further, allow me to congratulate
members of the Council upon their recent visit to the
region. In our previous reports to the Council over
the past year, we drew the Council's attention to the
improved relationship between the Sudan and South
Sudan. The change of Government in the Sudan
earlier this year provided new impetus for this positive
trend. Eager to open a new chapter in relations and to
secure peace across the Sudan, the new transitional
leadership in Khartoum encouraged President Kiir
Mayardit to intensify his mediation efforts between the
Government in Khartoum and Sudanese armed groups.
President Kiir readily accepted the invitation and has
since dedicated considerable effort to advancing this
noble cause.

With this new partnership in place, the past five
months have seen a flurry of high-level visits between
Khartoum and Juba. In July, General Burhan and his
deputy on the Transitional Military Council, General
Mohamed Hamdam Dagalo, also known as Hemetti,
visited Juba. Two months later, General Hemetti, this
time as Deputy Chair of the Sovereign Council, and the
new Prime Minister, Abdalla Hamdok, paid separate
visits to South Sudan. Both held meetings with Sudanese
armed groups in Juba in addition to their formal calls
on President Kiir.

In the course ofAugust and September, Juba hosted
talks with and between the armed movements from
Darfur and the two areas. The talks resulted in the Darfuri
armed groups, except the Sudan Liberation Army,
led by Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N), under Malik
Agar, uniting under the new umbrella of the Sudanese
Revolutionary Front. The South Sudanese mediation
initiative culminated in the signing, on 11 September, of
the Juba Declaration on Confidence-building Measures
and preparations for negotiations between the Sudanese
armed movements and the Sudanese Sovereign Council.
With those agreements in hand, General Hemetti also
engaged with SPLM-N leader Abdul Aziz Al-Hilu, who
made a gesture of good faith by renewing the SPLM-
North unilateral ceasefire for another three months
and expressing his readiness to join future rounds of
negotiation in Juba.

So far, the Sudanese opposition appears comfortable
with President Kiir facilitating the negotiations with
Khartoum. Nevertheless, several other countries
have expressed an interest in hosting coming phases
of the negotiations and some Sudanese stakeholders
have asked that Juba consult with other neighbouring
countries as they pursue their own mediation efforts.

As agreed in the Juba Declaration, the Sudanese
Government launched substantive talks with the
Sudanese armed movements on 14 October, which
are expected to continue until 14 December. On
21 October, the Sovereign Council signed an initial
agreement renewing the cessation of hostilities and
opening humanitarian access from within and outside
the Sudan to areas held by armed groups. That marks
significant progress, as previous peace negotiations
between the parties had consistently stumbled on the
issue of humanitarian access roads to those areas. Talks
between the Council and the SPLM-North and Abdul
Aziz Al-Hilu to reach a similar agreement have so far
been fruitless. However, both parties have committed
to continuing negotiations in November, when the next
phase of talks is expected to resume. The next round of
negotiations is expected to focus, among other things,
on a permanent ceasefire, the delivery of humanitarian
assistance, the opening of political space and the return
of refugees.

In another expression of the involvement of the
Sudan and South Sudan in each other's peace processes,
General Hemetti's September visit also allowed South
Sudan's First Vice-President designate, Riek Machar,
to travel to Juba for a long-awaited face-to-face meeting
with President Kiir. That was repeated on 19 October,
when the Government of the Sudan again facilitated
Mr. Machar's travel to Juba for a meeting with President
Kiir and the Security Council delegation.

Prime Minister Hamdok's visit to Juba in
September, his first visit outside of the Sudan after
his nomination, was devoted to bilateral relations.
Discussions between he and President Kiir focused
on the peace processes in both countries, trade, oil,
border issues and the free movement of people. In July,
the two sides discussed technical and financial issues
relating to oil. Furthermore, police chiefs from the
two countries met in August to explore cooperation,
information exchange and related matters. Consistent
with his vision for peace and reform in the Sudan, Prime
Minister Hamdok stated that he wanted to use his first
visit to repair the damage caused by the former regime
and restore the traditional ties among what he sees as
one people living in two States. In his view, that was the
first step towards finding a mutually agreed solution
to the disputed border areas and Abyei. In that spirit,
President Kiir and Prime Minister Hamdok discussed
border crossing points and agreed that the opening of
six corridors would be considered soon.

The list of pending issues between Khartoum
and Juba is long, as most of the commitments signed
in 2012 have yet to be implemented. The exception is
the agreement on oil, under which South Sudan has so
far paid the Sudan approximately $2.4 billion of the
$3.02 billion transitional financial arrangement agreed
in 2012. On 7 October, South Sudan said it intended to
ask Khartoum at the end of October for an extension of
the December 2019 deadline to complete the payment
of the arrangement. It is also worth noting that the
delegation led by Prime Minister Hamdok met its South
Sudanese counterparts in the areas of foreign affairs,
the interior, trade and industry, and energy and mining
to discuss pending issues. In a joint statement, the two
Foreign Ministers noted that the operationalization
of the agreements required sustainable peace in both
countries, hence the commitment by each Government
to support peace in the other's country.

Following Prime Minister Hamdok's visit to
Juba, I am pleased to report that the Joint Security
Committee, led by the Army Chiefs of Staff of the two
countries, met in Juba on 4 and 5 October and discussed
a number of pending issues, including the opening of
additional border crossing points, the redeployment of
forces from the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and
the full deployment of the Joint Border Verification
and Monitoring Mechanism. The Joint Border
Commission has also been meeting in Khartoum
since 13 October, after a hiatus of several months.
During my visits to Juba and Khartoum in July and
September, respectively, I encouraged authorities to
tackle all outstanding issues outlined in the cooperation
agreement in a spirit of openness and collaboration,
including by revitalizing and participating in the joint
implementation mechanisms.

As I conclude my remarks, let me say a word on the
conflict in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. The two
areas were relatively calm during the reporting period,
due in part to the dramatic changes in Khartoum and
the declarations announcing the cessation of hostilities
made by the Government and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement-North. The standoff in the Nuba
Mountains in South Kordofan continues, with forces
loyal to Abdel Aziz Al-Hilu maintaining their positions.
The Government is in a stronger position in Blue Nile
state, with the opposition divided between followers of
Al-Hilu and those who support Malik Agar, who was
recently been elected deputy chairperson of the Sudan
Revolutionary Front.

It is fair to say that there are encouraging signs
of progress in relations between the Sudan and South
Sudan, with a positive influence on peace processes
in both countries. My Office will continue to closely
follow developments in the weeks and months ahead,
in close collaboration with the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development, the African Union and
other relevant stakeholders.

