The President (spoke in Chinese): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
China.

I thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio, Permanent
Representative of Colombia, for his briefing. I appreciate
his efforts to promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) and I hope
that the Committee will continue to carry out its mandate
in accordance with the principles of realism, caution and
balance. China has always attached importance to those
principles and will continue to take an active part in the
work of the Committee.

On 7 June, the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 2049 (2012), to extend the mandate
Panel of Experts of the 1737 Committee. China hopes
that the Panel will strictly implement the objectives and
requirements of the relevant resolutions and that it will
continue to work under the direction of the Committee, in
accordance with the principles of neutrality, objectivity
and independence.

The Iranian nuclear issue falls under the scope
of the international regime for non-proliferation and
for peace and stability in the Middle East region. The
relevant resolutions of the Security Council should be
implemented in a comprehensive manner. However,
sanctions are not an end in themselves. China is not
in favour of excessive pressure on Iran or unilateral
sanctions against it.

China is firmly opposed to the use of threats of force
and calls upon all parties to refrain from any actions or
words that may lead to confrontation. Dialogue and
negotiation constitute the only right path towards a
proper settlement of the Iranian nuclear issue. Recently,
the 5+1 group and Iran discussed the Iranian nuclear
issue in a serious and useful manner.

China hopes that all parties concerned will further
demonstrate good faith, flexibility and respect; will
accommodate each other's concerns; will firmly push
forward the diplomatic process; and will gradually
settle their differences through dialogue. To that end,
China will continue to play a constructive role. China
welcomes the numerous rounds of dialogue conducted
between the International Atomic Energy Agency and
Iran and encourages both parties to continue their active
engagement, so as to contribute to an early clarification
of the international community's concern about Iran's
nuclear programme and to the achievement of a
diplomatic settlement.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I once again give the floor to Ambassador Osorio.

