Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland thanks the Malaysia presidency for the
organization of this open debate, as well as the briefers
for their instructive briefings.

This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
Graca Machel report (see A/51/306), which described
the impact of armed conflict on children and alerted the
international community about the devastating effects
of war on girls and boys. It is largely due to the report
that the mandate of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict
could be created. During the past 20 years, we have
seen many positive developments with regard to the fate
of children in armed conflict; for example, the release
of more than 115,000 children from armed forces and
armed groups since 2000 and the signing of 25 action
plans with parties to conflict towards halting violations
against children.

However, as we have heard from the briefers and
previous speakers, there is little cause for celebration
on this anniversary. The latest briefing of the Special
Representative Secretary-General outlined worrying
trends affecting children in armed conflict around the
world. That is why the time has come to discuss the key
issues raised by the Malaysian presidency.

With regard to the international collaborations
that have been successful in enhancing the protection
of children in armed conflict, including the fight
against impunity for serious violations, Switzerland
wishes to mention its support for the international
non-governmental organization Women's Initiatives
for Gender Justice. This initiative has contributed in
northern Uganda to rehabilitating and reintegrating
former female Lord's Resistance Army soldiers into
their families and communities, while also advocating
that crimes sexual violence be brought before the
International Criminal Court (ICC). States must conduct
investigations and bring to justice the perpetrators of
these crimes in order to render justice for the victims
as well as to prevent further violations. When States
are unable or unwilling to do so, the International
Criminal Court can play a decisive role. In that regard,
we welcome the initiative of the Prosecutor of the ICC,
who is implementing a specific policy for children.

With regard to the recommendations on how to
address the persistent risks faced by children in armed
conflicts, Switzerland believes that counter-terrorism
measures are necessary and can contribute to helping
children. However, we must ensure that such measures
do not impede humanitarian efforts. My country pays
particular attention to the importance of engaging in
dialogue with all parties to armed conflicts on the
matter of the protection of children, especially in areas
controlled by armed groups. In addition, we believe it
is particularly important to ensure the protection of
children who are detained because of their suspected or
actual links to armed groups.

With regard to concrete proposals to improve the
protection of children, Switzerland encourages the
Secretary-General to continue to include information
on the specific impact on children of attacks against
schools, hospitals and their staff in his reports to
the Council. We also call for the full and immediate
implementation of resolution 2286 (2016). Furthermore,
my country calls for avigorous response to the allegations
of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse committed by
United Nations personnel, notably involving the ban
for the Government armed forces mentioned in the
annexes to the reports on children in armed conflicts
from contributing troops for peacekeeping operations.

Finally, allow me to remind States that we, as States,
established the mandate for the protection of children
in armed conflicts through resolution 1612 (2005).
Therefore, it is also our responsibility to safeguard the
integrity and credibility of the mandate. Switzerland
also wishes to express its unqualified support for the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
who has done outstanding work to ensure the protection
of children in armed conflicts.

