Mr. Skoog (Sweden): We are grateful to the
Secretary-General for his briefing earlier this morning
and to Mr. John Prendergast for his account of how
corruption affects societies and drives conflict and for
his concrete recommendations to the Security Council.

The Security Council's mandate to maintain
international peace and security, prevent conflicts and
address their root causes makes the topic of corruption
highly relevant to its work. We therefore welcome
today's discussion, especially as it places significant
emphasis on prevention and sustaining peace.

Corruption can be defined as the abuse of power
and trust for private gain. It affects all countries, does
not recognize boundaries and can spread through all
levels of public agencies. Corruption cuts across entire
populations but hits the most disempowered members
of society the hardest. Women are often more at risk
of suffering the consequences of corruption. That is
because they tend to have weaker access to services and
are also at higher risk for sexual extortion and physical
abuse. We recognize how corruption contributes to
the destabilization of fragile States and is ultimately
one of the drivers of conflict. The recent United
Nations and World Bank study Pathways for Peace:
Inclusive Approaches to Preventing Violent Conflict
also mentions corruption as an underlying source for
conflict and violence. In contrast, when people trust
their service providers, institutions, Governments and
elected officials, the path to stable societies is firmer.
Knowing that everyone is treated equally gives the
most disempowered in particular a sense of belonging
and security, while offering better opportunities
to end the cycles of violence that are the result of
political exclusion.

Our multilateral efforts have produced strong
political commitments to supporting anti-corruption
initiatives. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, especially Goal 16, on stronger
institutions, and Goal 10, on reducing inequality within
and among countries, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda
and the United Nations Convention against Corruption
are important foundations for those commitments. The
peacebuilding and sustaining peace agendas of the
United Nations are also directly relevant to the fight
against corruption. Resolution 2282 (2016), on sustaining
peace, stresses the importance of strengthening the rule
of law and promoting accountability, good governance
and gender equality. It also highlights the need to
respect and protect human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Addressing corruption is part and parcel of
honouring those commitments.

Anti-corruption efforts are a high priority for my
country at home, at the multilateral level and through
our development cooperation. We support increased
democratic participation, which requires strong and
independent judicial systems, political institutions and
free media. That in turn reinforces transparency and
accountability, thereby making the abuse of power more
difficult. We also support partner countries in their
fight against corruption by strengthening institutions
such as tax and audit authorities. For example, we
organized the Stockholm Tax Conference, held in May,
to promote capacity-building in the area of taxation.
Efficient, transparent and effective tax administration
supports poverty reduction and equality and is closely
linked to the fight against corruption.

Every day in the Council we see the devastating
effects that conflicts have on countries by undermining
institutions and the rule of law, thereby creating more
avenues for corruption. It is crucial to keep that aspect
in mind when we plan for United Nations peacekeeping
operations and special political missions. Work against
corruption must be clearly included in mandates and
in the support we provide to capacity-building and the

reform of rule-of-law institutions. Mr. Prendergast has
put forward additional ideas, including on how we could
improve sanctions policies, which we believe are well
worth considering and are very much in line with the
work we have started in order to ensure that sanctions
instruments become more efficient.

It is also important to ensure that the support that
the United Nations provides to Member States in their
anti-corruptions efforts is coherent. Missions, United
Nations country teams and United Nations entities,
such as the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
must all work together. We must also continue to
support models for international cooperation among
practitioners, prosecutors and law enforcement. Not
only does anti-corruption work address the crippling
effects of corruption on societies, economies and lives,
it is first and foremost about prevention. If we can build
effective, accountable and inclusive public institutions
and provide access to justice for all, we decrease the
risk of a society sliding or relapsing into conflict. It
is for that reason that corruption is and should remain
part of the Council's agenda in the broader context of
prevention and sustaining peace.

