Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran):
Mr. President, I wish to express to you my gratitude for
convening this important meeting and for the concept
paper distributed earlier to facilitate the
implementation of the note contained in document
S/2010/507 on the working methods of the Security
Council. While associating my delegation with the
statement delivered by the representative of Egypt,
who spoke on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement,
let me share and emphasize the following points as
well.

The Islamic Republic of Iran attaches great
importance to reforming the working methods of the
Security Council with a view to strengthening the
Council's role in promoting the purposes and principles
of the United Nations, particularly the maintenance of
international peace and security and the peaceful
settlement of disputes, as well as developing friendly
relations among nations and upholding the rule of law
in the international relations among States by taking
into account the interests of the general membership of
the United Nations.

One of the major concerns we have is the
excessive reliance on the unlawful use of force or the
threat of such use by powerful members of the Security
Council in order to advance their interests through
outdated practices, thereby continuing to endanger

international peace and security and undermine the
fundamental principles of the United Nations and
international law. The discussion of the reform of the
Security Council and its working methods would well
provide a platform for Member States to review and to
renew their commitments to the lofty principles of the
Charter and the main organs of the United Nations that
are supposed to promote peaceful international
relations among States.

As is correctly noted in the concept paper,
contained in the annex to document S/201l/726, the
lack of improvement in the three interlinked and key
areas of transparency, interaction with non-members
and efficiency in the working methods of the Security
Council continues to be the principle theme suggested
for discussion with the aim of identifying ways of
improving all those aspects. I wish to build on those
shortcomings through further elaboration and a few
practical suggestions, as follows.

First, according to Article 24 of the United
Nations Charter, the Security Council should act on
behalf of all Member States, but, in reality, Council
decisions not only reflect the wishes and the views of
the general membership less and less, but, in many
cases, do not even represent the genuine opinion of its
own membership.

Secondly, despite the requirements set forth in the
Council's own decisions on its working methods,
including those contained in document S/2010/507,
which, for instance, call for consultation by the
Council with the broader United Nations membership,
in particular interested Member States, including
countries directly involved or specifically affected,
when drafting, inter alia, resolutions, presidential
statements and press statements, in many cases,
however, the general membership, even the countries
concerned, are kept totally uninformed of the
negotiations on resolutions or statements directly
affecting them, nor are their views even sought on the
Council's outcome documents. That is also the case for
non-permanent members, which are frequently faced
with secretive negotiations among a few permanent
members on important issues.

Thirdly, the quick and unnecessary resort to
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter and the
threat or use of sanctions in cases where no action is
even necessary are other disturbing facts that have
undermined the credibility and legitimacy of the
Council's decisions.

Fourthly, the Security Council sanctions regime
needs to be reviewed. Sanctions should be imposed
only in strict conformity with the purposes and
principles of the Charter and should avoid exceeding
the Council's authority or acting in breach of the
principles of international law.

In order to increase the transparency of its work,
achieve a balanced approach in its interaction with
non-members and improve the efficiency of its
working methods, the Council should seriously address
those shortcomings and take into consideration the
relevant provisions of the Charter, as well as the
resolutions that clarify its relationship with the General
Assembly and other organs of the United Nations. In
fact, the Security Council's increasing encroachment
on the prerogatives of other main organs of the United
Nations, particularly the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council and their subsidiary
bodies, as well as such technical bodies as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, is also of
particular concern to Member States.

The Security Council's failure to adequately
improve its working methods and decision-making
processes has brought about a situation in which we
witness a decline in international public opinion's trust
in that important organ. Undoubtedly, impartiality,
transparency and fairness are the key premises on
which the Security Council should base its approach in
discharging its Charter-mandated responsibilities.
Every effort should be made to render the Council
more democratic, representative and accountable. My
delegation stands ready to contribute to the
achievement of those goals.

