Ms. Terrazas Ontiveros (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to express its
satisfaction at seeing you, Sir, preside over this
exploratory debate on the relationship between energy,
security and climate, concerning which, as recognized
by its proponents, "it is for other United Nations
bodies... to pursue other aspects of climate change that
are not within the mandate of the Security Council"
(S/2007/186, para. 3).

Bolivia endorses the statements of the Group of
77 and China and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The 1994 Human Development Report introduced
the idea of human security with the objective, perhaps,
of going beyond the concept of national security to
adopt a broader vision of security from the perspective
of the lives of individuals.

National security concerns currently continue to
dominate international agendas, while violent conflict,
terrorist threats, the danger represented by weapons of
mass destruction, the lack of significant progress on
disarmament and non-proliferation, and the trade and
use of illicit small arms and light weapons certainly
remain major challenges to our collective security.

We know that peace and security, development
and human rights are intimately linked to one another
and that, in this century, the serious water crisis has
become a potential factor in national and international
conflicts, requiring an urgent and coordinated response
on the part of the international community. Climate
change is transforming the nature of water insecurity,
and global warming has begun to change the
hydrological patterns that determine water's already
limited availability.

Climate change has ceased to be a threat of the
future and can be felt ever more strongly and clearly in
many developing countries, where it has the
exacerbating effect of diminishing human development
achievements. International water tables cover
approximately half the planet. More than 30 countries
are located entirely in areas of cross-border water
basins. Some 145 States, home to 90 per cent of the
world's population, are located on shared basins. The
African continent is the clearest example of the
realities of the interdependency caused by water.

Cross-border water systems create links between
States by establishing conditions conducive to the
pooling of environmental resources, which affect
opportunities for sustenance and the potential for conflict
or cooperation. The ecological impact of the unregulated
extraction of water from underground or from aquifers
entails additional problems and challenges with respect
to political relations among States.

It is undeniable that, for a great many developing
countries, the management of cross-border waters,
including salt water, has acquired increasing
importance in their bilateral, regional and multilateral
relations. As competition for water steadily grows, it
has consequences for their development and effective
integration into the currents of progress.

Today, privation of the right to clean water not
only has the potential for similar or greater
destructiveness than that of armed conflict, but is
wiping out human potential on a massive scale.
According to reports issued by the World Health
Organization and UNICEF, a child dies every 15
seconds due in large part to the lack of access to clean
water and to substandard basic sanitation. The situation
is exacerbated by demographic growth, industrial
development and vastly increased agricultural
requirements. In the Outcome Document of the 2005
World Summit, the heads of State and Government
recognized that "that development, peace and security
and human rights are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing" (General Assembly resolution 60/1, para. 9).

We must also recall that water, like air, is an
essential element of life, as well as of economic and
social development. It is also crucial to achieving at
least three of the Millennium Development Goals,
since it is indispensable to agriculture and the
preparation of food, which are critical factors in the
elimination of hunger and poverty, the reduction of
infant mortality and the improvement of maternal
health. In rural areas, where the problem is aggravated
by seasonal changes, many communities and regions
remain without water for long periods of time,
requiring them to resort to unsafe market sources. In
the 1990s, privatization was broadly favoured as an
alternative to public supply. Experiences have been
mixed, including "water wars" that have demonstrated
that private provision of water is no magic formula.

The United Nations Committee on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights has declared that "The

human right to water entitles everyone to sufficient,
safe, acceptable, physically accessible and affordable
water for personal and domestic uses" (E/2003/22, annex IV, para. 2). That is the basis of water security
and sets out the parameters for that human right - a
right that is not enjoyed by approximately 1.1 billion
people. That situation must be addressed, because
clean water is a human right that cannot be denied to
anyone. It is a prerequisite for the enjoyment of other
human rights as set out in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the provisions of other international
relevant instruments.

There are seven years to go before 2015 - the
deadline for the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals - yet the international response to
the threat to water security represented by climate
change has been inadequate. Multilateral efforts have
concentrated on mitigating the effects of climate
change in the future, by which time it may already be
too late.

