Mr. Diallo (Guinea) (spoke in French): Allow me
at the outset to associate myself with the previous
speakers in welcoming Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, the new Permanent Representative of the United
Kingdom, and to assure him of our sincere desire to
cooperate.

I also wish to convey to Ambassador Heraldo
Munoz of Chile, Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), my
delegation's appreciation for his detailed briefing on
the quarterly review of the work done by the
Committee and its Monitoring Group, as well as on the
future programme of work. Finally, I wish to express
our gratitude to the members of the Monitoring Group
for their resolve in discharging their mandate and for
the outstanding results they have achieved.

This meeting is another opportunity to assess
progress made in implementing the measures imposed
by the Security Council against Al Qaeda, the Taliban
and associated persons and entities. I need not recall
that those measures include the freezing of financial
and economic assets, the travel ban and the arms
embargo.

My delegation welcomes the notable success
made in combating Al Qaeda since last April. That
success includes the arrest of some of its main leaders,
the establishment of new means and mechanisms to
attack the financial base of the network, improvement
of the consolidated list, and the submission by certain
Member States of their reports on the implementation
of relevant Security Council resolutions.

Clearly, the arrest of key members of Usama bin
Laden's command team has harmed the operational
capacity of Al Qaeda and has made it possible to obtain
useful information about how it functions. However,
those facts should not make us forget that the network
still has sufficient resources to rebuild itself and
consequently to conduct devastating targeted attacks.
The attacks in Casablanca and Riyadh, among others,
are there for us to recall, should we need to.

The adoption by several Member States of laws,
rules and procedures to identify and to combat more
effectively the financing systems of Al Qaeda are
significant points of progress, due basically to the
greater vigilance of Governments and banking
establishments and other financial institutions, as well
as to the gradual development of a better network for
information and information exchange. That process
should be strengthened.

Notwithstanding that relative success, my
delegation considers that much remains to be done to
eliminate the Al Qaeda supply lines. Apart from the
fact that several of its financing sources remain to be
identified, there is no doubt that that organization is
increasingly using informal mechanisms, such as
hawala and other parallel types of payment, to make its
operations more diffuse. That also certainly explains
why Al Qaeda is always in a position to conduct its
policy of indoctrination, recruitment and deployment to
undertake terrorist actions everywhere in the world.

In order to remedy the situation, we appeal to all
Member States to sign and ratify the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism, increase their efforts to identify and freeze
the assets of Al Qaeda donors and sympathizers and
implement the measures necessary to combat money-
laundering.

International drug trafficking is another
significant source of financing for Al Qaeda activities,
which, according to the report of the Monitoring
Group, brought in more than $6 billion in 2002. It has
also been proven that Al Qaeda uses contraband and
traffic in mineral resources from conflict areas to
increase its financial assets. We all need to combat
those phenomena seriously if we want to help dry up
this network's supply sources.

While rules regarding the travel ban are familiar
to all Member States, experience demonstrates that use
of the United Nations consolidated list continues to
pose a number of problems. That is why we believe
that it needs to be made more accurate, be
supplemented and be updated. To do that, my
delegation believes - as was also stressed in the
Monitoring Group report - that new minimum
identification data should be added, greater attention
should be paid to the submission of names, and the
position of titles in names that appear in the section on
the Taliban should be modified. We believe that the
information that the Afghan Transitional Authority has
promised to provide will be very useful. Also, in order
to expand the list, we urge Member States to
communicate the names of persons or entities recruited
or trained for terrorist purposes.
My delegation wishes to recall that the point of
the travel ban is to limit the movement of members of
Al Qaeda and the Taliban and of individuals associated
with them. However, we must recognize that the latter
remain mobile and that they continue, despite
everything, to prepare and to carry out terrorist attacks
in several countries, often using assumed identities. To
check that situation, Member States must increase
information exchange and adopt new techniques for the
easy identification of those individuals and thus to
block their activities. The world identification system
including biometric data in travel documents, recently
adopted by the International Civil Aviation
Organization, is an innovation that should be used
worldwide.

My delegation notes that, since the adoption and
the implementation of the arms embargo, the 1267
Committee has not been advised of any attempts by
individuals or entities referred to in Security Council
resolutions to violate or circumvent the embargo. The
facts on the ground indicate, however, that Al Qaeda,
the Taliban and their associates still have well
organized networks for procuring weapons and
explosives when the need arises. Witness, for example,
the intensification of deadly attacks against the
coalition force in Afghanistan.

For us, the best way to end that illicit and harmful
supply is to better coordinate the efforts of the
international community for increased surveillance of
international borders. Furthermore, the threat posed by
the ability of Al Qaeda to acquire and use weapons of
mass destruction should not be ignored. Special action
should be taken to strengthen control over the nuclear
safety regime, as well as to strengthen legislation
relating to the manufacture, stockpiling and use of
biological and chemical products.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to emphasize
the importance of strengthening the working
relationship between the 1267 Committee and the 1373
Committee, whose complementarity, which has been
pointed out by Ambassador Mufioz, should give
impetus to our common struggle against terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations. We wish to recall that,
notwithstanding the commendable efforts made, the
international community is still not safe from the
deadly attacks of Al Qaeda, the Taliban and their
associates. This situation should be taken seriously,
because, through the pernicious means that they use
and the dangerous ideology that they spread, they are
determined to stop at nothing. by fully taking
advantage of the weak links of the system, They are
still capable of organizing operations that do great
damage to international peace and security.

The only valid weapon in these circumstances lies
in an ongoing international effort, increased
cooperation at all levels, better exchange of
information and greater coordination of our actions. We
are convinced that the mission that the Security
Council will dispatch to Afghanistan and Pakistan from
31 October to 8 November - its terms of reference
have already been agreed on - will be an opportunity
to fine-tune our strategy to that end.

