Mr. Chaudhry (Pakistan): I will speak on behalf
of Ambassador Shamshad Ahmad, who had to leave for
Pakistan on official business. He would have wanted to
make these remarks himself, in view of his deep
involvement with issues related to peacekeeping, and
in particular the topic before the Council today.

We would like to begin by felicitating the
delegations of Singapore, Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius
and Norway on their non-permanent membership of the
Security Council from 1 January this year. We are
confident of the important contribution that they, as
elected members, will make to the work of the Council.
I would also like to express our deep appreciation to
the outgoing non-permanent members of the Security
Council - Argentina, Canada, Malaysia, Namibia and
the Netherlands - for the exemplary manner in which
they discharged their responsibilities.

Mr. President, as you mentioned in your
introductory statement, today's discussion is most
timely. We can only agree with you that the success of
peacekeeping operations depends on a healthy
triangular relationship between the Security Council,
the Secretariat and the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs).

The strengthening of cooperation with TCCs is a
topic which is fundamental to the goal of making
United Nations peacekeeping more efficient and
effective. Regular, meaningful and effective
cooperation between TCCs, the Security Council and
the Secretariat on all operational matters is an essential
element of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We believe that, had this issue been addressed in the
early 1990s, many of the setbacks suffered by United
Nations peacekeeping operations could have been
avoided. Had a proper mechanism for consulting TCCs
been in place, some of the problems in Somalia could
have been easily avoided. Had past consultations been
more meaningful and effective, the tragedy in
Srebrenica might never have happened.

The Security Council has been aware of this
problem for quite some time and has made several
attempts to deal with it. The Council established the
process of TCC meetings, the guidelines for which
were laid down in its two presidential statements -
also referred to in your introductory statement, Mr.
President - PRST/l994/62 and PRST/l996/l3. These
guidelines contained elements that could have helped
in making the three-way dialogue more meaningful and
effective. However, more often than not these
guidelines have remained largely ignored. As a result,
TCC meetings have become little more than ritualistic
briefings by the Secretariat. These meetings are
convened more out of form than out of purpose.

The Brahimi Panel report has correctly
highlighted the need to strengthen and institutionalize
the Council's cooperation and coordination with TCCs.
In response to the recommendations of the Brahimi
Panel report, the Council took a step in the right
direction when it agreed in its resolution 1327 (2000)
to strengthen the existing system of consultations
through the holding of private meetings with TCCs in
the presence of Secretariat representatives. While this
resolution does hold the promise of a more formalized
process of consultations, there are a number of aspects
that still need discussion to make the consultation
mechanism more effective and useful.

We believe the best way of achieving this is
through the establishment of ad hoc subsidiary organs
of the Council, as provided by Article 29 of the
Charter. These subsidiary organs would be mission-
specific and based around a "core group" of troop-
contributing countries for each peacekeeping operation.
The Secretary-General would identify the core group of
TCCs for each peacekeeping operation, which would
become operational at the conceptional phase of each
operation.

Consultations with the core group should begin
well in advance of the establishment of the operation
and be factored into the drawing up of new mandates.
This engagement should continue on a regular basis
through the implementation phase. In particular, such
consultations should be held when the Council is
considering a change in the mandate of an operation,
including the use of force, or renewal or completion of
a mandate, or when there is a rapid deterioration of the
situation on the ground, which threatens the safety and
security of peacekeepers.

In putting forward this idea, my delegation would
like to emphasize that our proposal is not aimed at
supplanting the Charter role of the Security Council.
The object of the proposal is merely to facilitate unity
of purpose between the Security Council, the TCCs and
the Secretariat on any given operation. The aim of such
an exercise would be to help ensure that the mandates
eventually decided upon are precise, credible and
achievable, with clearly defined political objectives.
The phenomenon of incremental reinterpretations of
mandates and of "mission creep" needs to be avoided
at all costs.

The Secretariat must also work closely with
TCCs. It is our experience that too often the Secretariat
does not speak with one voice. TCCs often end up
getting mixed signals and mixed directions from the
Secretariat simply because of communication and
coordination problems within its various components.
We hope that the new leadership of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will look into this matter
seriously and give it high priority in the upcoming
comprehensive review of the Department.

The Secretariat must provide TCCs and Council
members background and briefing materials, as well as
the agenda, well in advance of meetings, unlike the
present practice. Similarly, the date and venue should
be, as far as circumstances allow, announced in the
Journal of the United Nations several days before the
event.

The quality of consultations would depend on the
quality and the accuracy of information and
assessments that are provided by the Secretariat. As
past experience has shown, there can be neither
efficient planning nor clear and credible mandates if
these are inefficient or partial assessments. Sierra
Leone is a case in point. Both the Department of
Political Affairs and the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations have crucial responsibilities to bear in this
regard.

It is said that hindsight is 20/20. If there is one
lesson that we have learned from the tragedies of
recent ill-fated peacekeeping operations, it is that there
must be more coordination within the United Nations
system in carrying out such operations. Therefore, the
strengthening of cooperation and coordination between
the three pillars of United Nations peacekeeping - the
Security Council, the TCCs and the United Nations
Secretariat - cannot be emphasized enough.

In conclusion, I would like to say that we are
particularly pleased to note that today's deliberations of
the Council, under Singapore's presidency, allow non-
members of the Council to express their views prior to
Council members, breaking from past practice. As a
result, we hope that opinions presented by non-
members today will not only be heard, but also be
taken into consideration by the Council during its
future deliberations on an issue of such great
importance to the whole membership.

