Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-
Plasschaert for her useful briefing.

The Russian Federation consistently advocates
strengthening stability and security in the Republic of
Iraq. The principal role in that process must be played
by the Government and the people of Iraq. The new Iraqi
authorities still have a great deal to do in order to secure
the positive momentum building within the country's
political situation. In that connection, we welcome the
steps taken in the formation of the Iraqi Government,
including recent appointments to key ministerial
positions. We hope that process will be concluded in the
very near future, as we believe that it will contribute to
overcoming all domestic political differences.

We note the focus of the Iraqi authorities on
modernizing the country's financial sector and
improving its investment climate. We believe that
strengthening stability in Iraq is of major significance
for the entire region of the Middle East. We therefore
believe that it is important that the international
community support the authorities' focus on rebuilding
the economy and developing the social sector and
agriculture. We note the role of UNAMI in helping
national authorities take a focused approach to national
reconciliation and rebuilding the country's economy.

We welcome and applaud Baghdad's consistent
policy in maintaining good neighbourly relations with
regional partners. We note in particular the focus and
efforts of Iraqis and Kuwaitis in restoring historical
justice with regard to what we refer to as the Iraq-
Kuwait dossier.

We note that the importance of consistent efforts in
settling differences among the various ethnic and faith-
based groups in Iraq and the importance of bolstering
the unity of the Iraqi people and the integrity of the State.
In that connection, we welcome the ongoing dialogue to
establish a mutual understanding between Baghdad and
Irbil. We believe that further improving those relations
will help Iraq strengthen security, which is all the more
important given the persistent security challenges.

We are keen to see the elimination of the threats
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) and terrorism in general. The way to effectively
tackle this challenge is through the broadest possible
coordination on counter-terrorism efforts. At the same
time, we believe that it is necessary to engage all
stakeholders involved in a combating terrorism in Iraq,
that there be respect for the sovereignty of the Iraqi
Government and that their actions be coordinated with
Baghdad. That needs to align with the stated aim of
combating terrorism and assisting the Iraqi Government
in stabilizing the situation.

We are closely following the process of
strengthening the Iraqi armed forces, including the
integration of the popular mobilization forces to deliver
on security in the country.

The Russian Federation will continue to do
everything possible to support the Iraqi Government's
efforts to restore control over all territories seized
by ISIL as well as to ensure the unity, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Iraq. At the same time,
we cannot but be troubled by the negative impact of
escalations in the Persian Gulf region on the process
of achieving an intra-Iraqi agreement. Attempts to
drag the country into a contrived confrontation over
the Islamic Republic of Iran are counterproductive
and further destabilize the already tenuous situation
in the country. The international community would
be well advised to avert such a scenario. We cannot
allow another geopolitical experiment, regardless of
its origin, to undermine the hard-won success that has
been achieved in counter-terrorism.

During a meeting in Moscow in July between
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian
Federation, Mr. Lavrov, of and Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert,
confirmation was voiced of the need to address all
crises through dialogue and collective efforts. In
that connection, we wish to note that we are open to
cooperation on that basis with all interested regional
and international partners through our blueprint for
collective security in the Persian Gulf. At the same
time, we are of the view that our efforts are aligned
with the mandate of the Secretary-General to design
confidence-building measures in the region in keeping
with resolution 598 (1987).

