Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): We would like
to thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Maurer,
the President of the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Joanne Liu, International
President of Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), for their
briefings. I also want to pay tribute to the workers of the
ICRC and MSF and other humanitarian organizations
for the very difficult work that they do.

The adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) comes at a
time when health-care workers and facilities are, quite
literally, under fire in a number of current conflicts,
most of which are on the Security Council's agenda. In
Afghanistan, South Sudan, Syria and Yemen, hospitals
and other medical facilities have been attacked by
parties to armed conflict. Health-care workers have
been killed and injured, kidnapped, harassed and
intimidated for carrying out their medical duties.

Urgently needed medical supplies have been
routinely blocked or removed from aid convoys by
protagonists who have sought to deny access to
health care in order to achieve military objectives.
This alarming trend shows no Sign of abating as the
attacks on medical facilities in and around Aleppo
starkly illustrate. The consequences of such actions are
measured not only in the immediate loss of human life
but also in the longer-term disruption to health-care
systems that are often already severely overstretched.
The destruction of one hospital can affect the delivery
of health-care services to tens of thousands, if not
hundreds of thousands, of people. Such consequences
endure well beyond the end of hostilities.

The Council has spoken today with one voice to
deliver a firm response to this growing global problem.
We are shining a light on behaviour that is becoming
all too prevalent, but should not be happening. The law
is clear and so is our message. The wounded and sick,
medical personnel, facilities, transport and equipment
must be respected and protected. The delivery ofmedical
assistance must not be obstructed. It is that simple.

Resolution 2286 (2016) unequivocally condemns
attacks on health-care workers and health-care facilities.
It reaffirms the laws of armed conflict that recognize
the protected status of medical missions, the sick and
the wounded. It recalls key international humanitarian
law principles of distinction and precaution and the
prohibition against indiscriminate attacks. It stresses
the need for medical personnel to be able to uphold
their professional codes of ethics, including the duty
to provide impartial care. It demands that parties to
armed conflict facilitate safe and unimpeded passage
for medical personnel, their equipment, transport and
supplies to all in need. Let us be clear: those legal
requirements already exist. Some of them are among
the oldest rules of international humanitarian law. The
problem is one of respect and compliance.

On the practical side, the resolution emphasises
the importance of education and training in applicable
international humanitarian law and its integration into
the practice of armed forces. It also stresses the need
to end impunity and urges States to take action to
ensure accountability.

As Mr. Maurer has pointed out, modern warfare,
as we are seeing played out in Syria and elsewhere,
makes it all the more important that international
humanitarian law be respected. We fully endorse the
call for principled pragmatism in its application.

Importantly, today's resolution requests the
Secretary-General to brief the Council annually on the
implementation of the resolution. New Zealand hopes
to see the participation of relevant organizations and
civil society at those briefings.

As Ms. Liu has told us, our work today on this
issue is only just beginning. We expect her and the
International Committee of the Red Cross to hold us
to account.

Today's resolution is also significant from a working
methods perspective. Five elected members cooperated
in developing the text. Close consultation with all
Council members and openness to negotiation enabled
its unanimous adoption. Key stakeholders, including
the International Committee of the Red Cross and
Medecins Sans Frontieres, were also closely engaged in
the process. We are grateful for their support.

Lastly, let me pay tribute to my Deputy, Mrs. Carolyn
Schwalger, and her team for their leadership on
this initiative.

