Mrs. Jakubone (Lithuania): I have the honour to
speak on behalf ofEstonia, Latvia and my own country,
Lithuania. Our delegations associate themselves with
the statement made on behalf of the European Union. I
will deliver an abridged version of our statement. The
full text will be available on our Missions' websites.

Let me start by thanking Malaysia for convening this
open debate, and all the briefers for their presentations.
We would also like to express our appreciation for
the dedicated and passionate work of the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and UNICEF in that regard.

Twenty years after the ground-breaking Graca
Machel report (see A/51/306), important advances to
protect children in armed conflict have been made.
Despite the progress, the Secretary-General's report
(S/2016/360) depicts a distressing situation for children
in armed conflict. Countless children across the Middle
East and Africa, as well as Europe, continue to suffer
from conflict-related violence.
In recent years, extremist groups have inflicted
direct violence against children, including killing
and maiming, abductions, torture and brutal sexual
violence. Besides being victims of extremist violence,
children are also used to perpetrate acts of terrorism,
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

In many conflict situations, schools remain under
attack or are used for military purposes as barracks,
detention facilities and weapons storage facilities.
All Member States must fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian law and ensure the
protection of schools. Targeting schools or using them
for military purposes gravely endangers the lives of
children and denies their access to education.

Children involved in armed conflict first and
foremost are victims. No matter their role, they are
exposed to acute levels of violence - as witnesses,
victims of various abuses and as forced participants.
Administrative detentions and prosecution for their
alleged association with armed groups are unacceptable.

Children affected by conflicts face difficulties
in finding their place in society; even their local
communities tend to stigmatize and reject them. Proper
long-term and comprehensive programmes for the
rehabilitation and reintegration of children affected
by armed conflict should be put in place. It is crucial
to provide necessary psychological, medical and legal
assistance for children and their families to ensure their
successful reintegration into daily life. We have to use
all available tools to empower children to participate
in political processes and ensure their social inclusion.

Child protection work in United Nations
peacekeeping operations must be prioritized with
further deployment of child-protection advisers and
targeted training for all contingents and United Nations
personnel on children rights. The role of a mission's
leadership is crucial in ensuring that child protection is
considered a priority by all components of the mission.
Adequate resources should be allocated to ensure
successful mandate implementation.

We are concerned that despite the zero-tolerance
policy towards all forms of sexual exploitation and
abuse by the United Nations and related personnel,
sexual abuse by peacekeepers remains a systemic
challenge. Despite the progress made, a lot needs to be
done to ensure that there is no room in peacekeeping
missions for those who prey on the most vulnerable.

In conclusion, protecting children from serious
crimes and preventing such crimes go hand in hand with
tackling impunity and ensuring that perpetrators are
held to account. While the perpetrators are too many,
the cases and judgments against them remain too few.
We have to ensure that those responsible are brought
to justice by redoubling our own efforts to enhance
national judicial capacities and by strengthening the
international justice framework, including through the
work of the International Criminal Court.

