Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for calling this important
briefing. Thank you, Mr. Secretary-General, for
demonstrating by your presence here today the
importance that you attach to this issue and the support
that you, along with all of us, have for Bernard
Kouchner.

It is a great honour to welcome my good friend,
Bernard Kouchner, back to the Security Council again
to hear his report, and again, as I have said so many
times before, I don't think one could have picked a
better person for the job. He has approached it with just
the right mix of creativity and firmness. He has
respected his mandate. He is protecting, or trying to
protect under exceedingly difficult circumstances, the
interests of all Kosovars. He has my Government's full
support.

We have listened carefully to what he said, and
we support what he has done. We would suggest
strongly that all the people of Kosovo be allowed to
wage a campaign free of intimidation in the elections
next month. This is a very important election in
Kosovo. It will be a historic watershed for the Albanian
people of Kosovo, and for the Serb minority in
Kosovo, it will be a chance to pick their own destiny
within the framework of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).
But, talking about elections, allow me to switch
briefly to the very dramatic events that are now taking
place in Yugoslavia. We are in the middle of a period
of immense historical importance in Yugoslavia. The
people have voted resoundingly for a democratic
future, and the world is listening and watching even as
we speak.

I commend you, Secretary-General, for the
statement you made this morning, and I would like to
also quote President Clinton, who said earlier this
morning:

"What Europe and the United States should do is
support the expressed will of the Serbian people,
and it certainly appears from a distance that they
had a free election and somebody is trying to take
it away from them. But whatever we do, I think,
should be consistent with the wishes of the
majority ofthe people there."

The regime in Belgrade has taken every step to
prevent a fair election. It tried to rig the election and
distort the results. The Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the European Union have concluded that
the election was marred by widespread irregularities.
President Milosevic even tried to manipulate the vote
in Kosovo, as he has before.

In this context, I wish to commend again Bernard
Kouchner and his colleagues in the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
as well as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) forces and other forces in the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), for the extraordinarily important work they
did last Sunday to prevent an outcome in Kosovo that
could have created a false outcome throughout the rest
of Yugoslavia. I cannot say how important it was that
Bernard Kouchner was out early, showing the world
that there was an absolute theoretical, mathematical
limit to the number of votes that were cast in Kosovo. I
commend you, Mr. Kouchner, for an extraordinarily
important contribution to determining the free will of
the Yugoslav people, in your activities within the
framework of your responsibilities as the Secretary-
General's Special Representative.

Again, let me be clear: we are at a historic
moment in the destiny ofthe Balkans. The vote appears
to have been a landslide for change and democracy and
Europe. And even the Yugoslav Government has now
been forced to concede that Milosevic received fewer
votes than his opponent. By its own calculations, which
nobody else in the world accepts, he came out at least
eight points behind. The call for a second round is a
clear attempt to defeat the expressed will of the
Yugoslav people.

Credible evidence shows that the opposition is
definitely on its way to a resounding victory. The
opposition's conclusions rest on official data compiled
at all polling places where the votes were actually
counted with all parties present. This is in sharp
contrast to the regime's preliminary results, for which
no supporting credible evidence has been produced.
The opposition is therefore correct when it says that
there is no need for a second round.

Let us in the Security Council, in this historic
Chamber, in this most important of international
peacemaking and peacekeeping bodies, have no
illusions about what is going on. We in this Chamber
and elsewhere have dealt first hand with the Belgrade
regime's failed policies in Bosnia, Kosovo and Croatia.
We saw President Milosevic's disregard for the
electorate in 1996, but we believe that time is running
out. The brave voters of Serbia have now made it clear,
with their message of determination, that they wish to
end Yugoslavia's international isolation, rebuild its
broken economy and form a Government that is neither
feared by, nor fears, its people.

And what of the international community? It will,
can and should play an important role in supporting
democratic government in Yugoslavia. Obviously,
when and if - and I believe the correct word here is
"when" - a democratically chosen Government is
installed in Belgrade, it will not agree with every
position of the outside world, and the outside world,
including the United States, will not agree with every
position that it takes. But that is the nature of the free
exchange between independent States. If the winds of
change blow true, a Government in Belgrade,
committed to respecting the will of its people, will take
its rightful place in the international community -
including, I believe, in the United Nations.

We, the United States, will be prepared to take
steps with our friends and allies to lift existing
sanctions once a democratic Government has assumed
power. We will welcome its application for
membership in the United Nations, in accordance with
existing General Assembly and Security Council
resolutions. Yugoslavia will become a participant and a
partner in regional efforts to strengthen and build the
institutions of free market democracy.

These are very hopeful developments. As I said at
the outset, and stress, we are at a watershed moment in
the history of the Balkans. The proud people of
Yugoslavia have finally been able to make a statement
about what they wish. It is time for their voice to be
heard.

In conclusion, let me thank Mr. Kouchner again
for his exhaustive efforts, his Herculean energies, his
commitment in the face of extraordinary difficulties -
physical, bureaucratic, political - and his personal
sacrifices on behalf of the cause of peace in Kosovo, as
well as his contribution to the most important electoral
event in the Balkans in, in my view, the entire post-
cold-war period, if not the entire post-Second-World-
War period.

