Mr. Guterres: Briefing the Security Council in
2013 (see S/PV.7000), I said that the war in Syria had
not only unleashed the worst humanitarian crisis of our
times but it was also posing a terrible threat to regional
and global peace and security. This is the reality we
face today.

Iraq saw the most frightening and complete spillover
of an internal conflict into a neighbouring country in
recent history. Lebanon has been on near-permanent
security alert, and there have been increasing threats
even to Jordan in the past months. As many as 20,000
foreign fighters from over 50 countries have reportedly
travelled to Syria and Iraq since 2011, with their number
nearly doubling during the course of last year.

Meanwhile, the Syrianrefugee crisis has overwhelmed
existing response capacities, with 3.8 million registered
refugees in the neighbouring countries. Lebanon and
Jordan have seen their populations grow in the space
of a few years to a point they were prepared to reach
only in several decades. One third of the Lebanese
population today is Palestinian or Syrian. Jordan is
facing a similar challenge. Turkey has now become
the biggest refugee-hosting country in the world. In
addition, more than 2 million Iraqis were internally
displaced in 2014 and some 220,000 sought refuge in
other countries.

The continued growth in displacement is staggering.
But at the same time the nature of the refugee crisis
is now changing. As the level of despair rises and the
available protection space shrinks, we are approaching
a dangerous turning point. After years in exile,
refugees' resources were depleted long ago, and their
living conditions are drastically deteriorating. I have
met middle-class families with children who are barely
surviving on the streets and are praying to make it
through the winter. Well over half of Syrian refugees in
Lebanon are living in insecure dwellings - up from a
third last year - and a survey of 40,000 Syrian families
in Jordan found that two-thirds were living below the
absolute poverty line. One father of four compared life
as a refugee to being stuck in quicksand - every time
he moves, he sinks further. With humanitarian appeals
systematically underfunded, there is simply not enough
assistance.

At the same time, host communities are severely
overstretched. The refugee influx has had a heavy
impact on the economies and societies, mostly of
Lebanon, Jordan and northern Iraq, overwhelming
social services, infrastructure and Government
resources. International support is far from keeping
pace with the magnitude ofthe needs. As host countries
face growing security risks due to the regional spread
of the conflict and do not get the help they need to
cope with the refugee influx, Syrians are finding it
increasingly difficult to reach safety.

The Office ofthe United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) monthly registration figures in
Lebanon have dropped nearly 80 per cent compared
with early 2014, and the number of people entering
Jordan has also dropped substantially. Meanwhile, it is
important to underline that refugees continue to cross
the border into Turkey in significant numbers. The
Turkish budget has already spent around $6 billion in
direct assistance to Syrian refugees, and, in a landmark
decision last year, the Turkish Government's temporary
protection decree gave Syrians access to the country's
labour market as well as to free education and health
care.

But in the global context I described, it is no
surprise that growing desperation is forcing more
and more Syrian refugees to move further afield. The
dramatic situation in the Mediterranean illustrates this,
with Syrians accounting for one third of the nearly
220,000 boat arrivals last year.

With the refugee situation growing more protracted
and more desperate, almost 2 million Syrian refugees
under 18 risk becoming a lost generation. Many of the
over 100,000 refugee children born in exile could face
the risk of statelessness. If this issue is not properly
addressed, this crisis in the making could have huge
consequences for the future not only of Syria but of the
whole region.

As humanitarian resources dwindle, abandoning
refugees to hopelessness only exposes them to even
greater suffering, exploitation and dangerous abuse.
Abandoning their hosts to manage the situation on their
own could result in serious regional destabilization and
more security concerns elsewhere in the world.

It should be obvious that in order to prevent this and
to preserve the protection space in the region, refugees
and host countries need massive international support.
The regional refugee and resilience plan aims to bring
together the humanitarian and longer-term efforts of
host Governments and over 200 United Nations and
non-governmental organization (NGO) partners. Its
programmes are designed to be funded not only from
humanitarian but increasingly from development
cooperation budgets.

I hope that the upcoming Kuwait III conference
will play a determining role in stabilizing the situation
in the refugee-hosting countries. Beyond the immediate
humanitarian priorities, it is crucial that development
actors fund the plan's resilience pillar and the host
Governments' plans. Countries such as Lebanon and
Jordan need much more financial assistance, not only
to local refugee-hosting communities, but also through
Government budget support for the necessary structural
investments in health-care systems, education, water
and electricity supply, and other public infrastructure,
which is cracking under the tremendous pressure.

As discussed at length during the Berlin Conference,
the Syrian situation illustrates the inadequacies of
today's development cooperation policies at a time of
multiplying conflicts. To address this, bilateral and
multilateral donors, as well as international financial
institutions, should review existing criteria and
priorities. It is absurd, for example, that Lebanon and
Jordan have no access to World Bank grants because
they are considered middle-income countries.

As High Commissioner for Refugees, it breaks my
heart to see Syrian families fleeing from a horrible war,
forced to risk their lives again, on unsafe boats, to find
protection in Europe. Since the start of 2015, more than
370 people have died trying to cross the Mediterranean;
that is one person drowning for every 20 who make it.
But Italy's Mare Nostrum operation has ended, and
the European Union's Triton initiative is limited in
both mandate and resources. Europe must step up its
capacity to save lives with a robust search-and-rescue
operation in the Central Mediterranean, or thousands
more, including many, many Syrians, will perish.

To reduce the number of people getting on boats
in the first place, more legal avenues are needed for
Syrians to seek protection in third countries. Several
States provide resettlement and humanitarian admission
programmes, but the needs far exceed available spaces.
We believe that one tenth of Syrian refugees would
require resettlement as an adequate solution to their
protection situation.

Flexible visa policies, expanded family reunification,
academic scholarships and private-sponsor schemes must
complement these measures. Following the example of
countries such as Germany and Sweden, other States
in Europe and the Gulf region should consider offering
legal access, with more opportunities, so as to alleviate
some of the pressure on Syria's neighbours and give
more refugees an alternative way of reaching safety.

Without such alternatives, the number of people
taking to the seas will continue to grow. Not only are
they facing serious human rights violations at the hands
of smugglers and traffickers; we now also see armed
groups threatening to enter the smuggling business for
their own purposes of sowing fear.

This should remind us that protecting refugees
also means tackling racism and xenophobia. In today's
climate of rising panic, it worries me deeply that
refugees are becoming mixed up with security concerns,
confronting hostility in places where they thought they
were safe. In several public debates, they have been
made scapegoats for any number of problems, from
terrorism to economic hardship and perceived threats
to their host communities' way of life. But we need to
remember that the primary threat is not from refugees,
but to them.

Syrians are now the biggest refugee population
under UNHCR's mandate. As their number keeps
growing and they become more vulnerable, the serious
repercussions this has across the region only highlight
the obvious: the urgent need for the international
community to bring together all key actors and put an
end to the conflict. There are no winners in this war;
everyone is losing. But the highest price is being paid
by the refugees and the other innocent victims inside
the country.

