Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): It is responsible
on the part of the Security Council to be able to take
action on the Brahimi Panel report within a reasonable
period of time. The working group of the Council
deserves our full appreciation for its diligent work. Our
special thanks go to Ambassador Curtis Ward for his
able leadership in presenting us with a well-articulated
text. The broad agreement reached on the
recommendations demonstrates our collective
commitment to setting United Nations peace operations
right.

We have just adopted a resolution which will
have far-reaching implications. My delegation would
have preferred to make this statement before the action
on the resolution. However, we believe that it was the
consensus to have the statements afterwards. The text
annexed to this resolution contains critically important
decisions affecting the future of United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

We have noted many caveats and conditions in
the text before us. Also, paragraphs have been inserted
on peacekeeping doctrine and strategy. We have
reservations on these new concepts, which require
greater elaboration. Bangladesh strongly believes that
the resolution should be supportive of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, not an instrument putting
constraints on Council action in the maintenance of
peace and security.

We are happy that the Council resolves to give
peacekeeping operations clear, credible and achievable
mandates, as recommended in the Brahimi Report.
First is the issue of clarity. The lack of clarity in the
mandates is not because the Council has a dearth of
linguistic aptitude; it is the result of what one may call
the "tyranny of consensus". Faced with the choice
between no action and a weak consensus, the Council
has resorted to adopting dangerously ambiguous and
unclear mandates. This has raised the expectations of
civilians and parties, put peacekeepers in perilous
situations and given rise to problems of command and
control. We hope that, by adopting this resolution, the
Council members will be able to avoid such mandates
in future.

The second element is credibility. Credibility
hinges on the deterrent capability of the forces we put
on the ground. Credibility depends also on the
commitment of all Member States, including the
permanent members of the Council. The credibility of
peacekeeping operations, not the geographical location
of a given conflict situation, should be our common
concern.

The third element is achievability. We believe
that mandates should be realistic. But at the same time,
realism should not mean abdication of the Council's
responsibility. Its Charter responsibility should be
upheld through action. We have to make the objective
of peacekeeping achievable, not the other way around:
the response of the Council should be as the situation
demands.

We are happy that the Council recognizes the
seriousness of the question of the commitment gap.
The Brahimi Panel recommends keeping Council
resolutions in draft form until a firm commitment of
troops is available. In line with that recommendation, it
has been agreed to give a planning mandate to the
Secretary-General prior to authorizing any
peacekeeping operation. Such an approach does not
solve the problem of troop availability. We believe that
the commitment gap is a substantive problem and
hence cannot be solved by procedural adaptability or
innovation.

Article 43 of the Charter provides that all
Members of the United Nations, in order to contribute
to the maintenance of international peace and security,
undertake to make available to the Security Council, on
its call, armed forces, assistance and facilities,
including rights of passage. Clearly, all Member States,
the permanent members of the Council included, have
a solemn obligation to provide, inter alia, troops for
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

As the report of the Independent Inquiry into the
actions of the United Nations during the 1994 genocide
in Rwanda - the Carlsson report - (S/l999/1257, annex) puts starkly before the conscience of the
international community, the Secretary-General could
not gather in two months of canvassing more than 550
troops: one tenth of the authorized strength for the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda
(UNAMIR II). The report states that some countries
showed a willingness to contribute but lacked
equipment and financing.

We have been putting emphasis on the need to
have well-equipped, well-trained and well-motivated
troops for the success of peacekeeping operations. Our
question is where these troops will come from unless
all of us chip in. It is evident that the primary
responsibility lies with the permanent members of the
Security Council. It is only natural that the Member
States that have the final say on any decision on a
peacekeeping operation should assume responsibilities
and obligations commensurate with their powers and
prerogatives.

The withdrawal of Jordanian contingents from the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL)
prompted the Secretary-General to raise a very serious
question. He asked,

"Can the Council adopt resolutions that require us
to deploy troops when those in the Council do
nothing, particularly the major countries with
large forces?" (Press release SG/SM/7600, 25 October 2000)

In recent years, the world has witnessed a downward
trend in the involvement of their troops in United
Nations peacekeeping operations. While the obligation
applies irrespective of the geographical location of a
given conflict, their absence in some of the major
United Nations peacekeeping operations has been
increasingly questioned. That trend should be arrested
if we mean to strengthen the role of the United Nations
in the maintenance of international peace and security.

It was with that aim in mind that Bangladesh
proposed the inclusion of a paragraph addressing the
commitment gap in the text the Council has just
adopted. We proposed that the Council recognize that
the contribution of troops by Member States possessing
the greatest capacity and means, particularly permanent
members of the Security Council, is critically
important for bridging the commitment gap, facilitating
rapid deployment and further increasing the operational
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. In that context, we proposed that each of
the permanent members agree to provide at least 5 per
cent, or another agreed percentage, of the troops for
each United Nations peacekeeping operation.

That symbolic contribution, besides enhancing
operational capacity, would demonstrate that the united
strength of the whole of the international community
was behind each of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations. The Bangladesh proposal reflects the views
of a significant portion of the broader membership of
the Organization. Its adoption would have been good
for the permanent members, for the people affected by
wars and conflicts, and for United Nations
peacekeeping as a whole.

Unfortunately, the proposal could not be
included, in the face of opposition from the permanent
members of the Council. The need for assumption of
shared responsibility by all Member States, particularly
by those with the greatest capacity and means, is
recognized also in the implementation report of the
Secretary-General. While we yielded for the sake of
consensus, allowing adoption of the present resolution
within a reasonable time, for us and many others the
question remains outstanding.

Let me now turn briefly to the issue of Secretariat
briefings. The Council must be able to take well-
informed decisions. The Secretariat's advice should be
based on an objective assessment of the situation. The
briefings should take into account the evolving nature
of issues and their relevance for appropriate action by
the Council.

Bangladesh has strongly supported the emphasis
on humanitarian briefings. While working on the
Council debate on humanitarian action in March this
year, we were reminded of the critical need for closer
consultation between the political and peacekeeping
departments of the Secretariat and the humanitarian
offices and agencies.

The Carlsson report encouraged direct
participation in the consultations of the whole by the
High Commissioners for Refugees and for Human
Rights and, when relevant, by United Nations funds
and programmes. Regrettably, when Bangladesh
proposed inclusion of that provision, it did not receive
consensus. We hope, however, that all concerned have
a clear understanding of what is expected of
humanitarian briefings.

Briefings by the United Nations Military Adviser
and by force commanders are a new addition. We
commend Canada for its initiative in having the
practice introduced. We have found such briefings
extremely useful.

Beyond all the provisions on briefings, let us
recall the Brahimi recommendation that "The
Secretariat must tell the Security Council what it needs
to know, not what it wants to hear" (para. 64). Indeed,
the Secretariat should not make assumptions about the
disposition of the Security Council until the 15
members have met and discussed a given situation.

The need for greater coordination among the
various mission components 1s equally important. We
saw the need for effective coordination in the field in
Sierra Leone during our recent mission to the area.

Turning to the question of consultation with
troop-contributing countries, let me say how strongly
we are behind the decision to hold private meetings
between the Council and troop-contributing countries
at various stages of a peacekeeping operation: at the
outset; during implementation; during change, renewal
and completion of a mandate; and, in particular, in case
of the rapid deterioration of a situation. Our
understanding is that such meetings would be in the
format used at the 4 October meeting on UNAMSIL.
These consultations, whatever the provisions of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, should be
neither traditional troop-contributors meetings nor
private formal meetings in the Council Chamber.
Rather, they should be in a format that allows a free
exchange of views between Council members and
troop-contributing countries, and they should include
the necessary substantive briefings.

We are happy that the Council is renewing its
commitment to enhancing the rapid deployment
capacity of the United Nations and is supporting the
standby arrangements system. For that purpose,
appropriate machinery has to be set up in the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

It is essential that the Council continue to place
emphasis on conflict prevention. Addressing the root
causes of conflicts is at the heart of maintaining
international peace and security. Post-conflict peace-
building should also get our fullest attention in the
continuum of the process.

We welcome the focus on the protection of
civilians, especially women and children as the most
vulnerable. As the Prime Minister of Bangladesh
underlined at the Security Council Summit, peace and
security should be understood also in terms of human
security.

The training of peacekeepers has justly received
attention in our action. Training related to HIV/AIDS is
of paramount importance. We also underline the
importance of training regarding the gender
perspective, as called for in resolution 1325 (2000) on
women, peace and security. The lessons learned from
East Timor and Kosovo should be studied in
elaborating guidelines for future transitional
administrations run by the United Nations.

Finally, we should recognize that the effective
implementation of key decisions and recommendations,
such as strengthening the capacity of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, will require additional
resources. The Secretary-General has provided an
assessment of the financial implications. While we will
examine these, we believe we cannot make a serious
commitment to implement the resolution while
maintaining a cap on the budget of the United Nations.
We also believe that the question of the peacekeeping
scale of assessment, another area in the competence of
the General Assembly, is relevant in the context of our
action today. The current scale of assessment is an old
one and needs urgent updating. The rate of
reimbursement to the troop contributing countries, also
adopted years ago, needs revision.

In conclusion, we wish to underline that the
Council resolution today represents a follow-up of the
historic second Summit of the Security Council. It is
inspired by the solemn commitment of our heads of
State and Government. We should ensure that the
words in the text are translated into early action.

