Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured by the
presence of the Foreign Minister of Romania to preside
over this important meeting. We congratulate the
Romanian mission, led by your dynamic self,
Mr. President, on its initiative in developing the theme
of our debate. We are also grateful to the
representatives of regional organizations, whose
presentations enrich our insight into cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
in maintaining international peace and security.

At this stage of our discussion, the importance
and usefulness of cooperation between the United
Nations - in particular the Security Council - and
regional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security has been sufficiently acknowledged.
The United Nations and regional organizations are, and
should be, mutually reinforcing partners in that
endeavour. The challenge before us is to look for
opportunities to enhance that partnership and areas in
which to do so.

There are some operational guidelines we must
bear in mind here. The first obvious consideration is
that no two regional organizations can be so similar as
to admit of a uniform standard for cooperation or
partnership. Regional organizations embody regional
norms. The simplest way to understand a regional
organization - thereby making cooperation more
effective - is to study its charter or, in the absence of
such a document, the instruments establishing the
regional grouping. Regional organizations have
emerged from particular regional developments, as
reflected in the preambles of regional charters or
instruments.

The second obvious consideration to bear in mind
is that in most cases, a regional organization can be no
more than the sum total of the political orientation, the
level of economic development and the cultural and
religious diversity of its members. Those are important
factors in the equations affecting the competence of
regional organizations and the degree to which they
interact and cooperate with the United Nations, and
particularly with the Security Council, as it carries out
its mandate of maintaining international peace and
security.

The search for appropriate modalities for
cooperation between regional organizations and the
United Nations should aim to promote speedy and
effective responses to situations likely to threaten
regional or even international peace and security. Such
modalities should optimize the resources of concerned
regional organizations and of the various components
of the United Nations system on the basis of their
comparative strengths. That will ensure the
complementarity of efforts and will eliminate
duplication. This concept should hold true regardless
of whether the cooperation or partnership is in the area
of conflict prevention, peacekeeping or post-conflict
peacebuilding.

There are fertile areas that the United Nations and
regional organizations could cultivate in the
maintenance of international peace and security. In the
area of conflict prevention, the United Nations could
stimulate the use of regional mechanisms or
arrangements in the pacific settlement of disputes.
Such stimulation could come in the form of
confidence-building measures and technical assistance
aimed at the capacity-building of such mechanisms. In
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN),
the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia
provides for a High Council, which is available to
members for the settlement of disputes. The United
Nations could also enhance its support for and
assistance to regional seminars - for example, the
United Nations-ASEAN Conference on Conflict
Prevention, Conflict Resolution and Peacebuilding in
South-East Asia. The next such conference is
scheduled to be held in the first half of 2006.

It is also relevant to mention that, as borne out by
ASEAN's experience, a parallel track undertaken by
the academic sector of civil society or by regional
think tanks has been useful. The ASEAN Regional
Forum - the regional process initiated by ASEAN to
engage its dialogue partners and other interested
parties in the Asia-Pacific region in confidence-
building and cooperation activities on political and
security matters - should attract the attention of the
United Nations with regard to its conflict prevention
efforts.

In the areas of peacekeeping and post-conflict
peacebuilding, it is essential to establish a dedicated
communication procedure for the exchange of relevant
information. That would permit the identification of
activities likely to disturb regional peace and would
serve as a device for early warning and monitoring to
prevent their escalation into hostilities. Such
communication procedures or processes could also
serve as a repertoire of best practices through which
other regions could successfully address similar
situations. That would also provide an opportunity to
develop an integrated operational response aimed at a
negotiated political settlement.

During the recent ASEAN-United Nations
summit held on 13 September 2005, ASEAN leaders
and the Secretary-General of the United Nations
reviewed and discussed broad areas of cooperation,
which included energy security, debt relief, health,
disaster management and peace and security. In the
area of peace and security, they committed themselves
to enhancing cooperative efforts to combat
international terrorism at the national, regional and
international levels. It cannot be overemphasized that
cooperation between the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council, and regional organizations to
combat a common enemy - terrorism - should be
further enhanced.

The United Nations should also encourage
dialogue and cooperation among regional
organizations. ASEAN Foreign Ministers, for example,
have consultations with their counterparts from other
regional organizations - such as the Gulf Cooperation
Council, the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, the Economic Cooperation Organization
and the Rio Group - in the margins of the annual
sessions of the General Assembly in New York.

Finally, Mr. President, we welcome and support
the draft resolution formulated by your delegation,
which would, among other things, request the
Secretary-General to include in his reporting to the
Security Council assessments of progress made in
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations.

