Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her report and for the work that the Office
of the Prosecutor continues to carry out in this case, in
keeping with its commitment to international criminal
justice. All of this highlights the need for all States
and the regional and other international organizations
concerned to cooperate fully, as urged by the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in resolution 1593 (2005). This
also reminds us of the significance of the Council's
and other stakeholders' actions and support for the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor, with a view to
ensuring that the victims and the witnesses eventually
see justice done.

An additional reason for the importance of this
follow-up is the fact that, as Ms. Bensouda observed in
her previous briefing to the Council,

"Sustainable peace and stability can return
to Darfur only once the root causes of conflict
are addressed. That includes ending impunity for
alleged crimes under the Rome Statute in Darfur
and ensuring accountability for the victims ofthose
serious crimes." (see S/PV8290, p. 4)

We call on all stakeholders to work towards that
end and to cooperate with the Office, including, but not
limited to, on facilitating the collection of evidence,
the freezing of assets and assistance in the arrest and
surrender of fugitives.

We welcome the Office's dedication in pursuing
investigations against suspects in the Darfur situation,
the significant progress achieved and the cooperation
and assistance from some States in furtherance of its
mandate. We encourage it to continue fulfilling its
commitment despite the challenges.

While we acknowledge that the reported violence
against civilians there appears to have decreased, we
are concerned about the clashes between Government
forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction in Jebel Marra and their consequences for the
civilian population. We share the Office's concern
about the high numbers of internally displaced persons
and their fate upon their return to their areas of origin,
including the risk of becoming victims of violence,
including sexual violence, especially for women and
girls. Let me stress once again that if we do not address
the root causes of conflict and devise a sustainable
solution allowing millions of internally displaced
persons to safely return to their homes, durable peace
in Darfur may be hard to achieve.

We take note of the Office's reports on the travel
of some of the suspects to several States, as well as
the failure by Rome Statute States parties to arrest
and surrender fugitives from the Court, both of which
regrettable. We call on all stakeholders to undertake
adequate steps to address these issues.

In that regard, we take note of the fact that the
Prosecutor has urged the Council to consider options
to respond to States parties that invite and host Darfur
suspects on their territory. We also reiterate the proposal
to invite States deemed by the Court to have breached
their obligation to cooperate to address the Council.

Additionally, we support the position that on the
basis of such an exchange, the Council determines the
concrete steps and effective measures to be taken when
it is seized of the issue of States' non-cooperation with
the Court. We would like to reiterate in this context
our position expressed during the 6 July Arria Formula
meeting on relations between the Court and the Council,
which Poland co-sponsored.

To conclude, we would like to reiterate our appeal to
demonstrate support and cooperate with the Office and
the Court in relation to the Darfur situation. Darfur's
victims and witnesses, to whom we pay tribute, deserve
no less.

