The President (spoke in Chinese): Now I will
speak in my capacity as the representative of China.

The Chinese delegation welcomes Mr. Vieira de
Mello and Mr. Ramos-Horta in our midst, and we
welcome their statements.

We endorse the report by the Secretary-General.
We are sincerely pleased by the significant progress
achieved in the independence process in East Timor.
We appreciate the active efforts made by the
transitional authorities, especially in the transfer of
power, to speed up the process of Timorization, as well
as the fruitful work under the leadership of Mr. Vieira
de Mello.

As indicated in the report, East Timor is in a
critical, final stage in the transitional period. We hope
that the transitional authorities will continue to play
their constructive role in helping the people of East
Timor achieve self-government and self-sufficiency. In
our view, United Nations peacekeeping operations
should have a good beginning and a good ending. In
considering the exit strategy, they should plan
thoroughly and take a cautious approach. China
endorses the analysis and consideration in the report of
the Secretary-General.

In our view, after East Timor achieves its official
independence, the United Nations should maintain its
considerable presence and retain necessary
professionals in important departments in
administration and management, provide assistance to
the authorities of East Timor and maintain a
considerable military and police presence. The input of
the United Nations should also include corresponding
financial support. All these are vital in ensuring the
steady transition of East Timor and the smooth
functioning of the new Government.

As for the size, composition, mandate and method
of work of the presence, it should base itself on the
principle of high effectiveness and high efficiency,
proceed from the actual needs of East Timor, and
cooperate closely with the people of East Timor and
respect their views. In order to achieve this smooth
transition in East Timor, its economic and financial
independence and its sound development are important
conditions not to be neglected. We hope that the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) and the relevant agencies of the United
Nations will continue their efforts in this regard.

We also call upon the entire international
community to provide generous assistance to East
Timor. Recently, China offered gratis in-kind assistance
to East Timor, mainly in agriculture and fisheries. We
will provide capital for the building of a foreign
ministry. We have also extended assistance in the
training of management personnel and will continue to
do so. We are actively considering sending medical
teams to East Timor. We would like to join the
international community in making contributions
within our capacities to the peace and development of
East Timor.

I now resume my capacity as the President.

The next speaker is the representative of Portugal.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council and to make
his statement.

