Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation views with concern the delays in
the implementation of the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol
and the commitments undertaken by the Government of
Angola and by the Uniao Nacional para a Independencia
Total de Angola (UNITA).

Although we recognize that certain positive
developments have taken place in Angola in relation to the
peace process, such as the maintenance of the ceasefire, the
dismantling of the illegal checkpoints, improvements in the
freedom of movement of persons, continuation of the
programme of disarming the civilian population, and the
completion of the quartering of UNITA troops, there has as
yet been no swift action on matters that are essential for the
peace of the country. In the political sphere, there has not
yet been any tangible progress with respect to the prompt
establishment of the Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation, or to reaching an agreement on the special
status of the leader of the largest opposition party, in
accordance with the provisions of the Lusaka Protocol.

We believe that the parties should make greater efforts
to attain these objectives, and should strictly comply with
their obligations under the Lusaka Protocol, the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the commitments
undertaken in Libreville and Franceville. That is why we
urge them to meet as soon as possible, and to adopt
measures that will enable significant progress to be made
towards peace and national reconciliation.

My delegation believes that the achievements so far in
Angola must be consolidated through the assistance of the
international community for the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of the Angolan economy, which continues to
be in a critical condition. We appeal to the international
community and to donor countries to continue to lend their
support to the peace process in Angola.

My delegation also recognizes that, in order to
complete the tasks provided for in the Lusaka Protocol and
to consolidate the progress achieved, it will be necessary to
maintain a limited United Nations presence in Angola after
the withdrawal of UNAVEM. III's units.

My delegation feels that the presence of UNAVEM. III
is necessary at this stage of the peace process in Angola,
and will vote in favour of the draft resolution extending
the Mission's mandate until 28 February 1997.

