Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States would like to thank Burkina Faso for its
leadership in drawing attention to the threat to
international peace and security posed by drug
trafficking, particularly in West Africa. I welcome
Minister Yoda back to the Chamber. I would like to
take this opportunity to thank him and you,
Mr. President, and your entire delegation for providing
such an important voice to this body over the past two
years. We also appreciate the update - as
comprehensive and informative as ever - from
Executive Director Costa and look forward to future
briefings from the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC).

Drug trafficking is truly an international problem,
and one with very serious consequences for the
security and development of society. Increasingly, the
illicit activities of violent criminal networks pay no
heed to borders and undermine our common security
and our shared economic health. Illicit actors are
smuggling billions of dollars worth of illegal goods
into our jurisdictions, thus weakening the rule of law,
democracy and economic development. Transnational
drug enterprises are just that: enterprises. They search
constantly for higher profits and new business
opportunities, and they are closely linked to other
transnational criminal enterprises. Their cutting-edge
organizations and their weapons and other equipment
for communications, encryption and surveillance are
often better than those available to the law enforcement
officials charged with bringing them to justice.

Fighting transnational drug trafficking is not
something that any one Government can do alone. We
must work closely together on several levels: bilateral,
subregional, regional and global. Narco-trafficking in
West Africa is a serious and growing threat. It further
destabilizes an already turbulent region whose past and
present remain punctuated by civil wars and coups
d'etat.

Drug trafficking robs populations of legitimate
sources of economic activity and development, and it

tears apart the social fabric. West Africa has become a
major trafficking route for cocaine moving from South
America to Europe. Although most transit States in
Africa do not yet have significant markets for illegal
drug consumption, illegal drug abuse eventually takes

root and spreads. The wholesale value of cocaine
entering Europe from West Africa is estimated to be
$1.8 billion, with perhaps $450 million going to
traffickers. These illicit profits far exceed the resources
that regional Governments have to combat trafficking.
The wholesale value of just a few months of trans-
shipped cocaine can eclipse the gross domestic product
of many countries in the region. Such situations
threaten good governance and local and regional
stability.

Taking effective measures against narco-
trafficking requires both increased donor assistance
and a clear demonstration of political will by regional
Governments. The key to success is capable, reliable
and transparent institutions. Drug traffickers thrive in
poverty-stricken and permissive environments marked
by porous borders and weak State authority. Corruption
and ineffective governance often create de facto
impunity for drug traffickers.

My Government therefore welcomes the Political
Declaration and Action Plan adopted by West African
leaders one year ago. We also welcome the recently
launched West African Crime Initiative, which brings
together the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), the United Nations and the
International Criminal Police Organization. The United
States further welcomes UNODC's technical assistance
activities, which will strengthen regional States'
institutional capacity to combat the menace of
international drug trafficking.

UNODC's regional programme for West Africa
will represent a strategic road map for the
organization's activities. Furthermore, we applaud the
results of the donor's meeting that UNODC hosted with
the Government of Austria in Vienna on 3 December,
which raised more than €15 million to help ECOWAS
reduce the region's vulnerability to drugs and crime.

For our part, the United States is working as a
partner, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to combat
the scourge of drug trafficking. The United States
provides assistance for counter-narcotics and law
enforcement and criminal justice capacity-building in
more then 90 partner countries. In particular, we are
supporting Member States' efforts to accede to and
implement the three United Nations drug conventions,
the United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime and the United Nations Convention
against Corruption all of which provide the
international legal framework and tools to confront this
threat. Implementing those conventions and applying
those tools will serve as a force multiplier.

The United States has already devoted more than
$13 million to addressing this challenge in West Africa
during the last fiscal year, and we are working to
secure additional funding for bilateral and regional
programmes. For example, we are working with the
Government of Ghana to further develop an elite
counter-narcotics law enforcement capacity to
investigate drug trafficking organizations and support
high-level prosecutions.

Our discussion today focuses on West Africa, but
we face growing threats elsewhere too. In Haiti, for
instance, the net flow of drugs has grown recently, and
the Government, by its own admission, lacks the
capacity to counter these flows or fully adjudicate
related crimes. The United Nations and its Member
States have invested years of peacekeeping efforts in
Haiti. We cannot afford to let narco-trafficking
undermine the real successes that the Government's
efforts and the efforts of this body have begun to yield.

In Afghanistan the drug trade threatens political
stability and economic growth by funding insurgents,
feeding corruption and undermining the rule of law.
While the United States continues to provide funding
to UNODC for counter-narcotics activities in
Afghanistan, we urge others to provide extra-budgetary
contributions too. Over the next year we will seek to
provide together $450 million in direct assistance for
counter-narcotics efforts in Afghanistan.

We face enormous challenges as we seek to curb
the increasing power of ruthless transnational crime
and drug groups that threaten our communities. The
United States is committed to combating these threats
by working to dismantle criminal networks, develop
law enforcement capabilities and help strengthen
institutions and governance. This is a serious
challenge, but we are intensifying our work with our
fellow Member States and our international partners to
meet it.

