Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I am honoured to have the
opportunity, as the new Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), to brief the Security Council on the work of the
Committee since our most recent briefing, in October
2018 (see S/PV.8364). I wish to express my gratitude to
Ambassador Llorenty 80112 and his staff for their solid
chairmanship of the Committee, followed by a smooth
handover to my team.

Since the adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), on
28 April 2004, significant progress has been made
towards its implementation. Nevertheless, in resolution
2325 (2016), the Security Council recognized that the
full and effective implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) is a long-term task that will require continual
efforts at the national, regional and international levels.
To date, 182 countries have submitted initial reports
providing the Committee with information on the
measures they have taken, or plan to take, to comply
with their obligations under the resolution.

In October 2018, two 1540 experts visited the
Republic of Mali in order to support the national
authorities in drafting a first national report on the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Additionally,
on behalf of the Committee, I recently sent letters to
non-reporting States seeking their first reports as
well as notes verbales to reporting States requesting
up-to-date information to assist the Committee in its
preparations for the next comprehensive review.

The effectiveness of the practical steps taken
at the national level to implement the resolution is
also important. One helpful step in this regard is for
States to develop voluntary national implementation
action plans, as encouraged by paragraph 5 ofresolution
2325 (2016). It helps to identify actions to close any
gaps and vulnerabilities in regulations and national
control frameworks, foster interagency cooperation
and identify areas where assistance may be required.
Work on these action plans with Member States, at
their request, will continue this year, including at a
recent workshop hosted by Togo and an upcoming one
in Madagascar.

Exchanges and sharing of information by Member
States constitute one ofthe Committee's core activities.
The Member States are in the best position to identify
effective national practices and to share them with
the 1540 Committee and other partners. During
the past few years, an increasing number of States
have undertaken peer reviews. The Committee looks
forward to an opportunity to hear about the results
of their peer review meetings later this year, and will
continue to support States that wish to conduct them,
where appropriate.

The 1540 Committee recognizes the role of the
national points of contact in support of the resolution's
implementation. One hundred and five Member States
have informed the Committee of their points of contact,
including updated information from Hungary, India
and Turkey. In addition, the Committee has developed
regional training courses for points of contact and, in
cooperation with the African Union, will organize a
training for 1540 points of contact of English-speaking
African States next week.

In facilitating assistance to foster Member States'
capacity to implement their 1540 obligations, the
Committee has a matchmaking role and seeks to match
assistance requests from States with offers from States
or international, regional or subregional organizations.
Pending assistance requests are displayed on the
1540 homepage and date back to 2010. Today, 21
assistance requests are still open. However, assistance
related to specific elements of 1540 implementation
has been provided in the past several months to two
of the requesting countries - namely, Togo and
Zambia - on strategic trade control enforcement, both
in cooperation with the World Customs Organization
and other organizations. The 1540 Committee webpage
also includes lists of States and international, regional
and subregional organizations that have offered
assistance in general. I can also report that in 2018,
nine new requests for assistance were submitted to the
Committee by Bahrain, Burundi, Equatorial Guinea,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Iraq, Madagascar, Mali and
Peru. Several requests consisted of invitations to the
Committee and its Group of Experts to visit those States
to discuss assistance on implementation measures.

To date, 47 States and 16 organizations have informed
the Committee about general assistance programmes
that could help facilitate their implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee stands ready
to add new programmes or updated information on
available assistance to its website and to facilitate this
process, I have sent letters on behalf of the Committee
to Member States and international, regional and
subregional organizations, soliciting their updated
offers of assistance.

The Committee and its Group of Experts have
maintained the momentum of outreach events in the
course of fulfilling the Committee's programme of
work and will continue to do so with the adoption of this
year's programme of work on 6 February. In 2018, there
was a total of 51 events in which the Chair, Committee
members and the Group of Experts participated.

A top priority is direct engagement with States
through visits and national roundtables, at their
invitation. In the course of this process, increased use
has been made of the support that can be offered by
regional organizations, including the United Nations
Office for Disarmament Affairs regional centres. For
example, the Committee cooperated with the Regional
Centre for Peace, Disarmament and Development in
Latin America and the Caribbean during a national
round table on the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in Peru last November, and more recently with
the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa in Equatorial Guinea and Togo
during awareness-raising and national capacity-building
workshops in December and January, respectively.

We have also intensified our engagement with
international organizations whose mandates are
directly related to resolution 1540 (2004), such as the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Biological
Weapons Convention Implementation Support Unit,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
INTERPOL, the World Customs Organization and
the World Health Organization. The Committee has
encouraged these organizations to highlight obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004) in their model legislation
or guidelines and, in December, during an inception
workshop on the African Union Comprehensive Model
Law on Weapons of Mass Destruction, held in Vienna.

Transparency and outreach are vital to the effective
implementation of the resolution. With that in mind, the
Committee is seeking ways to make better use of its
website. For example, we have continued to publish a
quarterly message from the Chair that goes out to those
of the wider 1540 network who have registered their
interest, including civil society.

A special effort is being made to engage
parliamentarians through, for example, the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU). In this regard, my
predecessor took the opportunity to deliver a video
message in October to the 139th Assembly of the
IPU in Geneva. Active engagement between the State
and relevant sectors of society, including industry,
academia and professional associations, could also
contribute to the full implementation of obligations
under resolution 1540 (2004). Further, an effective
partnership between States and industry is vital to
successful non-proliferation efforts. The Wiesbaden
process conferences foster such a dialogue between
States and industry.

In accordance with paragraph 3 of resolution
1977 (2011), the Security Council, inter alia, decided
to conduct a review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) prior to the expiry of the
Committee's mandate in April 2021. In this regard,
the Committee is mandated to include, if necessary,
recommendations on adjustments to its mandate
and submit to the Security Council a report on the
conclusions of the review. The Committee has begun
its preparatory work for the upcoming comprehensive
review of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

I will conclude my remarks by drawing the
Council's attention to the work of the Group of Experts
supporting the Committee in its implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004). The Group is now operating
with nine experts, including the Coordinator appointed
by the Secretary-General last May. I regret to inform
the Council that the experts' contracts for 2019 were
issued for only four months, owing to ongoing financial
challenges affecting the United Nations, which is of
serious concern. If this situation is not remedied before
the end of April, the Committee will face serious
challenges in meeting its obligations to the Security
Council and realizing the activities agreed upon under
its current programme of work.

