Mr. Ehouzou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation would like to extend to you, Mr. President,
our sincere congratulations on the work that you have
doing over the month of your presidency. Your actions
were appreciated in this forum. I would also like to
express the great appreciation of the Government of
Benin to the Secretary-General for this comprehensive
and analytical report on the complex issue of small
arms and light weapons, which was introduced to us by
Ms. Hannelore Hoppe, Director and Deputy to the High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.

Small arms and light weapons continue to have a
tragic impact on the course of contemporary history.
Their steady proliferation makes them a genuine
scourge in terms of the large number of human lives
that they claim every year. These weapons have
become veritable weapons of mass destruction in very
real terms. Small arms help to make States fragile.
They encourage the emergence of harmful phenomena
that hamper the efforts of the international community
to advance sustainable human development.

We thank the Secretary-General for having
summarized, in his highly instructive report, the bold
actions undertaken within the framework of the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. A number of relatively new trends which are
highlighted in the report are of the greatest concern to
us. I shall cite a few of them in support of my
reasoning.

First of all, let us note that small arms production
and the potential markets are now closer together.
Here, the Secretary-General underscored the increase
in craft production outside the legal framework. Let us
note also the progressive blurring of the distinction
between the trade and the brokering of small arms and
of the demarcation line between underdevelopment,
instability, fragility, crisis and war, as well as the
mixed impact of operations to collect and destroy small
weapons. Evidence of this blurring is provided by the
situation in various countries where such destruction is
taking place.

This state of affairs is linked to the quantity of
stocks now in circulation. Here, it is important to adopt
effective measures to prevent illicit transfers,
particularly by strengthening control over the end use,
which is often an extremely important measure and one
that must become a priority for States wishing to
effectively contain the proliferation of light weapons.

These observations have guided the approach of
the Government of Benin, which has taken an
inventory of the craft producers of weapons at the
national level and maintains a rigorous oversight of
their activities. Those activities are now regulated by a
decree and are thus contained within the limits of what
is acceptable in terms of existing international
standards, at the level of the United Nations and of
subregional cooperation, in particular the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Convention, the ratification procedure for which is
well under way.

Benin fully concurs with the analysis of the
Secretary-General regarding the need for an integrated
approach in efforts to exert control over the underlying
causes and especially the structural causes of conflicts
and armed violence, while also dealing effectively with
the factors influencing the demand for light weapons.
That is the major purpose of resolution 1625 (2005) on
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, which we
need to systematically implement, in conjunction with
the international instruments now in force and with the
actors in this area, while at the same time establishing
synergies between security, development and human
rights, and taking into account the problem of armed
violence in strategies to combat poverty and to
promote the rule of law and human security.

Considering the action of the Security Council,
we need to underscore the importance of the embargoes
imposed on weapons as a means for putting an end to
conflicts and facilitating efforts for their ultimate
settlement. We welcome the supporting measures
adopted by the Security Council to prevail on States to
respect and implement embargoes consistently,
wherever possible. The effectiveness of such regulation
will be strengthened if it includes an appraisal of the
effective capacity of the neighbouring States to
implement these embargoes in order to establish the
required support.

Regarding the social impact of small arms, we
welcome the emphasis in the report on attention to the
protection of vulnerable individuals affected by armed
violence. Benin has contributed through resolution
1612 (2005) in order to establish a framework for
protecting children in armed conflicts. Aside from
young girls and women, whose specific problems are
taken into account in resolution 1325 (2000), we
should also pay attention to the situation of the elderly.
They suffer greatly as a result of armed conflicts.
Particular attention should be paid to their needs, even
if they are presumed to be covered by the efforts
undertaken for the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts.

The international community must find ways of
substantially reducing the number of arms currently in
circulation in the world by increasingly sensitizing the
manufacturing countries and by supporting initiatives
to this end. Benin subscribes to the Geneva Declaration
on Armed Violence and Development and to the
African Declaration adopted in Nairobi on 31 October
2007 on the same subject. It is also our View that
setting quantitative goals would be most useful.

The next biennial meeting of States to review the
Programme of Action of the United Nations on Small
Arms and Light Weapons could serve as a framework
for an in-depth discussion on this issue. It should also
devote particular attention to the weaknesses in the
Programme of Action, as noted in the report of the
Secretary-General.

Quantitative goals can be made credible by
specifically identifying surplus stocks of both arms and
ammunition and proceeding to destroy them. The
Security Council has an important role to play here,
together with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
reform of the security sector in vulnerable or
post-conflict States would provide an appropriate
framework for a systematic international action in this
area. That could considerably improve the prospects of
mankind in the area of international peace and security.

