The President (Spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Timor-Leste, in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item, without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Santos
(Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2007/513, containing the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
formation of the new Government in Timor-Leste
resulting from the 30 June 2007 legislative
elections. It also congratulates the appointment of
the new Cabinet of Timor-Leste, led by Prime
Minister Xanana Gusmao. The Council further
congratulates the people of Timor-Leste for
demonstrating their strong commitment to peace
and democracy. It expresses its readiness to work
with the new Government of Timor-Leste in
achieving its goals and tackling critical
2

challenges, including in its development efforts,
facing the country.

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation for the role played by the National
Electoral Commission, the Technical Secretariat
for Electoral Administration and the United
Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT) during the presidential and
parliamentary elections in Timor-Leste. The
Council commends the invaluable support
provided for the preparations and holding of the
elections by regional and international partners. It
also expresses its appreciation for the role played
by domestic and international electoral observers.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need
for all parties to resolve any disputes through
exclusively peaceful channels and within the
framework of democratic institutions and calls
upon the people of Timor-Leste to refrain from
violence and work together in order to ensure
security.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government, Parliament, political parties and the
people of Timor-Leste to work together and
engage in political dialogue and consolidate
peace, democracy, rule of law, sustainable social
and economic development and national
reconciliation in the country. The Security
Council reaffirms the need for justice and
accountability, and underlines the importance of
the implementation of the recommendations of
the United Nations Independent Special
Commission of Inquiry report of 2006.

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General on the work of UNMIT.
It also encourages UNMIT to continue to
cooperate and coordinate with the United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes as well as all
relevant partners to support the Government of
Timor-Leste in implementing a national
development plan and addressing challenges
facing the country, in particular security sector
reform, strengthening of the justice sector, the
promotion of democratic governance, resolving
the issue of internally displaced persons and the
pursuit of sustainable development.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for UNMIT in its work, and appreciates
07-50015
the continued efforts by the Secretary-General
and his Special Representative to ensure the full
implementation of the mandate of UNMIT."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/33.
07-50015

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

