Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like to begin, Mr. President, by
congratulating you at the outset of the Egyptian

presidency and thanking the Chinese delegation once
again for its capable leadership of the Security Council's
work in July. I am also grateful for the words of support
taddressed to me and to my colleagues. I have already
had the opportunity to assure my colleagues that I
have come here with the hope and intention of working
constructively with them with the aim of helping to
solve the problems facing the international community.

It so happens that the first official meetings of
both the General Assembly and the Security Council
that I have had the opportunity to participate in as
Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation
have been devoted to the issue of combating terrorism.
For our country, the topic is an absolute priority for the
forum of the United Nations, where we must all work
diligently to unite the international community's efforts
to confront that universal evil.

We are grateful to Egypt for organizing today's
meeting and to today's briefers for their substantive
contributions to our discussion. We would like to
highlight the activities of the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate in proposing and
providing specialized technical assistance. We firmly
believe that the United Nations system's newly created
Office for Counter-Terrorism will enable us to expand
their work's impact, and the efforts that have been
undertaken through INTERPOL and other specialized
organizations are significant in that regard.

My delegation supported the Council's adoption
today ofresolution 2370 (2017), on the issue ofweapons
falling into terrorists' hands. As the resolution notes,
States should work to suppress any kind of support
to terrorists, including commercial, economic and
financial ties. In laying out these provisions, the
Security Council also urges all States to intensify their
efforts to secure their borders. We hope that message
will be heard. Despite the international community's
efforts, the massive flow of arms to terrorists from
outside continues. The fight against the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and the other terrorist
organizations in Syria and Iraq has gone on almost
as long as the Second World War, and in all that time,
the militants have never experienced any disruption
in their supply of arms and ammunition, including
the most up-to-date types, and they continue to use
these weapons. Only today the Russian Embassy in
Damascus was again shelled from terrorist groups'
positions. Even with the effective offensive currently
under way, ISIL's resources, though reduced, are still
unacceptably high. They can be enabled only through
a large-scale, systematic, reliable supply of arms to
terrorists that continues even now and would not be
possible without the connivance, if not the assistance,
of State organizations.

The solution to the problem that we have
consistently proposed for years is an initiative that
would impose a comprehensive trade and economic
embargo on territories controlled by ISIL, with the
goal of banning the import and export of all goods to or
from ISIL-controlled territories and imposing financial
restrictions and strengthening border security in Syria
and Iraq's neighbours, because the information that
we have shows that their border controls have been
ineffective. Unfortunately, our proposals, which could
significantly strengthen the impact of the resolution
we have adopted today, have once again met with
stubborn resistance from various delegations. Their
unwillingness to go down the road of tightening
controls on the circulation of arms in the region plays
into the hands of international terrorism. We continue
to be puzzled as to why this is the case and whose
interests it serves. We are wasting an opportunity to
make an effective joint decision. More than that, we
are wasting time. The terrorists are exploiting this
situation, preserving their combat potential and clearly
assuming that some of their sponsors, including State
structures, will continue to support them.

Of course, international arms dealers such as, for
example, private companies, significantly enhanced
their activities on a background of the crises that
have erupted in the Middle East and North Africa and
that feed the wanton greed of the world's notorious
arms lords. In their pursuit of profits or political
goals, suppliers frequently prefer to turn a blind eye
to whatever the destination and purpose of the batch
of arms they are exporting may be or whose hands it
may ultimately end up in. The numerous middlemen
operating in the market sometimes fail to exercise the
appropriate responsibilityonsibility. States that have
accumulated excessive stockpiles of small arms and
light weapons are not always as careful as they should
be with their supplies. The production of weapons
under expired licences, or without a licence from the
countries that own the relevant technology, continues
to be a serious problem. With a view to solving these
problems, we have repeatedly proposed strengthening
the concrete national measures in Security Council
resolutions that could significantly reduce the risk of
small arms and light weapons falling into the hands of
terrorist organizations. We note that in adopting today's
resolution, the Council has acknowledged the need for
improving legislation in these areas, but any specifics
have gone by the board.

We all know that where there are military conflicts
of this type, private companies can do only what States
allowed them to do. Russia has sufficient information
from trustworthy sources to confirm the fact that
there are States that condone such activity and that a
number of countries' interested agencies, including
special services, are frequently involved in supplying
arms to terrorists. If necessary, we are ready to share
particulars of that data. We consider such a state of
affairs unacceptable and we will continue to take steps
aimed at using the international community's joint
efforts to deal with it.

In conclusion, we would once again like to affirm
Russia's willingness to cooperate multilaterally
with the United Nations counter-terrorism entities,
including on the problem of arms supplies, and we urge
all delegations to work actively to that end.

