Ms. Colakovie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this meeting of the Security Council to discuss such a
significant issue. Noting that our last debate on this
issue took place in 2006 (see S/PV.5474) and that this
very month we deliberated the progress and
contributions of the ad hoc tribunals, as well as the
achievements of and challenges to the Security Council
counter-terrorism committees, we find that the timing
of this debate is excellent. It will further reflect the
Council's dedication and support to strengthening and
promoting the rule of law. Bosnia and Herzegovina
fully supports you in this initiative.

I would like to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Migiro and the Under-Secretary-Generai for Legal
Affairs and Legal Counsel of the United Nations,
Patricia O'Brien, for their contribution to today's
discussion, as we consider their comments to be of
great value and significance.

Today's discussion focuses on three key issues:
the promotion of the rule of law in conflict and post-
conflict situations, international justice and the
peaceful settlement of disputes, and the efficiency and
credibility of sanctions regimes. Allow me to address
each of these issues.

Promoting justice and the rule of law means
enabling a fragile post-conflict society to avoid further
damage from the conflict and to reconstruct itself and
build sustainable peace. As Kofi Annan stated in 2004:

"[W]e cannot forget the political context. Peace
and stability can prevail only if the causes of
conflict are addressed in a legitimate and fair
manner - causes such as ethnic discrimination,
gross disparities in the distribution of wealth and
social services, abuse of power, and the denial of
the right to property or citizenship." (S/PV.5052, 
p- 3)

Peacebuilding activities in a post-conflict society
must be integrated, coordinated and based on a
comprehensive approach to the establishment of good
governance, the rule of law and promotion of human
rights, institution-building, security sector reform,
economic reconstruction and development. The right to
return and the reintegration of refugees and internally
displaced persons should be an integral part of
peacebuilding strategies.

Particular attention should be paid to the full
integration of the rule of law component into the
strategic and operational planning of peace operations.
We believe that the policy framework of United
Nations activities in the area of the rule of law should
be based on careful consideration of the country's
needs and capacities, taking into account the social,
cultural and justice system specificities of the host
country and complying with international norms and
standards.

Transitional justice and restoring the capacities
and legitimacy of national institutions should continue
to be at the very heart of the United Nations rule of law
action aiming to establish lasting peace in post-conflict
countries. Coming to terms with a legacy of gross
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law and ensuring accountability are of
crucial importance for stabilization, reconciliation and
overall reinforcement of the peace process.

Strengthening the rule of law must be
accompanied by efforts to ensure sufficient capacity
and bring to justice the perpetrators of the most serious
crimes. We firmly believe that addressing impunity is
of the utmost importance. Therefore, the establishment
and support of independent national judicial
institutions that will be given the task of dealing with
the domestic processing of gross human rights
violations is of vital significance for addressing the
legacy of the past. Also, in order to ensure the
effectiveness of these institutions, other segments of
the judiciary system - such as humane prison
services, victim protection and reparations measures,
juvenile justice systems or institutions in charge of
civil claims - should be simultaneously developed.

Bosnia and Herzegovina considers the
establishment of the Office of Rule of Law and
Security Institutions within the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations to be a positive step towards
assuring effective coordination in providing
comprehensive United Nations rule of law engagement
during conflict and post-conflict recovery. We look
forward to working together in further strengthening
the work of the Office.

It is crucial to emphasize the central role of the
United Nation in strengthening international justice
and the importance it gives to promoting the peaceful
settlement of disputes. We recall that one of the main
purposes of this Organization, which is firmly
embedded in its main document, is to establish
conditions under which justice and respect for the
obligations arising from treaties and other sources of

international law can be maintained. As stated in the
Secretary-General's report of 2006 (S/2006/980),
the Charter of the United Nations, together with
the four pillars of the modern international legal
system - international human rights law, international
humanitarian law, international criminal law and
international refugee law - and the wealth of the
United Nations human rights, crime prevention and
criminal justice standards set out a normative
foundation and provides the means for all United
Nations activities in support of justice and the rule of
law.

Following on from this, I should like to touch
upon the judicial institution that, as a principal organ
of the United Nations and as set out in Chapter XIV of
the Charter, has a fundamental role in determining the
law, establishing facts and defining legal situations.
The judgments and the growing number of advisory
opinions of the International Court of Justice have
made a valuable contribution to the cause of peace and
the building of an international order based on law
through the unified interpretation and clarification of
the key points of international law.

Bearing in mind the fundamental principle of the
international legal system that States settle their
differences through peaceful means, we can only agree
with the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1) and
recognize once again the important role of the Court in
those peaceful settlements.

This also prompts us to underline the very strong
connection and overlapping roles that the Council and
the Court have in those situations. As the majority of
disputes are perceived to be politically charged and
diplomatically sensitive, many of them are by their
nature concerned with supposed legal rights, in which
cases Chapter VI of the Charter refers to the Court as
the principal organ for their settlement. Since the
enforcement of the Court's judgments lies ultimately
with the Security Council, we are of the opinion that
the Council, through its own actions, should give
stronger emphasis and exploit this body more as one of
the central tools in maintaining peace and security.

Finally in this regard, it is of great importance to
underline that States today have many different means
of settling their disputes, through a vast range of highly
specialized forums and tribunals. We believe that all
efforts towards peaceful resolution further promote the

culture of dialogue and contribute to respect for the
principles of international law. We therefore strongly
encourage the further strengthening of existing
international dispute settlement mechanisms and the
use of alternative mechanisms and informal systems
for peaceful dispute resolution.

As I stated at the outset, this month the Council
also deliberated upon several other topics that, in their
nature, represent essential aspects of promoting and
strengthening the rule of law and international justice.
It once again emphasized the significant contribution
of the ad hoc tribunals to international criminal law, as
they have brought and continue to bring justice to
countries deeply wounded by mass atrocities and
serious violations of international humanitarian law.
Their role in fighting impunity and restoring peace and
the rule of law is indisputable, and their legacy has
been honoured with the creation of the International
Criminal Court (ICC).

We hope that this Court will draw its strength not
only from the vast experience of the ad hoc tribunals,
but also from the experience of the mixed tribunals and
truth and reconciliation commissions, as they proved
on numerous occasions to be a valuable tool in the
quest for justice.

In that context, the Council should consider
measures to further support and strengthen the ICC's
important role in the international judicial system. We
urge all those States which have not yet done so to
consider becoming party to the Rome Statute, but we
also take this opportunity to remind them of their
obligations under Article 103 of the Charter.

As many rightly pointed out during the debate in
2006 (5474th meeting), it is of the utmost importance
that sanctions are adopted in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter and that they have a high
degree of legitimacy. At that time, the Council was
urged to improve the efficiency and credibility of
sanctions regimes. Today, we can rightly say that the
Council has made a significant achievement in that
regard: resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904 (2009) have
contributed further to the credibility of the Al-Qaida
and Taliban sanctions regime. They targeted the key
issues of concern for the Council in 2006 and, What is
of even greater importance, set up an institution to
address the issue of listing and delisting in an efficient
and transparent way.
By establishing the institution of the
Ombudsperson, this Council took a step further in
strengthening the work of the sanctions regime,
underlining its firm commitment to and respect for due
process guarantees. Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes
the appointment of Judge Kimberly Prost to that
position and firmly believes that her work within the
framework of the sanctions committee will further
compliment our commitment to the rule of law.

It is important to emphasize that, besides the
establishment of the Ombudsperson, the Committee
continues to tirelessly address the requirements set out
in resolution 1822 (2008), always bearing in mind the
importance of fair and transparent procedures when
deliberating on the facts and evidence provided.

As a result, and drawing from the example of the
Al Qaida and Taliban sanctions regime, we support
other sanctions regimes in their practice of periodically
reviewing and evaluating targeted sanctions. All the
efforts they invest in further improving their
procedures and their careful consideration and
deliberation in this sensitive matter firmly underline
and demonstrate the credibility of such measures.

Finally, I would like to reiterate the importance
that Bosnia and Herzegovina attaches to justice and the
rule of law in rebuilding post-conflict societies, as
parts of a comprehensive approach to peacebuilding
strategies aimed at achieving reconciliation, stability
and lasting, irreversible peace.

