Mr. Albar (Malaysia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Mr. President, for convening this
Summit. I am privileged to participate in this historic
Summit of the Security Council on ensuring an
effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa, coinciding with the Millennium
Summit. The consideration of this important subject is
most timely in the context of the many challenges
confronting the Security Council in the twenty-first
century.

Clearly, for the Council to be more effective in
discharging its responsibilities, there must be the
necessary political will on the part of members.
Measures undertaken in conflict resolution around the
world, particularly in Africa, given the number and
intensity of armed conflicts in the region, must be
concerted and comprehensive. Such political will
should be manifested irrespective of where the conflict
occurs. Each conflict situation must be treated in an
even-handed manner, lest the Council be accused of
being selective in its approach. It is particularly
pertinent on the part of the permanent members of the
Council to manifest this political will, without which
the Council will be rendered ineffective. A paralysis in
the Council must be avoided at all costs if it is to fulfil
its Charter-mandated responsibilities. For this purpose,
members of the Council, especially the permanent
members, who can block a consensus, must put aside
their narrow political interests and join the consensus,
in the larger interests of the international community.

There is also a need for strong and sustained
support on the part of the members of the international
community for the actions of the Council. This is
particularly relevant when sanctioning peacekeeping
operations, whose success is predicated on the
willingness of Member States to contribute troops and
other personnel as well as equipment. My country has
done its part in this regard and will continue to do so.
The Council and the Secretariat should make every
effort to engage Member States, particularly potential
troop contributors, at the planning stage and at every
subsequent phase of the operation. Indeed,
peacekeeping operations should be established only
when there is assurance of adequate and well-trained
and equipped personnel from Member States.
Dispatching peacekeeping missions at less than
required strength and with inadequate equipment can
result in tragic consequences, as was demonstrated in
the early phase of the peacekeeping operation in Sierra
Leone.

Undoubtedly, continued and sustained financial
and material support by Member States is essential in
ensuring the operational success of peacekeeping.
What should not happen is for the effectiveness of
peacekeeping missions to be jeopardized on account of
a lack of necessary funding. At the same time, every
effort should be made for the early reimbursement of
the costs of peacekeeping operations borne by
developing countries. Delayed reimbursement, which
has often lasted a number of years, may have a
negative impact on Member States' ability and
willingness to participate in future peacekeeping
operations.

Another challenge that must be addressed is the
lack of institutional capacity on the part of the United
Nations Secretariat, both in planning and managing
peacekeeping missions. It is imperative that the
Secretariat, particularly the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, which is seriously
understaffed, be further strengthened, commensurate
with its enormous tasks. Immediate attention should be
given to information-gathering and analysis, planning
for future operations, and operational support for
ongoing peacekeeping.

The need for quality staff in order to ensure high
standards of professionalism, upon which much of the
success of peacekeeping missions depends, should not
be understated. Clearly, sound decisions can be made
by the Council only on the basis of prompt and quality
information and analysis by the Secretariat. The
Council should be presented with information and
analysis in an objective and clear manner.

Briefings on the military aspects of peacekeeping
operations should be given whenever possible by the
commander of the operation. This would be of
tremendous value to Council members and troop-
contributing countries in understanding the effect of
their commitments.

Beyond the deployment of peacekeeping
missions, there is a need for the Council and the United
Nations as a whole to develop strategies for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding, including those for
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants. This will go a long way in efforts to
implement post-conflict measures to consolidate and
sustain peace.

There is a need to develop strategies for conflict
prevention in close coordination with regional or
subregional organizations. In this regard, the
Secretary-General's recommendations on conflict
prevention contained in his Millennium report and in
his statement to the Council's debate on conflict
prevention in July 2000 are most pertinent and should
be given serious consideration. My delegation also
commends the bold recommendations of the Brahimi
Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, which
deserve early consideration.

My delegation fully supports the views expressed
by a number of Council members on the need to ensure
that the sanctions regimes are reviewed, eased or lifted
so as not to prolong the agony of the affected peoples.
The Council has to face the challenge of translating its
pronouncements into concrete action. This unique and
historic meeting of the Council would be best served if,
following this Summit, focused and prompt follow-up
measures were taken. This would result in a positive
and tangible contribution by the Council to the
objectives of the Millennium Summit.

