Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour and a great pleasure to see you, Sir, presiding
over the Security Council meeting today.

We are glad for the opportunity to hear President
Kagame today, and we welcome the good proposals he
has shared with us to settle the conflict. We have also
noted with great interest the meeting a few days ago
between President Kagame and President Kabila. That
dialogue, if it continues, as we ardently hope it will,
will bring us closer to a settlement of the conflict.
These are encouraging signs at a time when, as the
Secretary-General said last week and again today, a
certain calm has returned to the conflict zones of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Today there is
undoubtedly an opportunity to be seized to relaunch the
Lusaka Agreement process. But how long will this
last?

Relaunching the Lusaka Agreement process and
then finally proceeding to phase II of the deployment
of the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) requires
the disengagement and withdrawal of foreign forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo without
further delay, pursuant to the accords signed by the
parties to the conflict and to the relevant Security
Council resolutions. I wish to recall that these
resolutions, particularly Security Council 1304 (2000),
state that that withdrawal should be progressive and
phased and should begin with the withdrawal of troops
of the uninvited States in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. The States to which these resolutions apply
cannot subject their implementation to conditions.

The Security Council has already had the
opportunity to emphasize that the presence of forces of
aggression in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
unacceptable. It is the Council's duty to recall
everywhere and at all times the fundamental principles
of the Charter: respect for the independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity of States. We have
noted the willingness expressed by the Rwandese
authorities to withdraw their forces from Pweto once
the MONUC observers arrive. The latter must be
deployed quickly, and we will follow closely how
Rwanda lives up to its commitment. That will be a first
step in the right direction.

I would also like to recall the concerns expressed
by the Council about massive violations of human
rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
particularly in the eastern part of the country. There is
also concern about information on large-scale
plundering of the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly in Kivu. In this
connection, we all await with great interest the
conclusions and recommendations of the panel of
experts created by the Security Council, which must
submit its report at the end of March.

The return to stability in the region therefore
requires first of all the implementation of the
withdrawal of foreign forces. However, the internal
aspect of the Lusaka Agreement is also necessary. In
this connection, we welcome the encouraging
commitments made by President Kabila, whose
implementation we will follow with interest. It should
be noted, nonetheless, that establishing an internal
dialogue involving all political actors must not be
confined to the Democratic Republic of the Congo
alone. This is one of the keys to the settlement of the
crisis for the region as a whole.

President Kagame rightly emphasizes his
concerns about security. His concerns are legitimate,
and the Security Council is aware of Rwanda's need to
enjoy peace and stability within its borders that would
not be jeopardized by foreign threats. We have all
noted the efforts of the Rwandese authorities to settle
the matter of the former Rwandan Armed Forces
(FAR), and we are pleased to note that many of them
have already been reintegrated into the Rwandan
Patriotic Army. We must continue in that direction. The
matter of the ex-FAR and the Interahamwe militias will
also undoubtedly have to be resolved, in part, between
the Kinshasa and Kigali authorities. But assistance
from the international community will also be needed.
In this spirit, the Security Council has made it known
that it is ready to envisage the deployment of MONUC
personnel to Goma or Bukavu along the border with
Rwanda.

The coming weeks must enable long-overdue
progress to be made in settling this conflict. The
meeting between the Security Council and the Political
Committee of the Lusaka Agreement in two weeks, and
the meetings and summits preceding it, should, if all
the parties to the conflict make the necessary efforts,
lead to an irreversible process of disengagement and
withdrawal that will bring us closer to a resolution of
this crisis. On this point, I would like to assure
President Kagame of France's resolve to work for such
a settlement, which must take into account the interests
and legitimate concerns of all the parties involved.

