Mr. Maduekwe (Nigeria): On behalf of President
Umaru Musa Yar'Adua, may I commend South
Africa's initiative in bringing this crucial subject
before the Security Council. By the same token, I
commend Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his

comprehensive report on the issue. The report is
pertinent not only in terms of its proposals for
prospective cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), but also in proffering
targeted recommendations to improve that partnership.
We are pleased with the effort of the Secretary-General
and agree with his viewpoint that there are outstanding
questions about the nature of the partnership between
the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the AU, that need to be clarified.

African problems are truly global problems, in
ways that grim statistics render more disturbingly
challenging than the current pace of global response
would suggest, especially in the area of funding,
despite the untiring best efforts of the Secretary-
General. Nigeria therefore fully endorses this debate,
as it affords us an opportunity to redefine and realign
the major strands of the evolving strategic partnership
between the AU and the United Nations. Indeed, the
foundations of the functional relationship we seek
between the United Nations and the AU are rooted in
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations and
in the Constitutive Act of the African Union. In a
global village, one cannot afford unsafe compounds; it
is too close for comfort.

Regional organizations like the AU are uniquely
placed to tackle threats to regional peace and security.
Nigeria recognizes the efficacy of complementarities
and partnerships in that regard. That is part of the
reason that we have been steadfast in our commitment
to the United Nations, the AU and subregional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States.

We believe that this debate, which comes at a
time of reduced shooting wars in Africa, serves to
energize a momentum which we should build upon. On
its part, the African Union has sufficiently
demonstrated political will for the peaceful resolution
of the continent's problems. What is now required is
for the international community to put its money where
its mouth is.

I would like to conclude by calling for very close
cooperation between the United Nations and the AU in
drafting a resolution that will not only meet the
challenges of today but address our dreams for
tomorrow, namely, that of a more peaceful world
underpinned by an ever-closer partnership between the
United Nations and regional organizations, in

particular the African Union. I am confident that we
can achieve that objective. But that will be difficult if
the United Nations continues to ignore the wisdom of
the African proverb that says that you do not shave a
man's head in his absence. If close to 60 per cent of the
Security Council's time is devoted to African issues,
and Africa is the only continent not represented on the
Security Council in the permanent category, how can
the United Nations make progress on the issue of
African ownership of its own problems and solutions
without addressing that imbalance?

