Mr. Moriko (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
My delegation thanks Mr. Ghassan Salame, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL),
for his briefing, enlightening the Council about the
security, humanitarian and political challenges the
country faces. We also thank Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established in 1970
(2011), concerning Libya, for presenting its thirty-fifth
periodic report.

On 21 May, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General drew the Council's attention to
the consequences of the clashes between the troops
of General Khalifa Haftar and the forces of the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister
Faiez Serraj (see S/PV.8530). More than two months
after the beginning of hostilities for control of the
capital, Tripoli, the Libyan crisis is more than ever at
an impasse and does not appear to offer any prospects
for a settlement in the short term.

Like other members of the Security Council, Cote
d'Ivoire has always expressed its deep concern about
the consequences of the fighting on the security and
humanitarian fronts, as well as on the political process
to resolve the crisis in Libya. Indeed, the military
escalation centred around Tripoli has left more than
1,000 dead and 5,000 wounded, including nearly
400 civilians.

My delegation calls on all Member States to strongly
protest against the plight of sub-Saharan migrants, who
are victims of all kinds of abuses and violations of their
rights in detention centres. Fifty-three of them died on
2and 3 July in the bombing of the Tajoura detention
centre. Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its strong condemnation
of that attack and calls for a credible and independent
investigation in order to bring the perpetrators of these
acts before the appropriate courts, in accordance with
international law. My country also earnestly hopes that
migrants rescued from Libya's coastline will be treated
with dignity and that their repatriation to their countries
of origin, with their consent, will be conducted in close
collaboration with specialized United Nations agencies
in accordance with international norms.

The proven deliveries of arms to parties to the
conflict, in flagrant violation of the arms embargo,
remain a source of deep concern for my country,
especially as they are fuelling a conflict whose
stalemate is preventing a ceasefire and the immediate
resumption of inter-Libyan dialogue. In this regard,
Cote d'Ivoire calls for the effective implementation
of resolution 2473 (2019), adopted unanimously on
10 June, which prescribes the strict implementation
of the arms embargo on the high seas off the coast of
Libya. We also call for a rapid political settlement to
the current crisis in order to allow State authority to
extend throughout national territory so as to prevent the
dangerous and unremitting sanctuarization of areas for
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in some parts
of the country.

While recalling the primary responsibility of the
Security Council to maintain of international peace
and security, Cote d'Ivoire encourages Mr. Ghassan
Salame to further cooperate with the African Union,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations and the strategic framework for
conflict resolution that was signed on 19 April 2017.
In this respect, my delegation recalls the communique'
issued by the Peace and Security Council ofthe African
Union following its meeting on 5 July, underlining the
central role played by that continental organization
and its readiness to work in close collaboration with
the countries of the region to find lasting solutions
to the crisis in Libya. I also take this opportunity to
echo the concerns expressed by the African Union
High-Level Committee on Libya regarding persistent
external interference that undermines efforts to achieve
a ceasefire and launch a fruitful dialogue, which are the
conditions for restoring peace and stability.

In conclusion, cote d'Ivoire reaffirms its support
for the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ghassan Salame, as well as all UNSMIL
personnel, for their commitment to finding solutions
to the multiple challenges Libya is facing. My country
remains convinced that, however complex they may be,
the challenges that stand in the way of peace and stability
in Libya can be overcome through strong national
ownership of the political process to end the crisis and
resolute support from the international community.

