The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests that
the Foreign Minister of the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. I
have also received letters from the representatives of
Australia, Canada, Germany, India, Italy, New Zealand,
Norway and Pakistan, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rassoul
(Afghanistan) took a seat at the Council table;
the representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: On behalf of the Council, I wish
to extend a warm welcome to His Excellency
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Staffan de Mistura, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. De Mistura to take a seat at the
Council table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Pedro Serrano, head of the delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Serrano to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2010/463, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Afghanistan and
its implications for international peace and security.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Staffan de Mistura, to whom I now
give the floor.


