Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I am grateful for this
opportunity to introduce the Secretary-General's report
(S/2012/ 160) and to brief the Security Council before
the end of my assignment to Sierra Leone. Let me
therefore start by making some personal remarks.

Sierra Leone is a beautiful country and Sierra
Leoneans are lovely and kind people. Wherever I went
during my almost four years in Sierra Leone, I felt
welcomed and was often struck by the openness and
2

directness of its people, irrespective of whether they
were subsistence farmers or traditional leaders in so-
called up-country, or whether politicians or
intellectuals in the cities. It was also gratifying to see
how strong the role of women in Sierra Leonean
society is.

In the past, I have often spoken about the
exceptional successes Sierra Leone has achieved over
the past 10 years and the contributions that its three
post-conflict Governments have made - first by the
two previous Governments led by former President
Kabbah in restoring peace to the country, in rebuilding
State institutions and in uniting its deeply traumatized
people, and now by the Government led by President
Koroma, which is transforming the country
economically.

As I leave Sierra Leone, I would like to pay
tribute, first of all, to its people for their resilience and
their extraordinary ability to forgive and reconcile.
Today, victims and perpetrators live side by side in
communities all over the country. For anyone who
travels through Sierra Leone these days, it would be
difficult to imagine the horrors of the civil war that
occurred only 10 years ago.

We must recognize that Sierra Leone would not
be where it is today without the contributions of its
paramount chiefs and other traditional leaders, of its
Muslim and Christian religious leaders, of its diverse
and active civil society, of its women's organizations,
of its often courageous journalists and of the country's
artists, above all its musicians.

Sierra Leone benefited from one of the best truth
and reconciliation processes, and from a series of
independent democratic institutions - such as its
Human Rights Commission, its National Electoral
Commission, its Political Parties Registration
Commission, its Independent Media Commission and
its the National Youth Commission, to mention only a
few. Let me express here my deepest respect for all
their important work.

However, one does not have to search very
widely to discover the tremendous trauma that 17 years
of one-party rule, 13 military coups and, finally,
11 years of civil war have left behind. I remember the
void in Steven's voice, a young electrician, when he
spoke of his longing to find his father, who disappeared
when he, his mother and his three siblings fled the
rebel onslaught. I remember Aisha, now in her 20s,
12-27246
whose eyes still fill with tears when she speaks in pain
of how her family handed her over to rebels in order to
save the rest of the family from attack; she was barely
14 years old. I remember Jusu, who is today my
security guard, who chose to defend his daughter from
being taken by rebel forces and was penalized for it by
having both his hands hacked off with a machete. And
there are the amputee football players who play on the
beaches of Freetown every Saturday, and who will
always receive one with their happy songs despite
being terribly poor and remaining socially
marginalized. Most of them had their limbs cut off
when they were small children. There is no bitterness
in the country, but there is a lot of human dignity. I will
always remember them all with the greatest admiration
and a deep sense of humility.

The forthcoming elections in November will be
the major test for the country's nascent democracy.
Sierra Leone must pass this crucial test in its history
without allowing the demons of the past to re-emerge.
In that regard, Sierra Leone's political elites bear a
heavy responsibility not to let the elections derail
Sierra Leone's future. No doubt, most of that
responsibility rests on the shoulders of President
Koroma and his main challenger for the presidency,
Mr. Julius Maada Bio. What they decide and do over
the coming months will determine much of the
direction that the country will take. There will be times
when they will have to put national interest over that of
their political parties and over their own political
ambitions.

Against that backdrop, reports that the
Government imported assault weapons worth millions
of dollars in January to equip a recently enlarged
paramilitary wing of its police, the Operational
Services Division (OSD), are of great concern. Sierra
Leone is under no arms embargo. However, given
Sierra Leone's progress in establishing peace and
security throughout the country and its relatively low
crime rate, it is not clear why the police would need
such weapons, especially as the shipment, according to
a leaked bill of lading, appears to include heavy
machine guns and even grenade launchers. I would
urge the Government to fully clarify those reports and,
if true, to explain the intended use of the weapons.

An enlarged, heavily armed and, allegedly,
ethnically imbalanced OSD risks undermining the good
work that has been done by the Sierra Leone Police in
creating a modern and operationally independent police
12-27246

force that serves the people of Sierra Leone. A people-
oriented police was one of the important pillars of the
successful security sector reforms after the civil war.
Because of the country's painful experience, the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission had suggested that
Sierra Leone abandon all forms of paramilitary police
force. Such lessons from the past should be taken more
seriously.

There are other worrying signs, such as the attack
on the opposition presidential candidate in September
of last year, which was followed by an attack by
members of the opposition on property of the
governing party, the questionable imposition of a three-
month ban on all political party rallies, violence
surrounding a win by the opposition in by-elections for
the Freetown City Council and the recent break-in into
a newspaper critical of the Government.

In all of that, the main opposition must be aware
that it, too, is entering into the elections with
considerable historical baggage. It should therefore
help to dispel existing mistrust and allay fears that may
linger about any perceived ill intentions. I call on the
opposition to be more forthcoming in engaging the
Government and to refrain from a politics of
boycotting the Parliament and other meetings.

Furthermore, the hardening tone of the political
rhetoric is of concern. All sides must refrain from
extreme and unsubstantiated accusations. Given Sierra
Leone's past, such allegations that either side mobilizes
ex-combatants or traditional warriors, such as the
Kamajors, are serious matters and should not be taken
lightly. True or not, politics is based on perceptions.
Such allegations must be laid to rest to prevent them
from creating a sense of insecurity. Both sides may
consider organizing a multiparty investigation, similar
to the approach that was taken in tackling alleged
illegal cross-border voter registration along the
Liberian border.

The all-important elections will take place in only
eight months, and the country would greatly benefit
from a number of confidence-building measures. First,
the Government and opposition parties must continue
to carry out a dialogue and, in the interests of the
country as a whole, openly discuss controversial issues
that could derail the elections. That must also include
face-to-face meetings between President Koroma and
his main challenger, Mr. Maada Bio. Senior politicians
simply do not have the luxury of stalling such dialogue
3
because of personal clashes in the past while expecting
ordinary Sierra Leoneans to reconcile.

The discussions must be designed to reassure the
general public that both the Government and the
opposition are working together in creating an
atmosphere for the elections that is free from any
intimidation and in which each citizen can make his or
her own choice without fear of retribution. In that
context, the Government should seek to clarify several
reports criticizing the role that the Minister of Internal
Affairs has allegedly played in various violent clashes.
As the Ministry for Internal Affairs is responsible for
internal security during the elections, it must have the
trust of the general public.

Secondly, all parties should revert to the spirit
and letter of the joint communique signed on 2 April
2009 between the two main political parties, which was
wholeheartedly embraced by the President. That would
essentially include three aspects. The first is that the
report of the Shears-Moses Commission of Inquiry,
which investigated the events that led to the most
serious outbreak, in March 2009, of political violence
since the end of the civil war, must be issued without
any further delay. It has now been two years since the
report was submitted to the President. In spite of
repeated pledges to publish it, most recently in a
meeting the President held with the entire diplomatic
corps in October 2011, that has not yet been done.

The second aspect is the establishment of an
independent police complaints commission, which was
agreed to in the joint communique but has now been
delayed for three years. I welcome recent indications
that the Police Council has taken initial steps.
However, if that is to have a calming impact on the
November elections, there is no further time to lose.

As part of the Joint Communique, President
Koroma took the bold decision to turn the Government
radio station into a fully independent national public
broadcaster, the Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation
(SLBC). In exchange, all political party radio stations
were closed. That move drew much international
praise, and Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon joined the
President for the inauguration of the SLBC, in June
2010. Unfortunately, the SLBC has not fulfilled
expectations, and bad management practices have
begun to impact negatively on the quality and
impartiality of its programmes. Recent personnel
decisions made so close to the elections raise further
questions about the SLBC's political neutrality. I hope
that the Government will stick to its courageous
decision and help to bring about the necessary
adjustments in the board and management of the SLBC
that would make it a truly national and independent
voice of Sierra Leone.

The third aspect entails all political parties
working together in support of the country's electoral
management bodies, above all the National Electoral
Commission and the Political Parties Registration
Commission, and preventing any negative actions that
could undermine their credibility in the eyes of the
general public.

The revised election law must be approved by
Parliament without further delay. I call on all political
parties to join hands in the Parliament and approve the
revised law by consensus. The revised law has taken
into consideration concerns that had been raised
regarding the old law. Joint parliamentary approval
would send a positive signal to the public that the
elections can be held in a calm atmosphere.

Finally, all political leaders should continue
supporting various cross-party initiatives, especially
now in the heat of the election. I commend here in
particular the work of the All Political Parties Youth
Association and the A11 Political Party Women's
Association. The first has made inroads in uniting party
youth wings to prevent the misuse of youth in
fomenting violence, and the second has greatly
contributed to raising political awareness for a stronger
role for women in politics.

Sierra Leone is not only a lovely country; it also
has the potential to be a very rich country. It is well
endowed with natural resources and rich in mineral
resources; it has large stretches of unused fertile land,
one of the world's highest rates of rainfall, a large
natural deep-sea harbour and a rich seafront.

But all its riches are also the country's potential
curse. The huge investments in the mining industry
have raised expectations, but so far have not benefited
the wider population. In fact, as a result of high
inflation rates, the purchasing power of fixed-income
earners and the poor appears to have decreased
considerably over the last few years, and no real
difference has been made in getting youth engaged in
the development of the country. Sierra Leone's
persistent poverty levels are a factor that breeds unrest
and could undo all the successes of the past.
12-27246
In the 19603, South Korea had a lower per capita
income than most West African countries. Today it is
the tenth largest industrial country in the world. Korean
Prime Minister Kim Hwang-sik recently explained the
secret behind such success - education, education,
and again education. My final advice to Sierra Leone
would therefore be for it to invest in education -
invest in universal primary and secondary education,
invest in technical colleges and invest in universities.
Education would help to turn Sierra Leone's natural
and mineral wealth into sustainable development. It
would help to lift people out of poverty and help to
create new opportunities. It would help to reduce unfair
income distribution and it could help to maintain a
democratic and peaceful society. Freetown was once
called the Athens of Africa - why not again?

States Members of the United Nations have
invested heavily in Sierra Leone's peaceful future, both
in blood and treasure. On a per capita basis, Sierra
Leone has probably received more funding for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding than any other country
in the world. That is the international community's
investment, and we all have to make sure that that
investment pays a rich dividend. Sierra Leone has the
potential to become a success story, but it will need the
continued support and vigilance of the Security
Council - especially at this time of elections. For the
benefit of Sierra Leone, but also in our own interest,
we have to see this effort through.

Let me end here by thanking the Secretary-
General for his confidence in me and the Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, Mr. Lynn
Pascoe, for all his support. I would like to thank the
Chairperson of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Rishchynski, for his interest in the
country and his support. I have enjoyed working with
my colleagues from the diplomatic corps and the
development group in Freetown and thank them for
their confidence. My very special thanks go, of course,
to my colleagues in the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone and the United
Nations country team, who have been so supportive to
me. I thank them for their commitment to the future of
Sierra Leone and to the principles of the United
Nations. I would like especially to mention here my
Sierra Leonean colleagues who have remained loyal to
the Organization even at difficult times.
12-27246

But, above all, let me thank all Sierra Leoneans
for having welcomed me in their midst and for having
given me three and a half lovely years in their country.
I miss the smiles and warmth of Sierra Leoneans, I
miss the regular breakfasts with the country's
politicians, I miss the discussions at the round table at
the Palaver Hut, and I also miss the regular tete-a-tete
meetings that I had with President Koroma.

It would not be truthful if I did not admit that I
also miss the spicy cassava leaves, the beautiful
beaches and a good game of tennis at Hill Station,
where there was a primary school next door with
children's laughter floating in the background. I will
miss Kpaka, Stevens, Jusu and Obama, my gardener.

Let me wish Mama Salone the very best for its
future and hope that the Almighty protects and guides
the country and its people. After so many difficult
years, Sierra Leoneans deserve a brighter, prosperous
and peaceful future.

