The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations, among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the report
of the Secretary-General (8/2001/926) and
commends the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the commander of the
international security presence (KFOR) for their
ongoing efforts to implement fully resolution
1244 (1999).

The Security Council welcomes the
elections to be held on 17 November as a basis
for the establishment of democratic self-
governing institutions as specified in the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government, under which the people of Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, will enjoy
substantial autonomy in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). It emphasizes the
responsibility of Kosovo's elected leaders to
respect fully the final status provisions of
resolution 1244 (1999). It reaffirms its
commitment to the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999), which remains the basis
for building Kosovo's future.

The Security Council supports the
continuing efforts by the United Nations Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR to improve
public security, including through the
confiscation of weapons and the package of
legislation to combat violence, and to facilitate
the return of displaced Serbs and members of
other communities. It calls on Kosovo Albanian
leaders to actively support these efforts to
promote security and return, and to combat
extremism, including terrorist activities. It further
calls on all Kosovo leaders to publicly condemn
violence and ethnic intolerance. It calls on them
to exert all their influence and assume their
responsibility for actively ensuring that the
campaign and the elections are peaceful,
democratic and inclusive. It stresses the need for
proper organization and adequate security for the
elections on 17 November, and welcomes
continuing steps taken in that regard.

The Security Council calls on all women
and men of Kosovo to vote in the elections of 17
November. This will provide for the broadest
possible representation of Views in the
institutions of the provisional self-government.
The Security Council commends the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
particularly President Kostunica, for their
encouragement to the Kosovo Serb community to
register, which confirms the multi-ethnic
character of Kosovo, and calls on them to also
actively encourage the fullest possible
participation in the vote. It underlines the
importance, for the Kosovo Serb community, to
integrate in the structures set up by UNMIK. It
encourages the further development of a
constructive dialogue between UNMIK and the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

The Security Council will remain actively
seized of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security under the symbol S/PRST/200l/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15pm.
