Mr. Pence (United States of America): I am here
today on behalf of the President of the United States
of America to discuss the ongoing crisis in Venezuela
and to call on this body to stand up for democracy and
the rule of law in that nation, which has suffered so
much. Article 24 of the Charter of the United Nations
confers on the Security Council the responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
As another American president said many years ago,
the United Nations is designed to make possible lasting
freedom and independence for all its Members. It is
why this institution exists.

For six long years, the people of Venezuela have
suffered under the heavy hand of oppression. The
Maduro regime's socialist policies have shrunk their
economy by nearly half. In what was once one of the
wealthiest countries in our hemisphere, nine out of
10 people now live in poverty. The average Venezuelan
has lost more than 20 pounds through deprivation and
malnutrition. Thousands of Venezuelan children are
starving and, at this very hour, infants in hospitals across
Venezuela are dying for lack of basic medical care. The
Maduro regime, in the midst of this deprivation and
suffering, has used violence and intimidation against
anyone who opposes their actions. In the past three
months, the regime has thrown at least 1,255 people
into jail without any due process of law and killed at
least 40 protesters. That is the nature of the regime that
we are dealing with. But the Maduro regime is a threat
not only to the Venezuelan people, it is a threat to the
peace and security of the wider region as well.

The rising desperation in Venezuela has fuelled
a mass exodus, the likes of which we have never
seen in the western hemisphere. More than 3 million
Venezuelans have now abandoned their beloved
country, and, if things do not get better, it is estimated
that another 2 million are expected to follow before the
year is out. Travelling through the region, my wife and I
witnessed the results of that deprivation first-hand. At a
church in Manaus, Brazil, we spoke to families who had
fled the deprivation in Venezuela. I will never forget
when a father looked at me, with his two young boys
standing at his side, and said how hard it was as a father
to come home at the end of the day and say, "we are not
eating today". As he said it, his two little boys looked
up and nodded, recalling those days. Then there was the
day in Cartagena, Colombia, at another mission, where
Venezuelan people had fled the deprivation in their
country, and a grandmother told me how it had gotten so
bad in their small rural town that her grandchildren had
to rise at 4 am. to get a single ticket to purchase a piece
of bread at 4 pm. Their children were starving, and she
gathered up her grandchildren and fled the country.

Those are the stories the world deserves to hear of
deprivation. The truth is that those who stay behind are
subject to crime, violence and lawlessness. Thieves in
Venezuela do not rob banks; they rob restaurants for
food. Vicious gangs and so-called "colectivos" have
turned the streets into war zones. Venezuela now has
the highest murder rate in the world, as more than 70
people are murdered every single day. Venezuela is a
failed State, and as history teaches, failed States know
no boundaries. Drug traffickers, criminal gangs, even
terrorists, such as Hizbullah, are exploiting the chaos
in Venezuela to gain a foothold in the region and export
crime and violence. Were we to let the crisis continue,
the chaos and suffering would only spread.

The struggle in Venezuela is between dictatorship
and democracy. Nicolas Maduro is a dictator with no
legitimate claim to power. And Nicolas Maduro must
go. But for all the suffering, the Venezuelan people
across Venezuela - in cities large and small - people
are rising up. They are rising up against their oppression
and deprivation. Today those courageous Venezuelans
will take to the streets again. As President Trump said
not long ago, the fight for freedom in Venezuela has
just begun.

Just three short months ago, after Nicolas
Maduro was sworn into his second term, which was
stolen in a sham election, the National Assembly, the
only duly elected body in Venezuela, exercised its
power under the Constitution and recognized a new
leader, interim President Juan Guaido'. All across the
western hemisphere nations have been standing up
to declare their support for President Guaido. Last
month, the Inter-American Development Bank voted
to see President Guaido's representative. Earlier this
week, the Group of Seven issued a statement saying
the May 2018 presidential election lacked legitimacy,
and called on the Madura regime to, in their words,
"restore the authority of the National Assembly". And
just yesterday, the Organization of American States,
the oldest regional organization in the world, voted to
stand with the Venezuelan people and recognize the
Guaido Government's representative as the only true
representative of Venezuela.

At President Trump's direction, the United States
was proud to be the first nation to recognize interim
President Juan Guaido as the legitimate President
of Venezuela. Today, 54 nations have joined us. The
western hemisphere has spoken with a clear voice.
Nations across the world have spoken. It is time for the
United Nations to speak.

In February, the United States introduced a draft
resolution at the Security Council that called for the
restoration of democracy in Venezuela and for the
Maduro regime to allow all humanitarian aid into the
country. The draft resolution was not adopted (see S/PV.8476). Two nations that continue to back that
brutal regime used their vetoes to stop this body from
taking action. And while Russia and China continue
to obstruct the Security Council, rogue States, like
Iran and Cuba, are doing all they can to prop up the
Maduro regime.

For decades, Cuba has tried to create client States
across our region. While normal countries export
goods, Cuba exports tyranny and strong-arm tactics.
Even now Cuban military and intelligence services
train, support and equip Venezuela's secret police as
they silence opponents, jail and torture members of
the opposition.

Last week, the United States took action to sanction
ships transporting Venezuelan oil to Cuba. And soon,
at President Trump's direction, the United States will
announce additional action to hold Cuba accountable
for its malign influence in Venezuela. This week, in
addition to Cuba's action, Caracas received a delegation
from Iran to begin direct air service between those two
rogue capitals. That blacklisted airline is used to export
terrorism by Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps,
which President Trump formally designated as a foreign
terrorist organization on Monday. That is the company
that Nicolas Maduro keeps, and those nations continue
to prop him up even as he inflicts suffering on the
Venezuelan people. Just two months ago, the dictator
in Caracas actually danced while his own citizens were
shot and truckloads of desperately needed food and
medicine burned.

Unlike nations that are subsidizing the dictator
in Caracas, under the leadership of President Donald
Trump, the United States has been standing with the
people of Venezuela. And we are committed to helping
the families and communities that have been devastated
by the Maduro regime. At this point, the United States
has sanctioned more than a 150 Government officials and
organizations loyal to the dictator. We have sanctioned
State-owned businesses to prevent the Maduro regime
from robbing the people of what is rightfully theirs, and
as President Trump has said, we can be a lot tougher.

In addition, the United States has positioned
more than 500 metric tons of food and humanitarian
supplies on the Venezuelan border, ready for immediate
distribution. We have provided $200 million in aid to
support displaced Venezuelans and the host communities
that support them. And today, under President Trump's
direction, the United States is announcing an additional
$60 million in humanitarian assistance to address that
crisis. The United States of America will continue to
exert all diplomatic and economic pressure to bring
about a peaceful transition to democracy in Venezuela,
but all options are on the table.

Up to this point, while other international bodies
have acted, the United Nations and the Security Council
have refused to act. But now that nations across this
hemisphere have spoken, the time has come for the
United Nations to recognize interim President Juan
Guaido as the legitimate President of Venezuela and
seat his representative in this body. This body should
revoke the credentials of Venezuela's representative
to the United Nations, recognize interim President
Juan Guaido and seat the representative of the free
Venezuelan Government in this body without delay.

With all due respect, Ambassador Moncada should
not be at this meeting. He should return to Venezuela
and tell Nicolas Maduro that his time is up. It is time
for him to go.

The men, women and children of Venezuela are
suffering. Their economy has been destroyed. Their
democracy has been destroyed. The people of Venezuela
are paying the price, and soon the region and the world
will pay the price if we fail to act. There can be no
bystanders to this history. For the peace and security of
our hemisphere, the world and the United Nations must
stand with the people of Venezuela.

To that end, the United States is preparing a
draft resolution recognizing the legitimacy of the
Government of interim President Juan Guaido, and
today we urge every member of the Security Council
and all States Members of the United Nations to
support it and to stand with the Venezuelan people as
they rise up to restore freedom, democracy and libertad
to their nation. And this they are doing. They are rising
up against intimidation and violence. Even today the
people of Venezuela are taking to the streets to march
for freedom. Despite all the hardship, they continue to
march. Despite all of the oppression, they continue to
march. Despite the opposition, they continue to march
with courage and strength, because they are marching
to freedom. In the words of Simon Bolivar, a people
that loves freedom will in the end be free.

But now it is time for the United Nations to act
and for the world to stand with the people of Venezuela
as they march to freedom. History has taught us what
happens when the civilized nations of the world allow
oppression to go unchecked. When a brutal dictatorship
arose in Europe, the world failed to respond, and
millions of lives were lost in the Second World War.
This very institution was forged in the aftermath of
that war so that nations around the world could come
together and confront dictatorship with one voice. And
so the United States is calling on the United Nations to
live up to its very purpose, reject the failed leadership
of Nicolas Maduro, stand with us and with nations
across the world and this hemisphere to help the people
of Venezuela forge a brighter future.

As President Trump has said, "Ifthe righteous many
do not confront the wicked few, then evil will triumph".
When decent people and nations become bystanders
to history, the forces of destruction only gather power
and strength. So let us today rededicate ourselves to
the mission upon which this body was founded - to
maintain international peace and security. We have
confidence that if we do that, if we make every effort
to be at peace, the God ofpeace will guide us and bless
us, today, tomorrow and always.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the honour of
addressing the Council today. May God bless the people
of Venezuela. May God bless us all.

