Mr. Burian (Slovakia): Let me express our
appreciation to Belgium for putting the theme of
natural resources and conflict before the Security
Council for consideration. We believe that this issue is
relevant and important to the work of the Security
Council in dealing with various conflicts and post-
conflict situations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later on by the representative of Germany
on behalf of the presidency of the European Union. Let
me add a few additional comments that my delegation
considers it important to underline.

It has been well documented in various Security
Council resolutions and through various existing
commodity-based sanctions regimes that natural
resources often play a role in causing, or even further
fuelling, conflicts. Natural resources can also cause a
relapse into conflict in situations where the post-
conflict management of natural resources is not
addressed properly. Illegal exploitation deprives the
population of affected States of the wealth that belongs
to them. It is no coincidence that, after years of
plundering, post-conflict countries like Sierra Leone,
Guinea Bissau, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Liberia are among to the most impoverished
nations in the world.

It would be too simplistic to see the problem of
the illegal exploitation of natural resources as a
separate or isolated issue. We have witnessed a number
of conflicts where the absence of the rule of law, the
presence of undemocratic and unaccountable
Governments and weak security services have helped
the illegal exploitation of natural resources to flourish.
Therefore, issues like democracy, good governance, the
rule of law, transparency and fair distribution of
revenues and security-sector reform are inextricably
linked to the problem we are discussing today.

It is especially important that in post-conflict
States resources are transformed into a positive tool
that can be used to encourage peace and stability and to
contribute to development and post-conflict recovery.
In that regard, we believe that peacebuilding initiatives
should address the reform of resource management at
an early stage in post-conflict situations and
peacebuilding. The management of resources must be
more transparent, efficient and equitable, and subject to
both the rule of law and good governance. In that
regard, it will be important for the Peacebuilding
Commission to pay special attention to the issue of
natural resources in its efforts to manage post-conflict
situations.

Through resolution 1625 (2005), the Security
Council has already reaffirmed its determination to
take action against the illegal exploitation of, and
trafficking in, natural resources and high-value
commodities in areas where it contributes to the
outbreak, escalation or continuation of armed conflict.
In that regard, the Security Council should closely
monitor and analyse the role of resources in conflicts
that are on the agenda of the Council and take the
necessary action.

One of the crucial areas of the Security Council's
responsibility in this field is related to the
implementation of sanctions regimes.

Sanctions can be instrumental in limiting the
scope of a conflict and maintaining and restoring peace
and stability. At the same time, sanctions should be
utilized with much more prudence so as not to further
degrade the humanitarian conditions of the victims of
the conflict. In the field of individual sanctions more
should be done to target those who benefit from the
illegal exploitation of natural resources. There is also
scope for doing more to improve the effectiveness of
sanctions regimes. Let us in this regard recall the
valuable work performed by the working group on
general issues of sanctions.

Last, but not least, the international community
as a whole, and neighbouring countries in particular,
have a crucial role to play in ensuring that resources
are not used to sustain intra-State wars, or even begin
wars. Much more attention needs to be paid to cross-
border smuggling and trade in natural resources.
International mechanisms, such as the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme or the Extractive
Industries Transparency Initiative, should be further
promoted.

There is another important question: the impunity
of those responsible for looting minerals from
resource-rich countries. These individuals should be
prosecuted alongside those who are being brought to
justice for major violations of human rights or
international humanitarian law.

This all underlines the importance of today's
thematic debate on natural resources, further supports
the shift concerning natural resources and conflict from
country-specific treatment to thematic consideration by
the Security Council and points to the need for a more
integrated role of the Council in this field and a more
coherent United Nations approach.

To conclude, we support the draft presidential
statement prepared by the Belgian presidency, and we
support further Security Council discussion on natural
resources and conflict and on ways of improving the
United Nations response in this respect.

