Mr. Pleuger (Germany): I would like, Sir, to
welcome your presence in the Chair, which underlines
the importance that you attach to this meeting. We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his very concise and comprehensive
briefing. From what we have heard, I feel that, in the
future as well, Kosovo will require our full attention.

I would like to state at the outset that we fully
subscribe to the statement that the Italian presidency of
the European Union will shortly make on behalf of the
Union.

The document on standards for Kosovo that
Mr. Holkeri presented in Pristina last week is another
major step forward. Germany very much appreciates
the care the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) took in drafting that
document and the close consultations it undertook with
the Contact Group as it was put into its final form.
Working groups that are focused on achieving these
standards have begun to meet, and the drafting of the
implementation plan is under way. We hope the plan
can be finished in the next few weeks, because the
momentum created must be maintained or, even better,
accelerated if the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government are to achieve what is necessary before the
first possible review date, around the middle of 2005.

Germany commends both Pristina and Belgrade
for their positive attitude towards the review
mechanism and for voicing their acceptance of the
underlying rules and the tentative time frame.
However, we are disappointed that, despite extensive
consultations between UNMIK and Belgrade, Serbia
and Montenegro seems not to support the document on
standards for Kosovo for the time being. A11 sides have
much to gain if the blueprint is made into reality and a
democratic and tolerant Kosovo that respects the rule
of law is created. Only this outcome offers the prospect
of economic development and the prospect for the
return of refugees to their homes. Only this offers the
prospect that members of all ethnic communities can
travel wherever they wish without being subjected to
humiliation or violence. And most important, only this
outcome offers the prospect that the future for both
Belgrade and Pristina lies in Europe, rather than in
isolation and stagnation.

We strongly supported the European Union (EU)
Council decision this month to endorse the standards.
The implementation of the standards will be closely
linked to the EU association process, and, conversely,
obstruction of efforts to meet the standards will surely
have serious consequences for aspirations to draw
closer to Europe. The immediate priority now, besides
finishing the implementation plan, is starting the direct
dialogue at the level of expert working groups. It is
very disappointing indeed that months after the official
launch of the talks between Pristina and Belgrade,
groups from both sides, focused on issues such as
energy, transportation and returns, have not yet begun
to meet. I can only repeat what I have said in previous
meetings: in addition to being an essential standard that
must be fulfilled, direct dialogue is the best way to
build trust between the parties. The approach taken to
direct dialogue is one of the earliest indicators on
which we and the rest of the international community
will judge the sincerity of efforts by Pristina and
Belgrade. We strongly urge both parties to ensure that
the groups begin meeting in the next few weeks.

Another area where we would like to see rapid
progress is privatization. Privatization is so important
to economic development in Kosovo. We understand
that the vast majority of outstanding privatization
contracts could be approved, and that another round of
privatization tenders could be organized, without great
difficulty. Under those circumstances, we urge the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government and the
Kosovo Trust Agency board to certify and transfer to
private owners, as soon as possible, all those socially-
owned enterprises that have been duly screened by the
Kosovo Trust Agency.

In my remarks to the Council in October (see S/PV.4853), I stressed the importance Germany places
on political decentralization in Kosovo. We were
pleased that the Council of Europe presented proposals
last month that can serve as a good basis to begin work
on this issue. As UNMIK works these proposals into a
concrete plan, it will have to focus on the special
factors that make decentralization so difficult and yet
so important in Kosovo.

The task will be to accommodate the needs of the
various ethnic communities while not creating further
institutional barriers to reconciliation. Since effective
decentralization will be so important to achieving the
standards, it is essential to implement it soon.

Next year will be a critical one for Kosovo.
Pristina, Belgrade and, above all, the people of
Kosovo, have much to gain if the standards are
achieved quickly.

