Ms. Lee (Singapore): We would like to begin by
welcoming the Foreign Minister of Liberia to today's
debate, as well as the members of the Panel of Experts
and representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA).

Madam President, we thank you for arranging this
public debate on the Panel of Experts' report on
Liberia. The importance of such public debates lies in
the fact that they allow non-Security Council members
to help the Council in its assessment of the value of
such reports. Such panels have become a very
important tool of the Security Council in relation to the
follow-up to the sanctions imposed by the Council. We
need name only two panels to show the impact which
such panels have had on the work of the Council: the
Mollander Panel, which issued the first of the name-
and-shame panel reports and paved the way for the
setting up of the Angola Monitoring Mechanism, and
the Sierra Leone Panel report, which paved the way for
Security Council resolution 1343 (2001), on Liberia.
The report that we are discussing today also fits that
category.

It has been almost exactly eight months since
resolution 1343 (2001) was adopted. The resolution
imposed targeted sanctions on Liberia, with the main
objective of dissuading the Government of Liberia
from supporting non-State actors, particularly the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF), from activities
which were destabilizing the situation in neighbouring
Sierra Leone and the West African region as a whole.
The evidence of the Government of Liberia's activities
and the recommendations for the measures that were
imposed on Liberia under resolution 1343 (2001) were
mostly derived from the report (S/2000/ll95) of the
Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone, whose membership
is very similar to that of the Panel before us today. We
are highlighting this to show that, given the possible
consequences of such reports, we have to take them
very seriously.
Under its mandate, the key goals of the Panel
were to collect information on illegal activities,
investigate violations of the current sanctions imposed
on Liberia, collect information on the compliance by
the Government of Liberia with the demands of the
resolution, and investigate possible links between the
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
economic activity in Liberia and the fuelling of conflict
in Sierra Leone and neighbouring countries.

Today's consideration of the Panel's report is
therefore a timely juncture for all of us to reflect on
and consider the full impact of the sanctions on
Liberia, including the unintended effect of these
sanctions on the ordinary people of Liberia. In this
respect, we also have before us today the Secretary-
General's report requested under paragraph 13 (a) of
resolution 1343 (2001). This report was written
pursuant to the Council's request for

"a preliminary assessment of the potential
economic, humanitarian and social impact on the
Liberian population of possible follow-up action
by the Security Council in the areas of
investigation indicated in paragraph 19 (c) of the
resolution." (S/2001/939,para.1)

Those areas are basically the other areas of economic
activity that the Panel was investigating as possible
links to the fuelling of conflict in Sierra Leone and
neighbouring countries. We note that this is the first
time that a pre-assessment report has been requested,
and we hope that this practice will continue.

We would like to commend the Panel for its very
comprehensive report and extensive use of case
studies. Several speakers have already commented on
the specific contents and recommendations of the
report. Thus, in our statement today we will not go into
these details, but we would like to raise the larger
question of how we assess the work of such panels.

It is not so much a question of costs, although we
note that this report cost the United Nations $890,900,
which makes it the second most expensive report, after
the Angola Monitoring Mechanism report, which cost
the United Nations about $1.6 million. The third most
expensive was the Sierra Leone Panel report, which
cost about $717,300. Our assessment should involve a
greater dimension, relating to the usefulness of the
information that is contained in the Panel's report.

For example, what happened to the information
obtained in the Fowler report? We note that the Angola
Monitoring Mechanism that has been set up has
collected even more information on sanctions
violations. But our question is, what next? What
happens to the information and evidence obtained by
such panels? Is there a database in the United Nations
that stores this? And what is the point of having such a
database if it is only stored and not acted on? We ask
these questions because it seems to us that the same
criminal networks are referred to time and again,
beginning with the Fowler report and cited in both the
Sierra Leone Panel report, as well as in the report of
the Panel before us today. In fact, in the Sierra Leone
Panel report it was noted that

"Where diamonds are concerned, there have been
three Expert Panels examining many of the same
issues concurrently. There has been useful
collaboration, but there has also been overlap and
duplication." (S/2000/1195, para. 17)

That point was made in December 2000. Little has
been done to address it.

Another negative consequence of this lack of
follow-up on the information obtained is that it further
damages the credibility of the United Nations sanctions
themselves. Our perception is that there appears to be
only a one-off impact to the work of such panels. The
countries investigated need only show compliance for
the duration of a panel's mandate because there is no
one to monitor them after the panel leaves. Even when
the panel documents evidence of sanctions-busting, the
lack of follow-up means that any attempt to show
respect for the sanctions disappears as soon as the
spotlight is off these countries.

While the implementation of sanctions is the
responsibility of each Member State, their effectiveness
could be increased if there were some monitoring of
the sanctions. A permanent monitoring mechanism in
the Secretariat could also assist States in their
implementation and ensure a more professional and
thorough approach to the implementation of the
sanctions, rather than ad hoc panels. It could also assist
the Council's work by being the link with sanctions
committees and other United Nations agencies. Clearly,
there should be better coordination within the United
Nations system, not only to avoid duplication and save
on costs, but also to ensure that there is consistency
and follow-up.
Here we would like to express our regret that the
report of the Council's Working Group on sanctions -
which, under the note by the President issued on 17
April 2000 in document S/2000/319, was due on 30
November 2000 - has yet to be issued. While we do
not intend to compromise its eventual issuance, we
would like to state that the report would be very
relevant to the issues we have raised today, particularly
on the issue of consistency in the implementation of
United Nations sanctions, and for ensuring that we
make full use of the work of such panels. The report
would also be relevant for addressing the next issue
that we will be raising: what we can and should do to
limit the unintended effects of sanctions when they
have a negative - whether direct or indirect - impact
on the humanitarian situation of the targeted country.

Although the sanctions were designed to
specifically target the illegal activities of Liberia's
elite, and not intended to harm the lives of ordinary
Liberians, the report of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has confirmed the
bleak humanitarian situation of the population in
Liberia. The OCHA report has also highlighted that
international aid to Liberia has been drastically
reduced, falling from $138 million in 1998 to less than
$30 million this year. By December many aid agencies
will be pulling out of Liberia due to lack of funds. At
an Arria-formula meeting with some non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) on Liberia on 17 October 2001,
one NGO highlighted that Liberia is "starved of aid".

Of course, strictly speaking, the humanitarian
situation in Liberia and the United Nations sanctions
that were imposed on Liberia are separate issues and
should be treated as such. Furthermore, indications are
that the Government of Liberia's own corrupt practices
have strongly discouraged international aid donors.
Many donors are also suffering from donor fatigue, and
the situation in Liberia does not seem to have improved
after close to a decade. Yet, clearly, the Council cannot
ignore the growing humanitarian crisis in Liberia, not
least because OCHA has also highlighted that the
Government of Liberia has mounted a successful
information campaign to blame the economic and
social woes of the country on the United Nations
sanctions.

Sanctions are one of the most important tools of
the Council, and the Council needs to ensure that its
objectives are achieved without disproportionate
humanitarian effects. We should be careful not to allow
the United Nations sanctions on Liberia to suffer the
same fate as the Iraqi sanctions regime. Both from the
humanitarian perspective and for the credibility of the
United Nations and its sanctions, while the Security
Council must maintain the rigour and aims of its
sanctions regimes, it cannot ignore the news of the
rapidly deteriorating humanitarian situation in Liberia,
especially when the Government of Liberia has laid the
blame for it at the Council's doorstep.

One possible follow-up to the Panel's findings
and those of the OCHA report on the humanitarian
situation in Liberia is for Members of the United
Nations to send suggestions to the Chairman of the
sanctions Committee for its consideration. This is
because the sanctions Committee is mandated under
paragraph 14 (g) of Security Council resolution 1343
(2001) to make recommendations to the Council to
make recommendations to the Council on ways to limit
unintended effects, if any, of the measures on the
Liberian population. As such, any suggestions by the
United Nations membership would be useful to the
discussions of the sanctions Committee on the
necessary follow-up to the reports.

We thank the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for giving us the figures
on the 2000 Consolidated Appeal in relation to Liberia,
which reveal that only 5 per cent of the required $7.2
million, or only about $360,000, was received. This
highlights the point we made earlier on donor fatigue
in respect of Liberia. We should therefore be honest in
our assessment of whether the people of Liberia are
suffering because of the unintended effects of the
United Nations sanctions. We should also question why
the humanitarian agencies are pulling out from Liberia
and if there is something we can do to arrest this trend.
We hope that either the Panel members or OCHA could
provide some information on this.

In the meanwhile, my delegation will continue to
study in greater detail the findings in the Panel's report
and its key recommendations relating to transportation,
weapons, timber, diamonds, the maritime registry and
the travel ban. We will work with the other members of
the Council to ensure their appropriate follow-up and
to ensure due consideration of the OCHA report.

Finally, my delegation wishes to highlight that we
have already followed up one of the case studies
mentioned in the Panel's report on alleged sanctions
violations. Although the case in question relates to a
transaction in August 1999, we have written to the
Chairman of the Panel to request the relevant
documents necessary for our further investigations on
the possible implication of a Singapore-based
company, Borneo Jaya Pte Ltd., in sanctions-busting.
This request is contained in document S/2001/1043,
which was referred to at the opening of this debate.

As a responsible member of the United Nations,
Singapore holds all Security Council resolutions in the
highest regard and is committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1343 (2001).

