Mr. How (Singapore): Like previous speakers, I
thank Under-Secretary-General Sir Kieran for his
briefing.

We commend the United Nations Political Office
in Bougainville (UNPOB) for the role it has played and
continues to play in Bougainville. Ambassador Sinclair
and his small team have not only helped to make
possible a significant level of stability and security in
Bougainville, but also have slowly but gradually
moved the conflict towards resolution. We also applaud
the unwavering support and assistance extended by
Papua New Guinea's neighbours towards this end.

Since the signing of the Peace Agreement in
August 2001, the Papua New Guinea Government has
demonstrated its commitment to the Agreement in very
concrete ways. For example, it has delivered on its
undertaking to make the necessary constitutional
amendments to enshrine its agreements with the
Bougainville parties, clearing the way for subsequent
steps of the Peace Agreement to proceed. The
Government is also working closely with UNPOB and
other parties in the Peace Process Consultative
Committee (PPCC) to implement the Agreement on the
ground.

We are also heartened by the ministerial
statement delivered by Papua New Guinea's Minister
for Inter-Government Relations, Sir Peter Barter, two
days ago. From his statement to the National
Parliament of Papua New Guinea, it is clear not only
that the Government is fully committed to the
Bougainville Peace Agreement, but that it has a good
appreciation of the obstacles in the way and of what
needs to be done to overcome them. There can be no
doubt that the Papua New Guinea Government
deserves the continued support of the international
community as it strives to implement the Agreement.

The Bougainville file has for some time now been
a source of encouragement for Council members. This
is because it reminds us that our efforts in this Council
can, and often do, produce the desired results. It is all
the more gratifying if we note the small outlay
involved. UNPOB costs around $2 million per annum,
not much more than what many other United Nations
missions spend in a day. This is a very small price to
pay to help the Government of Papua New Guinea
resolve the Bougainville conflict and to bring peace,
and with it the hope of a brighter future to some
180,000 people on the island.

This morning we heard that the implementation
of stage II of the weapons disposal plan has been
slower than expected. We should not be overly
concerned about this, as long as it remains clear to us
that all parties remain committed and that the delay
does not threaten the peace process.

It is important that we not insist on fitting the
implementation of the weapons disposal plan and the
peace process as a whole to too rigid a time frame. An
approach taking into consideration the problems on the
ground, as well as local sensitivities and practices, is
likely to serve us better. We therefore endorse the
Secretary-General's intention to extend UNPOB's
mandate by one year, to December 2003, to
accommodate delays encountered during stage II of the
weapons disposal plan.

Finally, it is not sufficient that peace be restored
to Bougainville. For this peace to be sustainable, an
effective administration and a viable local economy
must be in place. Relevant United Nations agencies
should therefore closely coordinate their efforts in
Bougainville with donor countries in order to achieve
peace and consolidate the peace.

