Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
wishes to associate itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of Cuba on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

We, too, welcome the decision by Fatah and
Hamas to form a government of national unity in
Palestine. The significance of the Mecca accord lies in
the fact that it provides clear evidence that Palestinians
are both able and willing to settle their internal
differences. The Palestinian leaders have also
demonstrated their aim of forging a united and peaceful
front to address the urgent task of ending the illegal

occupation of their country, which remains the key to
peace and development throughout the Middle East
region.

Furthermore, both Fatah and Hamas have made
significant concessions, which we hope are sufficient
to break the international siege imposed on the
Palestinian people. Therefore, the opportunity
presented by the Mecca accord should not be
squandered, and direct negotiations on final-status
issues should commence without delay. We hope that a
new dialogue will be followed by the establishment of
confidence-building measures such as the extension of
the ceasefire to the West Bank and the release of
prisoners on both sides.

We urge the international community to ease its
financial blockade against the Palestinian Authority. In
particular, we urge Israel to release all Palestinian tax
revenues. The taxes withheld by Israel belong to the
Palestinian people and are neither development
assistance nor generosity of any kind. These funds are
urgently required to alleviate socio-economic hardship,
including the deteriorating Palestinian institutions.

The vision of a two-State solution, as enshrined
in Security Council resolution 1397 (2002), and the
principle of land for peace must underpin any
permanent settlement of the Middle East conflict. It is
our hope that the upcoming trilateral meeting that will
take place among Israel, Palestine and the United
States, followed by a meeting of the Quartet, will help
reinvigorate the peace process and ultimately lead to
the establishment of an independent Palestinian State
with East Jerusalem as its capital, existing side by side
with Israel, with both States enjoying secure and
internationally recognized borders.

Regarding the situation on the ground, South
Africa reiterates that Israel should refrain from taking
any unilateral action - such as the building of
settlements and the separation wall - that would
predetermine final-status negotiations. The building of
new settlements in the West Bank is contrary to
international law.

My delegation is particularly concerned about the
excavation work being carried out by Israel beneath the
holy Al-Aqsa mosque compound and the demolition of
the historic road connecting Bab al-Maghariba with the
compound. The excavation work is undermining the
foundations and threatening a collapse of the mosque,
which is located in an area declared by UNESCO as a
World Heritage Site.

The Mission of Palestine brought this matter to
the attention of the Council in a letter dated 6 February
2007 (S/2007/58). Among other things, the letter
stated:

"Additionally, Israeli occupying authorities
continue to carry out excavation works below the
Holy Al-Aqsa Compound, undermining its
foundations and threatening it with collapse.

"There are also concerning reports that
Israel, the occupying Power, plans to construct a
tourist site below the Holy Al-Aqsa Compound,
further raising fears about serious threats facing
the Holy Compound. Additionally, Israeli
occupying authorities have banned Palestinians
below the age of 45 from entering the Holy
Al-Aqsa Mosque Compound in grave
contravention of their basic right to access their
holy sites and clear violation of Israel's
obligations, as an occupying Power, to ensure and
protect that right."

On 7 February 2007, the Israeli Mission
responded as follows.

"The Israel Antiquities Authority has begun
salvage excavations in the Jerusalem
Archaeological Park for the sole purpose of
erecting support pillars for a permanent access
ramp. This is for the benefit and safety of visitors
to the area. The new ramp will replace a
temporary wooden bridge built following the
collapse of the old ramp. The former Mugrabim
was declared a "hazardous structure' on account
of erosion and decay caused by natural disasters
over time. Salvage excavations are standard
archaeological excavations conducted in declared
archaeological sites slated for construction and
development. Salvage excavations prevent and
minimize damage which could be caused to
ancient remains as a result of construction.
Similar excavations have been conducted in the
past, and are indeed common in cities with such
rich in archaeology and history, like Jerusalem."

On 9 February 2007, the Palestinian Mission
reminded the Council in a letter circulated to members
that
"The Security Council has repeatedly
affirmed the applicability of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949 to all the territories occupied
by Israel since 1967, including East Jerusalem,
and has called upon Israel to abide by the
provisions of the Convention. In several of its
resolutions, the Council declared all Israeli
measures and actions which aim at changing the
status of Jerusalem as invalid, and it called upon
Israel to rescind all such measures and to desist
from further action changing the status of
Jerusalem. The above-mentioned Israeli action is
obviously another measure aimed at the
judaization of the city, creating yet additional
facts with regard to the Holy City's status, thus
adversely affecting the outcome of the final status
negotiations". (S/2007/75, p. Z)

The concern of my delegation, confirmed by
many other letters the Council has received in the past
few days from other United Nations delegations, is that
the Al-Aqsa mosque compound is one of Jerusalem's
sites revered by millions of Muslims throughout the
world and that therefore any damage to it is likely to
have serious repercussions. We urge the Israeli
Government to avoid the destruction of this vital
infrastructure.

The situation in the Middle East, and in particular
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, has been on the agenda
of the Security Council since the creation of the United
Nations. However, there has been a consistent failure
by the parties themselves and by the international
community to address seriously the challenges facing
that region. A regional solution must address the plight
of the millions of Palestinians who live as refugees
outside Israel. The international community,
particularly Israel, can no longer pretend that those
living in appalling conditions in refugee camps in
Lebanon and elsewhere do not exist. Furthermore,
peace in the region also hinges on ending the
occupation of the Lebanese Sheba'a farms and the
Syrian Golan Heights. The grave situation in the
Middle East demands the concerted attention and
action of the countries in the region as well as the rest
of the world.

As South African President Thabo Mbeki wrote
recently,
"the question can no longer be avoided - is it
not time that the United Nations, genuinely

representing all nations, assumes its rightful
position and leads a global process to address all
the interconnected challenges facing the peoples
of the Middle East and West Asia? None of us is
entitled to succumb to a destructive paralysis by
resigning ourselves to the expectation that the
sister peoples of the Middle East are ineluctably
condemned to be consumed by an unstoppable
conflagration, foretold by current events as an
impending and modern frightening apocalypse, as
a result of which outright anarchy would be
loosed upon the world".

Finally, let me remind the Council that the United
Nations Charter entrusts the Security Council with the
mandate to maintain international peace and security.
Global challenges such as the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict threaten the whole world and demand
multilateral solutions that the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, is qualified to lead and
address.

