Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We wish at the outset to welcome His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo and to wish him
an enjoyable stay here in New York.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
unwavering and full support for the implementation of
the Final Agreement for the Termination of Conflict
and the Construction of a Stable and Lasting Peace of
24 November 2016, aimed at bringing about a definitive
solution to the conflict and the building of a stable and
lasting peace, as well as for the work of the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia, focused on
ensuring the reintegration of former combatants of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia - People's
Army (FARC-EP), into civilian life, and also ensuring
personal and community security. Equatorial Guinea
also encourages the Government of Colombia to
operationalize its "Peace with Legality" plan,
which is key to the process of reintegrating former
FACR-EP combatants.

Social reintegration is a central pillar of the peace
process. Former combatants who feel alienated from
society and without economic and social opportunities
could end up taking up arms once again, and all the
efforts made over the years to achieve peace in Colombia
would be in real danger of collapse. While the action
plans are important and very positive, they will have an
impact only insofar as they are actually implemented
on the ground. An absence of tangible results could
lead to mounting tensions within Colombian society.

Equatorial Guinea is of the view that, given all the
actors and elements that make up the peace process,
it is only normal that many challenges remain on the
path to achieving an effective peace throughout the
Colombian territory. For that reason, it calls on the
international community to continue to support and
closely cooperate with the Government and the people
to promote peace, stability and security there.

Consistent with this approach, we congratulate
President Ivan Duque Marquez on his genuine efforts
to ensure the implementation of the final agreement. In
his most recent briefing, on 23 January (see S/PV.8450),
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia, Mr. Ruiz Massieu, recognized the progress
made, including the "Peace with Legality" plan drawn
up by the Colombian Government. That is why the
Republic of Equatorial Guinea offers its support to
President Duque and encourages him to reaffirm his
commitment to continuing the peace process within the
framework of a broader Government programme that
focuses on equality, legality and entrepreneurship.

The legal aspect is key to the process of the
reconciliation and stabilization of the country. For
that reason, the Special Jurisdiction for Peace must
begin to operate on the basis of an agreed statutory
law, because the failure of any component of the peace
process to function properly couldjeopardize the entire
process. The actions of the National Liberation Army
represent a major obstacle to the process, and we call on
the Government and the National Liberation Army to
resume their negotiations and agree as soon as possible
on a renewed ceasefire. The National Liberation Army
must refrain from any acts of violence against the
population and take steps to show its commitment to
a peaceful solution, beginning with the release of all
hostages whom it is holding.
We wish to conclude with words of appreciation for
the noble support work being carried out by the United
Nations Verification Mission in Colombia to ensure the
reintegration of young people, and we commend it on
its efforts in that respect.

