Mr. Pildegovies (Latvia): I would like to begin by congratulating the five newly elected non-permanent members of the Security Council, namely, Estonia, Viet Nam, the Niger, Tunisia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. Latvia wishes them every success in their duties. Let me also express our deep condolences to the families and friends of the victims of the Ukraine International Airlines flight that crashed en route from Iran to Kyiv yesterday. There must be an independent and transparent investigation of the accident. I thank the Vietnamese presidency of the Security Council for organizing this timely debate. I also thank the Secretary-General and the Chair of The Elders for their briefings. Latvia aligns itself with the statement to be delivered by the observer of the European Union. Effective multilateralism and the rules-based international system have been long-standing priorities for Latvia. This year's seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations is the right time to revisit and reconfirm our commitment to principles that alleviated the sufferings of the past century and promised a better future for the next generations. They constitute indispensable principles of international cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes, human rights and the rule of law, as well as the only viable way to achieve lasting global peace and security. We are deeply concerned about the latest flare-up of violent confrontations in the Middle East. For the sake of preserving regional and global security and stability, it is essential to halt further escalation and create space for diplomacy. That is the only way forward to achieve a regional political solution and lasting peace while upholding international law and the role of the United Nations in the process. The credibility of the entire international system depends on our ability to effectively prevent grave violations of international law and respond to the multitude of new challenges. Here, the Security Council carries a special responsibility as the gatekeeper of international peace and security. However, the Security Council has not always lived up to the challenge, as indicated by escalating humanitarian crises and erupting conflicts. Furthermore, the use of the veto should never be acceptable in situations involving mass atrocities. The Security Council should speak with one voice in rejecting impunity regarding the human suffering and mass atrocities that have taken place in Syria, Myanmar and Yemen. While we welcome the adoption of the Secretary-General's funding proposal for the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, the rigorous implementation of all parts of its mandate to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes committed in Syria is crucial. We also express our support for the Syrian Constitutional Committee. At this stage, it is essential that all international and regional players support it so that a genuine political transition can be achieved. Similarly, Russia's annexation of Ukrainian Crimea, as well as its covert and overt actions in Eastern Ukraine, violate the fundamental principle of the Charter of the United Nations of territorial integrity. Latvia welcomes the commitment reached at the Normandy format summit to stabilize the situation in the Russia-Ukraine conflict area, as well as the recent exchange of detainees. In that regard, we call on Russia to implement the Minsk agreements in full and restore Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Moreover, other so-called frozen conflicts in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Transnistria and Nagorno Karabakh should be resolved by peaceful means and based on generally recognized principles of international law, sovereignty and territorial integrity. In conclusion, we should not stop striving for universal respect for the principles of international law and the Charter of the United Nations, as those are essential for maintaining international peace and security against a backdrop of serious threats and growing turmoil in many regions of the world.
