Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs Nakamitsu for her comprehensive
briefing. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
6 December biennial report (S/2017/1025) on small
arms and light weapons, which illustrates the very
serious and negative consequences of the misuse and
illicit circulation of small arms. We appreciate his
recommendations on the issue.

Uruguay is committed to disarmament in all its
forms and to that end has acceded to and ratified the
various related regional and international treaties.
We are therefore fully committed to combating illicit
trafficking in small arms and light weapons, as well
as their misuse and destabilizing stockpiling. The
proliferation of conventional weapons, including small
arms, is a fundamental element in armed conflicts and
a means of sustaining them. Trafficking and trading
in arms with belligerent parties to armed conflicts
contributes directly to the suffering and death of
civilians. The acquisition of such weapons by terrorist
groups and organized criminals also represents a
serious threat and requires a significant collective
approach and effort.

Unhindered access to small arms and the absence
of adequate controls on them have adverse effects both
on the humanitarian front and on human rights and
sustainable development. They can also affect decisions
on how to carry out individual peacekeeping operations.
The statistics are overwhelming. The arms trade is
undoubtedly one of the most profitable businesses in
the world. As the Secretary-General's report notes,
the international small-arms trade was worth at least
$6 billion in 2014 alone, with ammunition accounting
for 38 per cent of all global transfers. Nearly half of all
violent deaths between 2010 and 2015 were caused by
firearms. Regrettably, if States do not do everything in
their power to halt the illicit transfer of weapons, this
will continue. If we are to eradicate this illicit trade,
all States must cooperate in identifying the routes and
mechanisms that enable these weapons to circulate
and in strengthening border controls. International
cooperation and assistance must be reinforced, with a
special emphasis on generating national capacities.
Controlling the international trade in arms is a
matter of urgency. As my delegation has frequently
pointed out, it is States that are primarily responsible
for adopting national standards for strengthening
regulation of the possession and use of weapons as well
as controlling their export, import and transit with a
view to preventing and combating illicit trafficking.
We believe that every State has a shared responsibility
to cooperate in confronting this global problem.
However, States that produce and sell weapons also
bear a differentiated and primary responsibility, since
the source of the problem lies in the production and
trade of such arms.

Uruguay is convinced that the historic Arms Trade
Treaty was an important step towards international
regulation and a more responsible international trade
of conventional weapons, including small arms and
light weapons and their parts and components, as well
as ammunition. The regulation of that trade would
have fundamental consequences in armed conflicts,
especially for the civilian victims of armed Violence,
in particular women, children and other vulnerable
groups. It would also promote peace and security by
eradicating the transfer of arms to conflict zones.

The ratification of and accession to international
instruments aimed at protecting civilians, such as the
Arms Trade Treaty, would contribute greatly to civilian
protection. Similarly, the United Nations Programme
of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All its
Aspects is an instrument of vital importance and an
international benchmark in advancing the fight against
the illicit trafficking of these weapons.

Finally, as a country committed to disarmament,
Uruguay calls on all States - particularly those that
produce, sell and possess arms - to comply with
their obligations in accordance with the international
legal framework.

