Mr. Repkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General Michel Kafando for his briefing on
the developing situation in the country. We regret that,
unfortunately, today the Security Council could not
listen to the Permanent Representative of Switzerland,
Mr. Jurg Lauber, Chair of the country-specific
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
which remains a channel for reliable communication
with Bujumbura. We support the PBC's efforts to
revitalize cooperationwith the Burundians by discussing
issues related to the socioeconomic development of the
country and by re-establishing donor confidence.

We continue to receive information from Russian
colleagues i our diplomats in Bujumbura - according
to which the situation in the country remains generally
calm. The genuine security situation in Burundi is
evidenced by the fact that the country continues active
inter-parliamentary contacts. Opposition politicians as
well as refugees are continuing to return to Burundi.
The Government has released more than 2,000 political
prisoners in the framework of the ongoing national
reconciliation process.

In evaluating the political situation in Burundi, we
would like to point to the peaceful atmosphere in which
the constitutional referendum was held on 17 May.
We note the impressive, virtually unprecedented
voter turnout for an African country, and the support
expressed for the constitutional changes by a large
majority of those who voted, as well as the fact that
this expression of the people's will was preceded by a
democratic and transparent propaganda campaign. It
is also important that the country's new Constitution,
adopted on 7 June, retains all the elements of the
Arusha Peace and Reconciliation Agreement, including
those concerning ethnic quotas in Burundi's governing
institutions. We want to point out that the current
President of Burundi, Pierre Nkurunziza, has declared
his willingness to support his successor when his
second presidential term ends in 2020.

In that regard, we are not in full agreement with the
alarmist assessments of the internal political situation
in Burundi voiced by a number of our colleagues today.
They are clearly not taking into account the country's

positive momentum, which is a very good reason for
taking it off the Security Council's overloaded agenda.
We get the impression that instead of trying to improve
our collaborative efforts, our colleagues are openly
playing up to the radical Burundian opposition. We
proceed from a belief in the impermissibility of outside
interference in Burundi's internal political processes,
and we are opposed to mentoring and the imposition
of off-the-shelf recipes on sovereign States for solving
complex socioeconomic and political problems.

