Mrs. Dakhil (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Yazidis and all oppressed persons in Iraq, allow me to
express my deep thanks and gratitude to His Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France and to the Government and
people of France for the humanitarian stance toward
our people. We also wish to express our deep gratitude
to Mr. Ban Ki-moon for his commendable efforts to
achieve peace in the whole world.

I stand before the Security Council today, not to
speak on behalf of the Yazidi population, which has
suffered immeasurably in Iraq at the hands of the worst
and most dangerous terrorist organisation in the world,
but on behalf of Iraqis of all ethnicities, who have
paid a huge price due to the aggression of the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I would also like to
convey the greetings and best wishes of the Speaker of
the Iraqi Parliament, Mr. Salim Al-Jabouri, who wishes
this meeting every success. I also bring greetings from
the Government and people of the Kurdish region of
Iraq along with their hope for the Council's support for
any resolution that would help the Iraqi people.

The terrorist organization ISIL constitutes a real
threat and danger to international peace and security.
Today, Iraqis of all backgrounds and ethnicities are on
the front line in facing that threat. I am sad to say that
minorities in Iraq * Christians, Yazidis, Shabaks and
Turkmen, among others - were that organization's
first victims and the groups most gravely affected
by their campaign of aggression. They were the ones
who directly faced the Iraqi terrorists' guns. They
made tremendous sacrifices as a result of the crimes
committed against them - crimes unprecedented in
the history of the world - which affected women,
children and the elderly, and brought back the age of
slavery by capturing Yazidi women and turning them
into objects for sale. These are crimes that bring shame
to all of humankind and that confront the international
community not only with a moral responsibility but also
the legal one to help free the Iraqi people in general and
specifically Iraq's minorities from the grip of terrorism.

No people was spared - not the Christians, not the
Yazidis, not the Shabaks, not the Kurds, not the Shia.
We have all heard about the crime that took place at
Camp Speicher, where 1,500 people were killed in one
day. That is clear proof that ISIL has neither religion
nor humanity and that it does not belong to Islam, which
stands above any crime being committed in its name.

I would like to present the Council with some
statistics to illustrate the suffering of the Yazidis. Until
3 August 2014, and prior to ISIL's attack on Mount
Sinjar, the Yazidis were a peace-loving, primarily
agricultural people whose number was approximately
600,000. Today, 420,000 Yazidis are displaced persons
living in camps in the Kurdistan region, with another
8,000 confined to camps in Syria and Turkey. Some
5,680 people, including men, women girls, children and
the elderly, have been kidnapped. Almost 1,000 children
between the ages of4 and 10 have been taken by force
from their families and are being held in ISIL training
camps in order to create a new generation of terrorists.
Some 3,000 Yazidi girls have been kidnapped and
being sold in slave markets inside and outside Iraq after
being violated by all means, including physically and
psychologically. The price for one Yazidi girl is $18.

In what age are we living? More than 2,000 Yazidis
were slaughtered in cold blood by ISIL and its terrorist
personnel for no other reason than that we are Yazidis
and profess a religion different from that professed
by ISIL. We are being killed. Our women are being
raped. Our girls are being sold. Our children are being
abducted and taken to places where we have no idea
what will become of them. We are bought and sold like
goods in the market for no reason.

It is indeed a special opportunity for me appear
before the Security Council - our last resort - and
to present both our suffering and our hopes. We have
been oppressed because of our religion and our faith,
because the Takfiri groups consider us infidels. To
summarize, what we seek from the Council, first of all,
is to define the Yazidis' suffering as a genocide and to
adopt a resolution in that regard. Our suffering meets
all the criteria for the crime of genocide. Secondly, we
ask the Council to impose international protection for
minorities where they live, especially the Yazidis, who
will not otherwise be able to return to their homeland
even if it is liberated after what we have suffered at the
hands of ISIL and their supporters. Thirdly, we urge
the international community to expedite its campaign
to eradicate the terrorist ISIL group, in particular from

the Government of Mosul, to enable us to free the more
than 3,000 kidnapped Yazidi women who continue to
suffer physical and psychological torture. Fourthly,
we request the Council to support and arm the Iraqi
Army, including the Peshmerga and all Iraqi forces that
are fighting ISIL on behalf of the entire world. Fifthly,
we ask the international community to undertake the
reconstruction of the cities that have been destroyed by
terrorism and to redress the results of those terrorist
attacks on our communities.

