The President: As this is the first meeting of the
Security Council for the month of June, I should like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to Mr. Munir Akram, Permanent
Representative of Pakistan to the United Nations, for
his service as President for the month of May 2004. I
am sure I speak for all members of the Council in
expressing deep appreciation to Mr. Akram for the
great diplomatic skill with which he conducted the
Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Liberia

Report of the Secretary-General pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1521 (2003)
regarding Liberia (S/2004/428)

Third progress report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(S/2004/430 and Corr.1)

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 37 of its
provisional rules of procedure to invite Mr. Charles
Gyude Bryant, Chairman of the National Transitional
Government of Liberia.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

Mr. Charles Gyude Bryant, Chairman of the
National Transitional Government ofLiberia, was
escorted to a seat at the Council table.


The President: On behalf of the Council, I
extend a warm welcome to the Chairman of the
National Transitional Government of Liberia,
Mr. Charles Gyude Bryant.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Liberia.

It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Klein to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members have before them the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1521 (2003) regarding Liberia, document
S/2004/428, and the third progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Liberia, document S/2004/430.

At this meeting, the Security Council will first
hear a briefing by Mr. Jacques Paul Klein, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Liberia,
and then by Mr. Charles Gyude Bryant, Chairman of
the National Transitional Government of Liberia.

At the end of those briefings, I will give the floor
to those Council members who wish to make comments
or ask questions.

As there is no list of speakers for this meeting, I
invite Council members who wish to take the floor to
so indicate to the Secretariat as from now.

I give the floor to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Liberia, Mr. Jacques Paul
Klein.


