Ms. Tachco (United States ofAmerica): Iwould also
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Mohammed,
Mr. Bila and Ms. Nagarajan for their briefings today.
One year after the Security Council's mission to the
region and its adoption of resolution 2349 (2017), the
presentations are an important reminder that much
work remains to be done to address the continuing
terrorist threat and the escalating humanitarian crisis
in the Lake Chad basin.

One year later, we can point to some progress in
the humanitarian response and efforts to deliver help
to those in the greatest need. But the terror of Boko
Haram and its offshoot Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham (ISIS)-West Africa continues to devastate
communities, families and lives throughout the region.
Their brutality, hatred and inhumanity will spread
terror, prolong the humanitarian crisis and displace
millions until they are destroyed. We express our deep
condolences to the victims of the horrific terrorist
attacks in north-east Nigeria and across the Lake Chad
region, including the attack and tragic kidnapping of
over 100 school girls in Dapchi and the abduction and
killing of humanitarian aid workers in Raan.

We are encouraged by the return of a significant
number of the girls to Dapchi yesterday, but are
horrified to hear of those killed during their captivity.
We call for the return of all those abducted across the
region and accountability for the perpetrators. As the
United States has told the Governments of the Lake
Chad region many times, we are their partner in the
fight and we will continue to support their efforts to
defeat those terrorist groups.

We commend Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon, the Niger
and Benin for stepping up to counter that threat through
the Multinational Joint Task Force. We thank Nigeria
for the leadership role it has played in the response
and we urge those nations to stay focused on the task,

even while they face other pressing security priorities.
Governments must also focus on a smooth transition
between military forces and civilian protection forces
to ensure that populations are protected even after
troops move on. Regional leaders must redouble efforts
to secure territory to allow the displaced to return
safely to their communities, restart their livelihoods
and rebuild their lives.

The latest abductions in Dapchi and Raan show the
need for robust protection to end the appeal of abductions
and extortion and the cycle of rape, forced marriage,
brainwashing and suicide bombings. Nigeria's recently
launched demobilization, disassociation, reintegration
and reconciliation strategy and the action plan for
preventing and countering violent extremism are very
positive steps, as are other similar regional efforts. The
United States will continue supporting that critical
work and we encourage partners to do so as well.

As our briefers and Council colleagues have
described here today, success will not depend on
military effectiveness on the battlefield alone. It also
requires improvements to the economy and governance
off the battlefield. The region cannot simply restore
north-east Nigeria and the broader Lake Chad basin
to what they were before the destruction caused by
Boko Haram and ISIS-West Africa. They must build
a better future there. Governments must work with
civic leaders and a wide range of community leaders to
create the social, economic and political infrastructure
to support lasting peace. That progress must include
transparent and credible investigations of human
rights violations and abuses, as well as mechanisms to
hold those responsible accountable for their actions.
Impunity only fuels terrorist recruitment. We therefore
reiterate the call in resolution 2349 (2017) for all
regional security forces to conduct operations in line
with international human rights and humanitarian law
and for Governments to take appropriate action to
secure justice and accountability. Those efforts deepen
people's trust in their Governments and strengthen
security efforts.

The staggering size and toll of the region's
continuing humanitarian crisis require a dynamic and
comprehensive response that helps respond to urgent
needs, while looking ahead to the future. The response
must lay the groundwork for durable solutions for the
more than 10 million people throughout the region
needing humanitarian assistance, the 4.5 million facing
severe food insecurity and the many still at risk of
famine, as well as the 2 million displaced. A successful
response depends on access to the communities in need
throughout the regions. We reiterate calls on regional
Governments to do all they can to help humanitarian
partners secure that access. Regional Governments
should also do more to bolster grassroots support for the
international humanitarian response by reinstituting
responsive governance in the region and reassuring the
region's people that they have a future in their home
communities.

The United States is committed to supporting our
Lake Chad partners in their efforts to defeat the terrorists,
address the root causes of violent extremism, provide
life-saving assistance to those in need, create a secure
environment so that the displaced can voluntarily and
safely return home and rebuild communities ravaged by
conflict. Our bilateral security assistance provides vital
support to our Lake Chad basin partners in the fight
against Boko Haram and ISIS-West Africa, as well as
to help those who have been victims of those terrorist
groups. The United States is also the single-largest
humanitarian donor to the international humanitarian
response. On 6 March, the United States announced
more than $128 million in additional humanitarian
assistance for the Lake Chad region, bringing the total
to over $655 million since 2017, and over $1 billion
since 2015.

The United States is also helping regional partners
rebuild devastated communities. To help establish
civilian security, the United States trained civilian
law enforcement actors, provides personal protective
equipment to police and rebuilds police barracks
and stations. Throughout the region, when security
conditions allow, we fund education, health and
agriculture projects in a holistic effort to kick-start
local economies, help establish effective governance
and service delivery and foster respect for human rights
and accountability for violations and abuses. With our
fellow Council members, we stand with the people
and the partner Governments of the Lake Chad basin
committed to this effort.

