Mr. Ndaruzaniye (Burundi) (interpretation from French): At the outset, my delegation would like to
associate itself with the statements made by the
representative of the African Group and other speakers and
to express our condolences to the families, to the United
Nations and to the various Governments of those who
tragically lost their lives along with Maitre Alioune Blondin
Beye.

It is a great honour for my delegation and for me
personally to participate in this public debate of the
Security Council on the issue of children and armed
conflict. This is a subject of great importance for the
future of humanity.

I would first of all like to take this opportunity to
express my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and for your outstanding stewardship of its work in the
month of June, as well as to the Security Council, which
decided to hold this debate on children and armed conflict
at such a high level of responsibility within the United
Nations.

We welcome the work of Ms. Graca Machel and her
report on the plight of children in armed conflict, and we
fully support the work of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, who gave us a very clear and
comprehensive introduction to this problem this morning.

Children are the humankind of tomorrow and the
future of the world, which everyone wants to be better.
But unfortunately, through the nefarious acts of human
beings our world is often plunged into wars, one more
horrible than the next, thus eroding all hope, even hope of
survival, for those to whom we would wish to bequeath
a better world: the children.

However, we are duty-bound to educate children in
the values of humanity and to create an environment
conducive to a sound assimilation of these values in the
hope that they will build a more peaceful and prosperous
world of tomorrow. It is up to all of us. It is our
responsibility, and future generations will judge us on our
decisions to give them a brighter future.

In addressing my delegation's congratulations to the
Security Council for having organized this discussion
under your presidency, Sir, I was not merely complying
with the customary courtesy; this subject is of capital
importance for the future of all humankind.

My country, Burundi, is gradually emerging from a
fratricidal war that has lasted for five years. My statement
will serve as testimony to the new atrocities that children
suffer in war, and I am sure that in other lands armed
conflicts have not spared them.

Not only are national and international legal
instruments insufficient to protect the children, but these
instruments are tossed aside, replaced by the law of the
jungle, and only those most blessed by nature survive.

 

My testimony will deal first of all with children in the
Burundi genocide and the armed conflict that prolonged it,
and children under the economic embargo imposed on my
country by neighbouring countries for the last two years.

In October 1993 the Burundi crisis erupted through
two simultaneous events: the assassination of the head of
State and the organization of a genocide against a part of
the population, which in only three weeks resulted in a
death toll of over 100,000 people killed solely because of
their ethnicity and/or political affiliation. Children, selected
and arrested by their teachers, were condemned to be
burned at the stake by the very people whose job it was to
protect them. The best-known case is that of the high
school in Kibimba where on 21 October 1993 nearly 100
pupils were burned alive by their school principal. But at
the same time, in various locations, children were killed
one after the other by a political school administration that
was responsible for protecting them. This practice of
ideological genocide has unfortunately extended to other
countries in the Great Lakes region, and this has now
become a very sad reality.

Not more than a month ago, in a neighbouring
country, a school bus was the target of armed groups, and
in another, more than 80 students were burned while
sleeping inside their school. Children are no longer only
Victims of conflicts, but they are the target of the
ideological genocide that is developing in the Great Lakes
region.

The use of rape, sometimes by groups, as a means of
humiliating women and girl children already condemned to
die solely because of their ethnicity was observed in my
country in several places during the three weeks of
genocide. Dogs were unleashed to hunt down children
hiding in the brush, and some men participated in a hunt
for human beings like themselves, but upon whom they
deliberately inflicted a beastly death. Other innocent
children were eyewitnesses to these atrocities, and they
continue to wander about without appropriate assistance,
suffering from the after-effects of the psychological shock
of seeing their friends being subjected to inhuman treatment
for a crime they simply cannot understand - merely that
of ethnic and/or political affiliation.

My Government maintains that these acts of genocide
must face appropriate judgment at the national and the
international level. That is why, in the light of the
conclusions of a United Nations international inquiry duly
mandated by the Security Council, my Government has
requested the establishment of an international criminal
tribunal for Burundi in order to prosecute the perpetrators
of these crimes of genocide if national courts cannot
reach them.

Unfortunately, some of these criminals travel freely
throughout the world, sometimes under the protection of
those who supported and encouraged the hate media that
covered up their atrocities, assuring the perpetrators the
impunity their crimes do not deserve.

At any rate, my Government maintains that the
future international criminal court will have to recognize
these crimes perpetrated against children. But it would be
cynical if the current exercise pertaining to the
international criminal court were to remain a forum for
academic debate for years without the victims of genocide
and other crimes against humanity receiving proper and
equitable justice.

It is for this reason that while awaiting the effective
establishment of an international criminal court, ad hoc
tribunals will have to operate wherever evil shows its
face. The establishment of ad hoc tribunals in no way
creates inconsistencies in the elaboration and the
application of international criminal law; for we believe
that international criminal law must adapt itself in order
to deal with new complications of crimes of international
scope, and we cannot encourage the impunity of crimes
while awaiting a political and academic debate that could
redress any possible inconsistency in the application of
international criminal law.

The civil war has continued to exacerbate the plight
of children in my country. War survivors have not been
able to reunite with their families, and in the displacement
camps it is not unusual for humanitarian agencies to find,
for reasons of practical organization, regrouped families
whose heads of household are no older than 12 years.
Armed groups have destroyed primary schools to force
children to follow them into combat. Hospitals and
dispensaries have been destroyed, thus depriving the
surviving children of primary health care.

A misfortune never comes alone. Under the guise of
humanitarian assistance, benefiting from the absence of
appropriate legislation and the misery of these children,
some organizations have established international systems
of adopting children in dire straits, depriving them of
their national identity, sometimes without their consent.
That is why my Government has just proposed to the
National Assembly a new law on national and
international adoption, which would give maximum

 

protection for the rights of children and their parents. This
law strengthens the commitment of my Government, which
has ratified the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Geneva Convention and its Additional Protocols. Our desire
is that the international community deal more with this
serious problem of the adoption of children in situations of
war.

In July 1996, there were political changes aimed at
putting an end to the protracted fratricidal warfare. We are
pleased to note today the progress achieved by the Burundi
people in the search for peace over the past two years. A
political platform and a constitutional act of transition
resulting from a political partnership between the
Government and the National Assembly have been set up.
Institutions of transition under the new constitutional act are
in place, and on 21 June in Arusha, Tanzania, all the parties
to the conflict signed a joint declaration committing
themselves to far-reaching political negotiations to resolve
the Burundi conflict through dialogue, agreement and the
rejection of violence.

During this same period, despite considerable progress
in the search for peace, my country was subjected to a total
economic embargo by neighbouring States. This has had a
particularly dire effect on children, especially the youngest.
Child war survivors now suffer a total lack of school
materials, vaccines, clothing and food, as if destiny itself
were dooming them to the genocide from which many had
miraculously escaped.

We do not doubt the goodwill of neighbouring
countries in their efforts to help Burundi restore peace, but
the means adopted - economic sanctions - may betray
their good intentions by decimating children, pregnant
women, the elderly and other vulnerable populations. As a
result of disruption in international trade law following the
illegal imposition of economic sanctions against my
country, the negative economic repercussions of organized
smuggling have put a stranglehold on a landlocked country
in need of relief from the war that has ravaged it for five
years.
On behalf of my Government, I would like to thank
the Security Council and you, Mr. President, for your
statement of 25 June 1998 on the situation in Burundi. We
hope that our neighbouring countries will frankly
acknowledge the political progress achieved in my country
towards peace and that they will not take it upon
themselves to impede the Burundi peace process by
maintaining an illegal embargo that is literally destroying
children who are already victims of a war for which they
are not at all responsible.

In conclusion, I wish to draw the attention of the
international community to its role, and that of
Governments, in condemning and suppressing all criminal
acts against children.

Specific action must be initiated to help those
children who still have a chance to live. This action must
include various forms of assistance to war orphans; the
rehabilitation of children traumatized by conflict
experiences, such as the physically and mentally
handicapped; and help for children to gain access to
primary health care and elementary education. In this way
they will be able to look forward to their rightful social
reintegration and thus feel like full citizens of their
nations.

That is why we believe that Governments and the
international community should mobilize to create a
special fund to assist and rehabilitate child victims and
survivors of armed conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation fully supports the draft
presidential statement of the Security Council on the
situation of children in armed conflict.

