Mr. Salame: Let me, at the outset, congratulate
the Kingdom of the Netherlands on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council.

I am briefing the Council from Tripoli, where I now
live, as do an increasing number of my colleagues. For
the United Nations to best support Libya, we must be
in Libya. I am proud to announce that we have truly
returned to the country. But we are here for the whole of
Libya, and not for any one region or city. Accordingly,
we are now looking to reopen our office in Benghazi.
Once conditions permit, we will also seek to reopen
in the south. The United Nations has visited cities and
towns across the country in which it has not stepped foot
for years, and it shall continue to do so. It is essential
that we hear from all Libyans and, whenever possible,
from where they live.

In early March, I spent three days in Benghazi.
I saw a city devastated by three years of conflict. Its
downtown is in ruins. Signs of the recent fighting are
ubiquitous. I heard strong concerns over the economic
and political situation in the country. But, behind the
heated speech, there was a widespread willingness to
make a fresh start and a sense of optimism. Citizens are
mobilizing to rebuild their city. One of many examples
is the Benghazi University faculty, who have taken the
rebuilding of their university into their own hands. That
spirit provides new hope - a hope we must nurture.

Libya was once a country known for its great
demographic fluidity. Citizens were willing to speak to
one another, traverse the land to meet, marry and trade
with one another, or settle in cities far from their place
of birth, all the while carrying their personal identity.

Since 2011, this demographic fluidity has been
constrained, if not altogether strangled. That has
produced more than 300,000 internally displaced
persons, who are unable to go back to their homes
and often live in miserable conditions. Others have
been forced to flee the country altogether. Groups
have refused to live with one another. Ideological or
identity cleavages have led to widespread ostracism. A
discourse of hatred has replaced peaceful interaction.
This has been demonstrated most recently by the
people of Tawergha, whose return was blocked and
many of whom now live in temporary shelters. We
have conveyed a plan to expedite the overcoming of
this impasse.

More generally, we are committed to reversing
mutual exclusion and sterile seclusion. Unless Libyans
from all stripes and segments can come together to
speak, they will be unable to agree. And unless they
agree, the political process cannot progress. Through
our own efforts or working with our partners, we
have made progress in reversing this situation. We
have reached out to constituencies that had been
marginalized, including partisans of the former regime.
We have convinced ethnic groups, rival cities and
political parties that have not spoken to one another for
several years to come together.

My mission is not to slice the cake between
competing greeds. First and foremost, it is to bring
Libyans together around a common national narrative.
That common narrative is crucial. We have seen a range
of initiatives - some supported by the United Nations
and its partners, many instigated by the Libyans
themselves - to rewrite it. Mayors from all across
Libya have met together, first in Tunisia and then in
Libya, to discuss vital issues of service delivery. They
were hosted in the homes of the people of Shahat, in
the east, and met again just few days ago in Tripoli,
in the west. Popular movements are starting across the
country, demanding change and an end to plundering.
Members of the House of Representatives and the
High State Council have engaged with each other
to maintain ties and alleviate divisions. The United
Nations has supported local communities in conflict
to forge reconciliation agreements. Armed groups that
were fighting each otherjust months ago have accepted
to sit around the same table. Facilitating some of these
discussions, the United Nations has helped successfully
prevent clashes, sometimes at the very last minute.
These many activities and efforts are part and parcel
of the process of the national conference, which will
ultimately gather after the holy month of Ramadan.

Libyans insistently remind us of their wish for a new
period of stability and certainty built on accountable
and unified institutions. The present institutions are
based on shallow legitimacy. They are built on tenuous
mandates or are divided into competing bodies. To lead
and unify the people and take difficult decisions for
their own good, the Government must come from the
people. That means that elections must be held.

For the United Nations, working for the conduct
of fair, free and credible elections before the end of
the year is at the top of our priorities. It is vital that,
before elections take place, we are certain that they
will be inclusive and their results accepted. It is for
that reason I am pleased that voter registration, which
ended 10 days ago, was very successful. With 1 million
new registrants, 2.5 million Libyans are now eligible
to vote. There was strong participation by women and
youth in the voter registration update. Such remarkable
participation is a clear message to all. The Libyan
people want their voices heard though elections.

At the International Women's Day event, I called
on women to translate their higher participation as
registrants into higher participation as candidates.
The United Nations will continue to support the High
Commission for National Elections in preparing for
elections and will spare no effort in addressing the
other preconditions for successful elections. Laws
are required for any election to take place, and they
must be drafted in a consensual manner. Efforts to
adopt a permanent national constitution continue.
A draft was approved by the Constitution Drafting
Assembly on 29 July 2017. It went through a judicial
challenge and, on 14 February 2018, the Supreme Court
recognized the validity of the Assembly's vote on the
draft. However, hurdles remain to the conduct of a
constitutional referendum. The question of referendum
legislation remains very controversial, while some
factions are clearly not satisfied with the content of
the draft Constitution. However, the political process
must continue, as the status quo is untenable. I ask the
Council to make the message on the unsustainability of
the status quo clear to all leaders of the country.

While there is reason for optimism in the political
process, there is also cause for concern. A backdrop
of continued violence and localized conflicts persists.
Extremists, including the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant and Al-Qaida, continue to maintain a
presence in Libya and recently have carried out attacks.
Armed groups, including those formerly integrated
into State structures, continue to operate outside of
the law, including perpetrating human rights abuses.
Bodies bearing signs of torture have turned up in
many locations. Libyan men, women and children are
increasingly kidnapped for profit, even in the heart of
the capital. Citizens are arbitrarily arrested by shadowy
security forces. People are held and abused in unofficial,
official or quasi-official detention prisons.

In the south, the situation in Sabha is currently of
serious concern. There have been a number of fatalities,
including civilians. The complex network of local
animosities, the ongoing jostling by national political
and military players and the growing presence of
foreign mercenaries seriously complicate the situation.
The conflict risks taking on a transnational dimension
that could further destabilize Libya. To prevent further
escalation, I have expressed the willingness of the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to
mediate should the parties request it. I call on Member
States to support Libya's fragile transition by urging
their partners there to embrace the political process and
not arms. There is space for all in civilian life. It is
abundantly clear that no military faction can hope to
conquer the country.

The provision of security in Libya should be
a matter for national institutions, and not for the
numerous armed groups. UNSMIL has embarked on
a broad conversation with the leaders of those groups
to better understand their perspectives. Too many
young men earn a living by carrying weapons. They
should instead be reintegrated into civilian life. Before
May, we expect to unveil a strategy to do so. However,
we must be realistic. In a country awash with arms,
disarmament will require time and much stronger
national institutions. Furthermore, the arrival of more
arms in Libya will only hamper such efforts and damage
the political process. Unfortunately, more weapons are
indeed being imported. I urge the Council to exert its
utmost influence to stop arms from entering Libya.

At the heart of Libya's problems is an economic
system of predation that degrades the lives of ordinary
Libyans and serves the interests of the powerful. It is
the main obstacle to the political process and cements
the status quo. I was concerned about it when I first
arrived; now I am truly disturbed. That system must
be shattered. Resources must flow into building a
strong, equitable State for all, and not into the pockets
of the few. We have built knowledge and expertise on
the matter. I am grateful to the Panel of Experts for
their contribution. The United Nations and partner
institutions must comprehensively address economic
plundering as a key pillar of our engagement.

Human trafficking is but one of the elements of
the perverted economy. It is also the most morally
reprehensible. Such trade has become the main source of
income for some people, leaving them numb to the sight
of humans being traded as commodities or of migrants
being left to die as they fall off packed pick-up trucks.
Libya is a destination, a transit country and a source
of migration. Such an important issue, which affects
the lives of hundreds of thousands, must be addressed
strategically and across borders. I thank our partners in
the African Union, the European Union and the League
of Arab States for their excellent cooperation on the
issue and on the political process in Libya.

Libya's finances remain precarious. Despite the
country now producing well over 1 million barrels of oil
a day and generating rosy macroeconomic indicators, it
does not enjoy true economic recovery. Instead, Libyan
people become poorer every year. Women from the once
wealthy Tripoli bourgeoisie confess to putting their
teenage children to work. Elders from the east lament
that their own internal tribal emergency welfare funds
are now depleted. Basic health and education services
decay, while frustrated citizens cannot understand why
the surge in oil production translates into a further
decline in living standards. To address the needs of the
most vulnerable and of internally displaced persons, on
25 January we launched a new humanitarian response
plan to provide life-saving assistance to almost 1 million
people a year. There are signs of a looming monetary
and fiscal crisis. Although now high, oil revenues are
vulnerable to underinvestment and sabotage. Financial
institutions are divided. Government expenditure is
bloated and continues to increase, but thus far increased
spending has not led to improved services.

Overall, the State's inability to provide services
and implement the reforms needed creates a dangerous
vicious cycle. It strengthens the self-righteous
arguments of others who claim they are stepping in to
fill the vacuum left by the absence of the State. In turn,
the activities of those individuals and groups undermine
the ability of the State itselfto fulfil its obligations. For
many Libyans that abnormal state of affairs has become
the new normal. The vicious cycle must stop.

One aspect of the action plan was the amendment
to the Libyan Political Agreement. When I joined the
Mission, almost all stakeholders I met requested that the
matter be included in the action plan. The appointment
of a new executive would have been useful, but only
if chosen in an open manner that promoted national
unification and strengthened the Government's ability
to serve the country for the limited transition. I now
believe that they have little chance of being passed.
The action plan does not depend on these amendments,
and certainly the closer Libya is to elections, the less
relevant these amendments become. However, starting
tomorrow, I shall commence a new and possibly final
attempt to realize these amendments.

In my first briefing from Tripoli, I reported that
there was a consistent staccato of bullets overhead. The
bullets are still flying. The other day I was told that this
was just normal. For the sake of the Libyan people, for
whom we in the United Nations work, we must refuse
to accept this normality.

