Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): On behalf of the
Secretary-General, I wish to thank Egypt and you, Sir,
for bringing us together today for this timely discussion.

I will limit myself to making four points.

First, on this tenth anniversary of the annual
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council, we should
look back over those 10 years and measure the progress
achieved to strengthen our partnership in maintaining
peace and security on the continent. Indeed, in their
first joint communique of 2007 (8/2007/386, annex),
the Security Council and the African Union Peace
and Security Council committed to the development
of a stronger and more structured relationship, and
underlined the particular importance of support for the
operationalization of the African Peace and Security
Architecture (APSA).

Ten years later, I am glad to bear witness to the
fact that one of APSA's key pillars, the African Standby
Force, is about to be declared operational at the African
Union Summit in July. This progress has made been
through a series of phases in the context of the so-
called African Capacity for Immediate Response to
Crises and on the basis of a strong collaboration with
the United Nations in the development of key policy
and guiding documents, as well as at the practical level
in the planning for the AMANI Africa II Field Training
Exercises, all of which were key milestones in the
operationalization of the African Standby Force.

The Secretary-General has repeatedly underscored
that strengthening global and regional partnerships
is absolutely critical, especially in Africa, where the
United Nations clearly must continue to work very
closely with the African Union to maintain peace
and security on the continent. But it is only through
concrete instances of collaboration that progress in
building mutual trust becomes tangible, leading to an
upgrading of the level of cooperation. This brings me to
my second point. Several milestones have signaled this
change of nature in the partnership between the two
organizations on peace and security matters.
First, by issuing its new road map for the African
Peace and Security Architecture from 2016 to 2020,
the African Union has clearly moved away from
ad hoc activity-based responses towards a more
strategic position.

Secondly, the African Union and its regional
economic communities and mechanisms have
significantly strengthened their capacities over the
past decade, while seeking to leverage the comparative
advantages of each organization and consistently
recognized the primary responsibility of the African
Union for the regional mechanisms. African regional
partners are involved in peace efforts across the
continent, often facing significant human costs, as
illustrated by the case of the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

Thirdly, as Council members know, a joint United
Nations-African Union framework for an enhanced
partnership in peace and security will be signed by the
Secretary-General and the African Union Commission
Chairperson in 2016. In that respect, the United Nations-
African Union relationship is graduating from an earlier
support-and-capacity-building model. The partnership
is much stronger now, based on a common vision of
purpose and the efforts to be undertaken. Indeed, the
strategic partnership has made considerable progress
through its specific coordination arrangements. This
can be clearly in the Joint Task Force developed as a
cooperation mechanism between the decision-making
bodies of both secretariats to manage conflict
prevention and peacekeeping.

This has led to some important decisions, including
therecentestablishmentinAddisAbabaofajointworking
group on sustainable financing; the effectiveness of
AMISOM, particularly in relation to command and
control; and support for the Somali National Security
Forces, in the context of the upcoming elections and
the reduction of European funding. More generally, the
Joint Task Force has increasingly encouraged proposals
to help the African Union and the United Nations
coordinate messaging. Members will have noted the
recent increase in and regularity ofjoint communiques
on issues in which we have a shared interest. There has
also been far more information-sharing, joint analyses
and follow-up of developments on upcoming elections
or crisis situations in Africa.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
example, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been lending support to the African Union-led
facilitation efforts led by Mr. Edem Kodjo. Beyond
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the United
Nations and the African Union have maintained a
strategic engagement between the Office of the Special
Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan and the AU High-
Level Implementation Panel aimed at advancing a
peaceful resolution of the outstanding issues between
the Sudan and South Sudan, where the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and the High
Representative of the African Union, former President
Konare, are working closely together and with the Joint
Monitoring and Evaluation Commission to advance the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

My third point relates to the trend of growing
cooperation between our two organizations on the
ground, including, as I have said, the planning and
management of peace support operations and support
for greatly increased African Union institutional
capacity in this regard. This area of cooperation has
been the most active of our partnership recently.
Specific achievements in these areas include, as I
have already mentioned, support for the development
of AMISOM. strategic concepts of operations and the
drafting of revised strategic directives for AMISOM
leadership. We have also made strenuous joint planning
efforts to ensure the deployment and management of
the African-led International Support Mission in Mali
and the African-led International Support Mission for
the Central African Republic. All of that was followed
by transition planning to facilitate a smooth hand-over
from the African Union to the United Nations.

Turning to Somalia, cooperation with the African
Union is clearly a cornerstone of our collective efforts,
and remains a model of partnership that we should
tirelessly try to improve and enhance. We will therefore
continue to work together with Somali leaders to bring
the country out of the conflict that has plagued it for
over two decades and make decisive progress towards
peace. In this year of elections, it is more important
than ever to work hand in hand. Once again, we remain
fully committed to supporting AMISOM.

The African Union, directly or not, is the most
important partner of the United Nations when it
comes to peacekeeping. Three simple statistics will
serve to illustrate that fact. Out of 16 United Nations
peacekeeping missions, 9 are deployed in Africa;
80 per cent of all our uniformed peacekeepers serve in
Africa; and more than 50 per cent of all contingents
throughout the world come from African Union member
States. That serves to demonstrate the absolute need for
a strong partnership to be able to put an end to all those
conflicts and provide support for peacebuilding.

I have no doubt that the Security Council will join
me in expressing profound gratitude to all of the African
countries that are contributing with troops and police to
peacekeeping operations. They are working relentlessly
and with courage in incredibly difficult circumstances
to restore peace and stability in volatile environments,
risking their lives every day - as we unfortunately
see all too regularly from the painful statistics, as we
mentioned to Members States last week during the
annual meeting on Blue Helmets. We should therefore
pay tribute to their efforts and to the memory of those
who have made the ultimate sacrifice. We, the United
Nations and the African Union, need to relentlessly
pursue our efforts to provide our peacekeepers with the
necessary training and equipment to strengthen their
security and improve their performance, all the while
ensuring that they adhere to the highest level of conduct
and discipline expected of them and observe the values
and principles that our respective organizations are
committed to.

That brings me to my fourth and final point, and I
shall conclude quickly. With a view to further enhancing
all those efforts and our partnership, the Secretary-
General has called for more predictable and sustainable
financing and support to African Union peace support
operations authorized by the Security Council. I am
pleased to inform members that the United Nations-
African Union joint review on financing and support
to African Union peace operations will be launched
tomorrow, when a technical seminar will begin by
evaluating the various United Nations models of support
to date. That will feed into the process carried out by
the High Representative for the African Union Peace
Fund, Mr. Donald Kaberuka, to enhance predictable
financing.

A review of re-hatting experiences in Mali and the
Central African Republic has shown that predictable
financing remains critical to the success of transitions
from African Union peace operations to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The review also confirmed
the fact that no support modality is sufficient on its
own. In that regard, there is a need to pursue efforts to
optimize the full range of support modalities, including,
as I mentioned at the beginning of my statement, the
timely operationalization of the African Standby
Force. Let us bear in mind that this is a critical issue
in strengthening collective security together. A more
effective African Union, as a regional arrangement
under Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
will make it possible for the United Nations itself to
further and better respond to situations on the ground
and the needs of Member States. Ultimately, financing
is part of a broader partnership. We therefore remain
firmly committed to support all the efforts of the
African Union to build capacity on mission planning
and support, as well as standards and performance.
Once again, financing is part of that global vision.

