Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): The presence of persons of note at this
meeting of the Security Council is a testament to the
great importance of the topic under consideration - the
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As
such, we wish to congratulate and thank Kazakhstan
for including this issue in its programme of work. We
also thank Secretary-General Guterres for sharing his
prescient ideas.

This report is timely, as recent world events indicate
a difficult year for multilateral action on disarmament
and international peace and security. Last year, we saw
renewed efforts to address a broad spectrum of issues
related to non-proliferation, multilateral disarmament
and international security, including far-reaching
questions on cyberspace and outer space activities.
International security has continued to deteriorate as
the world faces immense peace and security challenges.
In that regard, I wish to underline the absolute validity
of multilateral diplomacy in the field of disarmament,
non-proliferation and international security, and
reiterate that there is no substitute for a multilateral
approach to addressing global issues of disarmament
in a sustainable manner, in accordance with the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

As the international community continues to await
the realization of the goal of the total elimination of
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,
we seek broader and more concrete measures in
the pursuit of the goal of nuclear disarmament and
nonproliferation. It is evident that the current approach
has not managed to offer tangible results that ensure the
realization of the goal and the general objectives of a
world without weapons of mass destruction.

On 20 September 2017, the historic Treaty on the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons (TPNW) was opened
for signature. Its adoption was a welcome development
in our search for a world free of weapons of mass
destruction. I want to emphasize that the TPNW
underlines our shared commitment to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). Both
treaties complement each other and establish a clear path
towards a world free of weapons of mass destruction.

Equatorial Guinea is well aware that, in order
to achieve significant progress in the elimination of
weapons of mass destruction, there must be practical
and comprehensive confidence-building measures.
Indeed, all Member States, particularly nuclear-
weapon States, must commit to the existing regimes of
transparency, dialogue and verifiable notifications of
military reserves and activities.

More than 70 years have passed since the world
witnessed the terrifying power of the atomic bomb in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The destruction and impact
of the twin bombs still resonate today. The unfortunate
incidents left a legacy of devastation and long-term
negative impact on the environment and, fundamentally,
on the lives of the people affected. Therefore, the
time has come for the world to unequivocally and
unanimously express the goal of ensuring a world free
of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. It is also time to raise our voices against
the slow pace of nuclear disarmament and to call on
all Member States to comply with the legal obligations
and the implementation of the commitments assumed
by the nuclear-weapon States.

For Equatorial Guinea, the highest priority
remains nuclear disarmament and the total elimination
of all weapons of mass destruction. To that end, the
contribution of nuclear-weapon-free zones to the
objectives of the NPT, including nuclear disarmament,
as well as other contributions to nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation in all regions of the world, should
be maintained and expanded.

The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, the
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin
America and the Caribbean, the South Pacific Nuclear
Free Zone Treaty, the Treaty on the Southeast Asia
Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone and the nuclear-weapon-free
zone of Central Asia, as well as the nuclear-weapon-free
State of Mongolia, contribute significantly to achieving
the general objective of a world free of nuclear weapons
and other weapons of mass destruction. They improve
global and regional peace and security, strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation regime and contribute to the
realization of the objectives of nuclear disarmament
and the elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

In that context, the Government of Equatorial
Guinea reiterates its ongoing commitment to the Treaty
of Pelindaba, which entered into force on 15 July 2009.
The Treaty reaffirms, inter alia, the status of Africa
as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and shields Africa by
avoiding the parking of nuclear explosive devices on the
continent and prohibiting the testing of such weapons
throughout the African continent.

This year will mark the thirty-second anniversary
of the United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and
Disarmament in Africa, based in Lorne. Despite its
limited resources, the Centre has continued to offer
technical assistance to States throughout the African
region. In 2015, the Centre oversaw the participation
of more than 1,000 representatives of Governments
and regional organizations, as well as more than
2,000 members of civil society through a wide range
of activities. The Centre needs help in promoting its
mandate. We welcome the Centre's efforts and its
management, and we take this opportunity to request
more alliances and more assistance to boost its efforts
and ensure that it fulfils its mandate.

My country emphasizes the importance of continued
respect for the inalienable right to the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy and highlights the central role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), in that
regard, through the ongoing commitments of States
to the implementation of the IAEA Comprehensive
Safeguards System and the provision of technical
assistance and cooperation.

We also stress humanitarian considerations in the
context of deliberations on weapons of mass destruction,
particularly in the light ofthe catastrophic humanitarian
consequences of the use or detonation of nuclear
weapons, either by accident or as a deliberate measure.
We therefore stress the importance of General Assembly
resolution 70/47 and call on all States, in particular
the nuclear-weapon States, to take into account the
catastrophic humanitarian consequences of the use
of these weapons on human health, the environment
and Vital economic resources, inter alia, and to take
the necessary measures to dismantle and give up
these weapons. It is in this context that I once again
welcome the adoption of the Treaty on the Prohibition
of Nuclear Weapons.

The continued existence and possession of nuclear
weapons does not guarantee security; rather, they
subtract from it. Our world, including outer space,
must be free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of
mass destruction. It is in this context that my country
insists on the need for nuclear-weapon States to stop
modernizing, renewing or extending the life of their
nuclear weapons and related facilities.

In Equatorial Guinea, we also underscore the
importance of achieving universal accession to the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT),
taking into account the special responsibilities of
nuclear-weapon States in this regard. Our delegation
welcomes the convening of the eighth Ministerial
Conference on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty, held in New York on 21 September 2016, and
supports the international community in remaining
committed to the promotion of the CTBT. We call on
all nuclear-weapon States, those States that have not yet
acceded to the NPT, those that are listed in annex 2 of
the CTBT, and those that have not yet signed or ratified
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to do so
without delay.

Equatorial Guinea reaffirms the importance of the
work entrusted to the Conference on Disarmament and
expresses its concern at the many years of stalemate
that have prevented the Conference from fulfilling
its mandate as the single multilateral disarmament
negotiation forum. I call on the Conference on
Disarmament to resume its substantive work, bearing
in mind the security interests of all States and without
further delay.

Furthermore, we are concerned that the United
Nations Disarmament Commission has been unable
to reach consensus on recommendations since 1999.
Nevertheless, I welcome the adoption in April 2017
of recommendations on practical confidence-building
measures in the field of conventional weapons. Indeed,
it is important to stress the importance, not only of
preserving the Commission, but also of achieving its
negotiating goals.

