Mr. Wais: First of all, I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your leadership of the Security
Council for the current month. I wish you, Sir, success
in your presidency.

I thank the Council for this opportunity to brief
it on the progress made in preparation towards the
convening of the high-level revitalization forum of the
parties to the peace process, including estranged groups,
to restore the permanent ceasefire, full implementation
of the peace agreement and establish realistic timelines
for democratic elections at the end of the transition
period. Since this is my first time briefing the Security
Council, I will just concentrate on what we have done
so far.

For six months, we have been doing everything
possible to revitalize the peace process in South
Sudan. The first action we undertook was to assist
the stakeholders of the conflicting parties in South
Sudan. After concluding the mapping exercise of the
key stakeholders, we planned a pre-forum consultations
schedule, which was also approved by the Council of
Ministers. In September and October, we conducted
pre-forum consultations and presented our findings to
the Council of Ministers in the first week ofNovember.
We held the consultations in various locations within
and outside the region, such as Ethiopia, South Africa,
the Sudan and Juba. The Council of Ministers of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
took an active part in the discussions in the course of
those consultations. It is worth mentioning, for example,
that all ofthe members of the Council of Ministers were
present in South Sudan's capital, Juba, where they led
the consultations. After the conclusion of the pre-forum
consultations, we sat down again to draft a report on
those consultations, which we concluded in November
and presented to the Council of Ministers.

For the Security Council's information, I would
now like to provide a brief summary of the contents
of the pre-forum consultations. In total, more than
48 different stakeholders made submissions, either
directly or indirectly, through consultations or in
position papers. All submissions were analysed, and I
would now like to highlight some of the key findings.
Stakeholders made proposals for a new transitional
Government, which included the following five options:
maintaining the status quo; returning to the status quo
ante of 8 July 2016; reconstituting the Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan to include new parties; establishing a new
transitional Government of national unity composed
of technocrats; and establishing a hybrid transitional
Government of national unity made up of technocrats
and politicians.

In addition, three key proposals were advanced for
the restructuring of the states, namely, first, revoking
the current number of states and reverting to 10 states;
secondly, maintaining the 32 states and renegotiating
new power-sharing arrangements based on that number;
and, thirdly, reverting to the three regions of Bahr el-
Ghazal, Equatoria and Upper Nile.

Some stakeholders demanded that the status quo
of the Transitional Government of National Unity be
maintained until the end of the current transitional
period. Alternative proposals were made for the current
governance system to be restructured into a federal or a
confederal system of governance. Under a restructured
governance system, two options were proposed for the
presidency in the interim period, namely, a rotational
presidency or a ceremonial President with an executive
Prime Minister.

Three main proposals for constituting the Council
of Ministers were also put forward: first, maintaining
the 30 ministries and establishing a deputy ministry
for each; secondly, reducing the numbers of ministerial
positions to 18 so that the Cabinet is lean; and, thirdly,
restructuring the Council of Ministers based on the
three regions, with each of one holding 10 portfolios
and 10 deputy portfolios.

The report made it very clear that all stakeholders
demanded a total cessation of hostilities before the
convening of the IGAD-led high-level revitalization
forum. The report also proposed that all parties and
estranged groups must sign a political charter that
committed all parties to non-violence before the the
holding of the forum. It was furthermore proposed
that an inclusive permanent ceasefire and transitional
security arrangements be negotiated at the forum, with
the regional protection force at the centre. There was also
a call for an effective ceasefire monitoring, verification
and enforcement mechanism, including measures to
guarantee the freedom of movement of citizens through
the provision of enablers and multipliers. Stakeholders
also recommended that the citizens' mandate be
reviewed to make it robust and effective. A national
ceasefire commission was proposed to oversee the
implementation of the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism.

The report also mentioned several critical issues.
The success of the IGAD-led high-level revitalization
forum was deemed to be dependent upon the following
factors: inclusivity; the cessation of hostilities and the
establishment of a permanent ceasefire; political will;
a unified position on the part of the opposition; IGAD's
leadership and credibility as an impartial arbiter;
a robust enforcement mechanism agreed by IGAD,
the African Union and Security Council prior to the
holding of the revitalization forum; the structure of
the forum; gender parity and women 's participation;
the participation of Rick Machar; coordination of
concurrent political initiatives, such as the national
dialogue, the Sudan People's Liberation Movement
re-unification process and revitalization, and wider
consultations and transparency.

Suggestions on the timeline were also put
forward. On average, the stakeholders suggested that
a new transitional period would require four years to
deliver an effective transition that would culminate in
democratic elections. The majority proposed a two to
three year period, while others suggested four to five,
and others five to 10 years. In addition, the majority
thought that a three to six month pre-transitional period
would be required.

The report was subsequently presented to the
Council of Ministers, which endorsed it. I am very
glad to mention that, last week, at the African
Union-European Union Summit held in Abidjan, the
IGAD Council of Ministers held an informal meeting
at which they endorsed the pre-forum consultations
report. They also agreed to hold a Council of Ministers
meeting on 15 and 16 December. Immediately after
the Council's meeting, they also agreed that the high-
level revitalization forum should take place between
17 and 28 December. Both the Council of Ministers
and the forum should take place in the African Union
Multi-Purpose Hall.
I am very pleased to say that we are now at the
threshold of commencing the IGAD-led high-level
revitalization forum, according to the decisions of the
IGAD Council of Ministers and the Summit.

