Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for convening this emergency
meeting. I also wish to thank Mr. Feltman, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
on the preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board
on the investigation into the crash of Malaysia Airlines
Flight MH-17.

We welcome the statement delivered by His
Excellency Mr. Frans Timmermans, Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofthe Kingdom of the Netherlands, and
we acknowledge the important leadership of his country
in the investigation. We also acknowledge the presence
among us of Her Excellency Ms. Julie Bishop, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Australia, and His Excellency
Mr. Jean Asselborn, Minister for Foreign and European
Affairs of Luxembourg.

We have taken note of the preliminary findings of
the investigation. We consider them to be an important
step towards the implementation of resolution 2166
(2014). According to the report, damage observed in the
forward section of the aircraft appears to indicate that
it was penetrated by large, high-energy objects from
outside the aircraft. There is now little doubt that it was
indeed shot down.

We deplore the fact that, two months after the
crash, all the remains of the victims were not recovered.
However, we commend the investigators on the ground
for identifying most of the victims. We hope that all the
countries concerned will continue to cooperate with the
investigation to ensure that all victims are recovered,
identified and brought home for proper burial.

Although the purpose of this report was not to
apportion blame or liability in respect of any party, it
is important that criminal investigations be carried out
expeditiously to establish the perpetrators. As we look
forward to the final findings of the investigation, it is
important to remind ourselves that what the families of
the 298 victims expect from the investigators and from
the international community as a whole is to name the
perpetrators and hold them accountable, in line with
paragraph 11 of resolution 2166 (2014). In that regard,
we welcome the launch of a criminal investigation by
the Netherlands Public Prosecution Service in close
cooperation with the investigation and prosecution
authorities of the affected countries.

I want to welcome the signing, on 5 September,
of the Minsk protocol agreement, under the auspices
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), and the ceasefire in eastern Ukraine.
We regret, however, the continued reports of ceasefire
violations by the warring parties. Other than security,
human rights and humanitarian consequences,
the fighting continues to hamper the work of the
investigations team, and nothing can guarantee that all
the necessary evidence will be found more than two
months after the crash.

In the same vein, we deplore the fact that, due to
resumption of the fighting, the lives of OSCE monitors
were put in danger as they were caught in crossfire and
threatened by armed separatists. We therefore reiterate
our call to the parties concerned to cease hostilities in
conformity with the agreement and in accordance with
paragraph 7 of resolution 2166 (2014), by which the
Council demands that all military activities, including
by armed groups, immediately cease in the immediate
areas surrounding the crash site to allow for the security
and safety of the international investigation.

To conclude, Rwanda once again urges the
armed separatists to lay down their arms, respect
the independence, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine and engage constructively with
the Ukrainian Government, which, with the proposed
amnesty and self-governance bill to separatist-held
areas, has demonstrated goodwill to finding a political
settlement to this crisis.

