Mr. Shcherbak (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation welcomes the
participation of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at
today's meeting, especially as it is taking place on the
eve of his trip to Africa.

We believe that the President's initiative to have
the Security Council take up the issue of the prevention
and resolution of conflicts in Africa is both important
and timely.

The United Nations, the Security Council, the
Secretary-General and the African Union have recently
done significant work to identify the causes of conflict
in Africa. Resolving those conflicts entails in particular
overcoming old and well-known political and socio-
economic problems, which are being exacerbated by
new challenges and threats. There is no doubt that
African States must themselves play the primary role in
resolving those problems. As experience has
demonstrated, our African colleagues do indeed have
the desire to do so. Not only is that evident in the
measures undertaken by African States themselves to
overcome critical socio-economic problems, carry out
structural economic reforms and reforms in the areas of
management, promoting democracy, law and order,
judicial systems and the establishment of democratic
armed forces; it is also borne out by the course charted
by African States to strengthen regional inter-African
cooperation, thereby ensuring a joint platform to
collectively resolve the major challenges facing Africa,
to strengthen peace, stability and security on the
continent, to increase Africa's peacekeeping
capabilities, to combat infections diseases and to
improve environmental conditions in Africa. We
believe that the course of action plotted by African
States merits support, given the interrelated causes of
conflict on the continent.

As the Council is aware, there is no quick or easy
fix to meeting the major challenges that exist in
preventing conflict. Africa's friends, and Africans
themselves, must undertake multifaceted and
painstaking joint efforts in order to break the vicious
circle, in which insufficient development breeds social
problems that in turn intensify political and military
instability, thereby leading to conflict and ultimately
destroying social and economic development
programmes.

We are pleased that we have come to today's
meeting with some positive results. The Secretary-
General today gave us some optimistic information in
saying that the number of conflicts in Africa has recently
declined. Another positive element has been the
constructive practical dialogue between the Security
Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union in resolving acute crisis situations - a
dialogue that recurs on a regular basis. We believe that the
existing agreements between the two bodies, especially
the Addis Ababa agreement of 16 November 2006 and the
joint communique of 16 June 2007, which was issued
during the Council's mission to Africa, serve to
strengthen the basis for that interaction and sets a course
of action for the long term. We also support the proposal
to have the Council once again consider ways to further
implement resolution 1625 (2005), once the Secretary-
General submits his report on the issue.

I should also point out the evident increase in the
efforts of African States themselves in the area of
preventing and resolving conflicts on the continent,
especially through the work of the African Union and
regional and subregional organizations. That illustrates
Africa's readiness and capability to assume
responsibility for resolving its problems. In that regard,
I should like to note another important element,
namely, that the further development of early-warning
mechanisms, which have been frequently referred to
today, must go hand-in-hand with the strengthening of
cooperation and coordination mechanisms within the
United Nations system as well as with international
partners, especially with African regional and
subregional organizations. In our view, successful early
identification of such conflicts will depend upon how
comprehensively we implement the early warning
system and on how carefully we bear in mind the
specificities of individual conflict situations.

We share the view of the Secretary-General that
investing in logistical and intelligence capacities in
order to prevent conflicts and strengthen the
capabilities of the United Nations in the area of
conflict mediation and political analysis to assess
conflict situations will be very beneficial for the
international community, as it will contribute to
lowering the number of conflicts in Africa.

There is no doubt that without truly achieving
long-term resolution of local conflicts it will not be
possible to ensure that Africa can really achieve robust
sustainable development and full integration into the
world economy.

One of the key components of a strategy to
strengthen peace must be the establishment of an
effective pan-African security architecture that aims
both at conflict prevention and resolution and at
comprehensive resolution of post-conflict
reconstruction issues.

The international community must do everything
possible to ensure that the mechanisms to prevent and
resolve conflict set up by the African Union and the
continent's subregions become fully operational.

We also believe that we must do more to activate
the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter,
encouraging regional organizations to take proactive
steps in the areas of preventive diplomacy and the
peaceful resolution of disputes. That entails in
particular continuing the practice of African
peacekeeping operations supported by the Council and
providing assistance to establish African rapid-
deployment forces and early-warning systems. In doing
so, we must of course comply with the prerogatives set
for the Council by the Charter as regards the
establishment of peacekeeping operations whose
mandates include the use of force.

Russia will continue to provide all possible
assistance to resolve the problems of African countries,
with which we have traditionally had ties of friendship
and partnership. Africa was, and continues to be, a
priority focus. We have been very pleased to note the
growing role of African States in world affairs and
their contributions to strengthening the multilateral
approach to resolving the most acute problems of our
time.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the
Russian delegation supports the draft presidential
statement that has been prepared by the President with
regard to today's agenda item. In our view, this
document contains key provisions that constitute a
programme of action for the international community
in its efforts to maintain peace and security and to
further enhance the role of the Security Council in
conflict prevention and resolution in Africa.
