Mr. Prendergast: I regret that, in briefing the
Council today, I must confirm what we all know: that
the past month has brought little or nothing by way of
substantive moves towards peace. The narrow window
of opportunity cited by Terje Reed-Larsen, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to the
Palestine Liberation Organization and the Palestinian
Authority, in his briefing to the Council last month, has
not opened wider. The peace process remains
stalemated.

This situation is tragic. It is also frustrating,
because the solution is evident, although to implement
it would require courage and the political will to take
risks for peace. The peace process will resume only
when both parties recognize that their mutual concerns
must be addressed through parallel steps, and not in a
sequential manner littered with preconditions. Parallel
steps are the approach adopted by the road map. If it is
to succeed, a basic requirement is that Palestinians and
Israelis acknowledge and address each other's core
concerns.

The Government of Israel's most basic concern
remains the security of the State and of the Israeli
people. In response, as a necessary first step, the
Palestinian Authority should take effective action to
halt all acts of terror and violence against Israelis. The
Palestinians' most basic concerns are territory and
viability - meaning the end of occupation and the
establishment of an independent, sovereign and viable
State in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In response, and
also as a necessary first step, the Government of Israel
should take effective action to halt settlement
expansion, the construction of the separation barrier
and all actions that work against the contiguity - and
therefore the viability - of the State.

Despite initial contacts between the new
Palestinian Government and the Government of Israel,
both parties have continued to ignore each other's core
concerns. Be it with regard to terror or territory, they
have fallen short of carrying out their preliminary,
Phase I commitments under the Quartet's road map.

The Palestinian Authority took no tangible
measures during the past month to establish control
over the various groups that use violence and terror. It
has so far failed to reform its security apparatus or -
as called for in the road map - to consolidate it under
the single authority of an empowered interior minister.
There is no indication that the Palestinian Authority
intends to do so in the near future. At the same time,
Palestinian militant factions have so far failed to agree
on a comprehensive cessation of violence, although
they continue their dialogue thanks to the tireless and
very welcome efforts of the Government of Egypt.

Although Palestinian violence declined
considerably overall last month, the absence of clear
action on security makes it difficult for the Palestinian
Authority to claim responsibility for this trend. In fact,
the Government of Israel perceives the decline in
violence as being the result of its military and security
measures. In addition, the last month has seen a
worrying deterioration in the Palestinian Authority's
capability to maintain domestic law and order. If this
trend continues, there could be more unrest on the
Palestinian street, with negative repercussions for the
governing control of the Authority.

The Government of Israel - including Prime
Minister Sharon - has repeatedly committed itself to
implementation of the road map. However, such
statements have not been matched by action. Israel has
not fulfilled its core commitment to remove all
settlement outposts erected since March 2001 and, as
the security situation improves, to implement a
complete settlement freeze. Quite the opposite has
happened. Settlement outposts have increased and the
Government of Israel is proceeding with the
construction of the West Bank barrier. Together with
other settlement infrastructure and a tight closure
policy, this construction is fragmenting the West Bank
into non-contiguous patches of territory and is eroding
Palestinians' trust in the peace process. If this process
continues, the West Bank will look more like
Bophuthatswana than the basis for a viable and
independent State.

In the face of this discouraging situation, the
international community must maintain its involvement
in the peace process. The Security Council adopted
resolution 1515 (2003) calling for the implementation
of the road map, and this sends a very positive signal to
the parties. The General Assembly has asked the
International Court of Justice to provide an advisory
opinion on the legality of construction of the separation
barrier. Quartet representatives continue their informal
and ground-level consultation on how to bring the
parties to implement the road map. However, it is all
too apparent that the parties need a more vigorous
involvement of the key players in the international
community.

Both parties have explanations as to why the
peace process appears deadlocked and why neither is
implementing its road map commitments.

The Palestinian Authority explains that, to muster
enough domestic support to act swiftly against violence
and terror, it must have a political horizon. In its view,
Palestinian extremists are strengthened by such Israeli
actions as settlement expansion, barrier construction,
tight closures, house demolitions and extrajudicial
killings. If Israel ended these practices, the Palestinian
Authority could, it says, more easily rally support
among the Palestinian people and better confront
extremists.

The Government of Israel explains that it
continues these measures because it sees no genuine
Palestinian action on security and terrorism. Thus,
Israel will be ready to fulfil its commitments under the
road map, it says, only when the Palestinian Authority
acts swiftly against militant groups and dismantles
what it terms the "terrorist infrastructure".

Unfortunately, developments on the ground
during the last month have reinforced both parties'
justification of the stalemate. In particular, both sides
experienced a continuation of violence. Since our last
briefing, 58 Palestinians have been killed. During the
same period, ll Israelis were killed. Almost 440
Palestinians and 65 Israelis have been wounded. On 25
December, a suicide bomber struck in the heart of
Israel, killing four people and wounding more than 20
civilians. Yet again, on 14 January, a suicide bomber
killed four Israeli soldiers and wounded 10 at Gaza's
Erez crossing. In addition, more than 62 mortars and 38
rocket attacks on Israeli targets were launched from
Palestinian areas.

Israel has resumed extrajudicial killings. On 25
December, Israeli helicopters fired two missiles at a
civilian vehicle in Gaza City, killing two Palestinian
militants and three bystanders and injuring 12 civilians.
On 8 January, Israeli special forces assassinated a 31-
year-old Palestinian national security officer. House
demolitions have continued. During the reporting
period, the Israeli authorities demolished 36 houses in
Nablus, Hebron and the Jerusalem area.

The Israel Defence Forces (IDF) launched at least
15 incursions into Palestinian towns, villages and
refugee camps, which often included the use of
disproportionate and deadly force in civilian areas. An
incursion into Rafah on 23 December took the lives of
eight Palestinians and injured dozens of people, with
children and civilians among the casualties. The
Secretary-General strongly condemned the Israeli
incursion and reminded Israel of its responsibilities as
an occupying Power under international law.

Since the middle of December, the IDF has
carried out almost daily major incursions into Nablus.
On 26 December - the day after a terror attack - it
launched a full-scale military operation in the historic
old city of Nablus. To date, 10 Palestinians have been
killed and more than 50 injured in Nablus. Several
historic buildings and houses were damaged or
destroyed. The old city was placed under almost
continuous curfew and movement limited to
humanitarian agencies.

The situation on the ground continues to cause
great harm to the Palestinian economy. Israel's ongoing
internal and external closures of the occupied
Palestinian territory remain the central impediment to
economic stabilization and recovery. Slight economic
improvement has been observed in places, in part
through IDF troops moving out of some of the major
Palestinian cities. But closure remains the defining
reality for these areas, with roadblocks and, in some
places, construction of the barrier almost completely
halting movement. The closure system continues to
impede the international community's efforts to deliver
emergency and humanitarian aid. Improvements here
and there will not change the rapidly deteriorating
overall trends; only a political agreement can reverse
those trends.
There have been some particularly disturbing
economic developments that may have serious political
and humanitarian consequences and further derail the
peace process. At a major donor meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee held in Rome in December, donors
and the parties discussed the first substantive review of
the rising costs and complexity of aid delivery. One of
the glaring examples was the direct costs of closure
borne by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East alone - a total
of $22,000 each day.

Furthermore, we are starting to witness serious
signs of donor fatigue, which would have dramatic
consequences both for the financial status of the
Palestinian Authority and for the ongoing humanitarian
relief effort. The Authority's financial situation is
perilous, with the budgetary shortfall for 2004
estimated at $650 million. Donors' direct budget
support dropped from $531 million in 2001 to $230
million last year. Palestinian tax revenues transferred
by Israel are diminishing. Although Israel has handed
over most of the withheld revenues, $190 million are
still blocked by Israeli court orders.

The Palestinian Authority's expenditures are now
outpacing revenues by $30 to $40 million per month.
As a result, the Authority could not meet all its
financial and budgetary obligations in December and
was forced to cut further salaries, pensions and social
support, even after it resorted to borrowing from the
banks. At this stage, it is not clear how January public
sector salaries will be paid, let alone other
expenditures.

In response to this budgetary crisis, Prime
Minister Abu Allah, Minister of Finance Fayyad and
other Palestinian Authority officials have made major
efforts to raise funds from western and Arab donors,
but have had only modest success. Recognizing that the
Palestinian Authority faces bankruptcy, the World Bank
suggested at the Rome Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
meeting that a trust fund be created to generate
additional budgetary support from donors. That effort
is now under way, and it deserves the support of the
international community.

Against this backdrop of violence, misery and
stagnation, both parties have threatened unilateral
steps. Prime Minister Sharon stated his intention to
implement unilaterally a separation plan if he
concludes that the Palestinian side has failed to take
effective action against violence. The Palestinian
Authority, for its part, declared that it reserves the right
to declare statehood unilaterally if Israel resorts to
unilateral separation or, indeed, to reject the two-State
solution altogether.

It must be stressed that in such a protracted
conflict, unilateralism is a policy that will fuel
additional violence, hatred and hostility. Peace and
security can be achieved only when both sides work
out a solution together, across the negotiating table, in
the framework of recognized international agreements
and with the active support and involvement of the
international community.

It is still possible to move towards a negotiated
settlement that would bring peace and security to the
Middle East. The road map remains a viable and
pragmatic plan. It outlines practical and reasonable
steps that, if taken, would move the parties towards the
achievement of a vision of two States, Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security. It
also outlines a framework for resuming negotiations
between Israel and both Syria and Lebanon, taking all
parties towards a comprehensive peace based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973) - an outcome that is essential for long-term
peace and stability in the Middle East. Yet the
implementation of the road map needs recognition by
the parties that unilateralism does not pay and that they
should fulfil their obligations in parallel. It also
requires the strong and consistent engagement of the
international community, led by the Quartet.

As the Council knows, the calm that has long
characterized the Israeli-Syrian front was broken last
October. Since then, tension and threats of further
hostile actions have been frequent. Recently, worrying
reports outlined an Israeli plan to expand settlements
on the Golan Heights. Although the reliability of those
reports remains unclear, it should be noted, in any case,
that settlement activities are illegal and must stop.
A resumption of the peace process on the Syrian
and Lebanese tracks is needed to avoid a potential
deterioration of the situation along this front. President
Al-Assad of Syria has asked Israel to resume peace
talks. We believe that it would be in the interest of
peace and security that Israel respond positively to that
overture. Resuming negotiations between the two
countries would also renew hopes for peace in the
region, reduce tension and enhance stability at a critical
juncture.

Since the last briefing to the Security Council, the
Blue Line between Lebanon and Israel has been calm,
though still tense. On at least four occasions, Israeli
jets have violated Lebanese airspace. We reiterate our
calls on the Government of Israel to comply with
Security Council resolutions 425 (1978) and 1310
(2000) and to refrain from such violations. There were
no reports of anti-aircraft fire from Lebanon on any of
those occasions, and we commend that restraint.

On 12 December and again on 4 January, the
Israel Defence Forces informed the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) that it had
identified explosive devices on the Israeli side of the
Blue Line. That development posed a risk to lives on
both sides of the Line and had the potential to
destabilize the area. We urge all parties to refrain from
any actions that could lead to such destabilization, and
we call on the Government of Lebanon to establish full
control over south Lebanon in order to ensure that
international peace and security prevail.

It is quite clear that the peace process in the
Middle East has suffered serious setbacks. The hopes
that were generated in Madrid in 1991 and in Oslo in
1993 now appear as distant memories. Yet the stakes
are too high for us to allow the region to sink into
despair and conflict.

The road to peace is clear. It is spelled out in
Security Council resolution 1515 (2003), which
endorses the road map. The international community
agrees on the end goal: a comprehensive peace based
on Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973)
and 1397 (2002). We must revive our collective efforts
to persuade the parties to move towards that goal. The
dangers of inaction are great. Time is on no one's side.

