Mr. Menon (Singapore): I would like to thank
Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari for his briefing.

Singapore is currently the Chairman of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We
are, however, making this statement in our national
capacity.
At the last meeting of the Security Council to
discuss the situation in Myanmar, my delegation had
referred to the efforts of the United Nations, as
embodied by Mr. Gambari, as unique and irreplaceable.
This description remains valid. Mr. Gambari continues
to have the most critical quality for the role he is
playing, and that is the trust of both the Myanmar
Government and Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Both parties
see value in his continued engagement. To date, no one
has done better than Mr. Gambari.

The situation in Myanmar is extraordinarily
complex and Mr. Gambari's report only confirms that.
There are mixed signals. On the one hand, there
continue to be reports of arbitrary arrests in Myanmar
and we remain very concerned. We call for the release
of those detained during the recent protests, as well as
previously detained political prisoners.

We are disappointed by the Myanmar
Government's decision to end the assignment of the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
Resident Coordinator Charles Petrie. Mr. Petrie and
UNDP, along with other United Nations agencies, have
consistently tried to help improve socio-economic
conditions in Myanmar. That move by the Myanmar
Government sends the wrong signal about its
commitment and willingness to work on those crucial
issues with the United Nations.

But there have also been positive indications
coming from Myanmar, which we should not dismiss.
It is a positive sign that the Special Rapporteur on the
Situation of Human Rights in Myanmar, Mr. Paulo
Sergio Pinheiro, has been allowed to visit Myanmar
after a four-year hiatus. Minister for Labour Aung Kyi
has been appointed as the liaison person between Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi and the Myanmar Government.
That is another positive step that hopefully sets the
stage for serious discussions and a genuine dialogue.

While we are disappointed that Mr. Gambari did
not meet Myanmar's head of State, Senior General
Than Shwe, during his last visit to Myanmar, we are
encouraged that Mr. Gambari had access to the rest of
the Myanmar leadership, including Prime Minister
Thein Sein and Myanmar's State Peace and
Development Council (SPDC) Authoritative Team. Mr.
Gambari also met Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, as well as
other stakeholders, including members of the National
League for Democracy (NLD), the National Unity
Party and civic groups. We welcome the partial lifting

of political restrictions on Daw Aung San Suu Kyi,
which allowed her to meet fellow NLD officials on
9 November.

The most significant development was the
statement of Daw Aung Suu Kyi, which Mr. Gambari
delivered to the international community on her behalf
on 8 November. That was the first time in a very long
time that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's views had been
heard by the outside world. Daw Aung San Suu Kyi's
statement underscored her commitment to discussions
with the regime in order to achieve national
reconciliation. She welcomed the appointment of the
liaison person Minister Aung Kyi, described their first
meeting as a constructive one and looked forward to
further discussions. She stated her expectation for a
meaningful and time bound dialogue with the SPDC
leadership. She said that she stood ready to cooperate
with the Government in order to make the process of
dialogue a success. Most important, she welcomed the
necessary good offices role of the United Nations.

Of course, it would have been much better had
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi been released and allowed to
deliver the remarks herself. In that regard, we hope that
the Myanmar Government will release Daw Aung San
Suu Kyi immediately and unconditionally so that she
can participate fully in the process of political dialogue
and national reconciliation.

Nevertheless, it is extremely significant that in
her statement, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi expressed clear
support for the current process and the good offices
role of the United Nations. We are therefore
encouraged that the Myanmar Government has invited
Mr. Gambari back for another visit. We urge the
Myanmar Government to continue to engage
Mr. Gambari at the highest level and to grant him full
access to all parties in Myanmar. National
reconciliation will require commitment and dialogue at
the highest level.

The Myanmar Government also needs to establish
a meaningful, results-oriented and time bound political
dialogue with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. Such a process
should be inclusive and involve all stakeholders,
including the various ethnic groups. We are heartened
by NLD spokesman Nyan Win's press statement of
9 November that Daw Aung San Suu Kyi believed the
ruling authorities have the will for national
reconciliation and that she intends to work with
Minister Aung Kyi.
The international community should respect the
views of Daw Aung San Sun Kyi and do what we can
to support Mr. Gambari in his mission. We should not
make an already complex mission more difficult by
precipitate moves. The progress that Mr. Gambari has
made so far is not insignificant. We have to recognize
that a genuine political dialogue leading to national
reconciliation is a long-term process. There are no
quick fixes and we should not complicate the process
by injecting unreasonable time lines or unrealistic
expectations. What we can do is to support
Mr. Gambari and encourage all the parties involved to
engage in a meaningful dialogue. We would only be
doing the Myanmar people and ourselves a major
disservice if we were to prematurely give up on the
United Nations good offices mission. Mr. Gambari
continues to represent our best hope for progress. He
should be invested with the requisite support, authority
and prestige.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN) and its regional partners fully support
Mr. Gambari's efforts. Singapore's Foreign Minister,
George Yeo, recently met his counterparts in China,
Japan and India for informal consultations on how the
region could support the national reconciliation process
in Myanmar. Singapore's Prime Minister, Lee Hsien
Loong, has invited Mr. Gambari to brief the leaders of
the East Asia Summit in Singapore next week, on
21 November. That will be an important opportunity
for Mr. Gambari to personally update and engage
Summit leaders from ASEAN, China, India, Japan, the
Republic of Korea, Australia and New Zealand. This
can only strengthen the Secretary-General's good
offices mission. We look forward to welcoming
Mr. Gambari to Singapore next week and to his
participation in the EAS discussions on Myanmar.

