Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I wish at the outset to congratulate the
Republic of Peru on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and on holding this
important debate.

I also thank the briefers for their valuable
presentations this morning.

The United Arab Emirates is participating in
this debate because of the great importance my
country attaches to combating terrorism, including
its relationship with organized crime. My country,
as an important commercial and financial hub of the
Middle East, seeks to combat these serious crimes at
all levels. As speakers have pointed out today, there
is a growing linkage between organized crime and
terrorism, whereby terrorists benefit from trafficking
in persons, weapons, cultural heritage and natural
resources, as well as kidnappings and bank robbery,
to finance their operations and support their terrorist
activities. Therefore, the elimination of international
terrorism requires cutting off all sources of financial
and logistical support, including organized crime.

The concept paper submitted for this debate
(S/2019/537, annex) points to the importance of sharing
best experiences and practices to address the linkages
between terrorism and organized crime and to explore
ways of enhancing cooperation among regional,
international and subregional organizations. In this
context, I would like to note a number of initiatives and
actions taken by the United Arab Emirates to disrupt
the linkages between terrorism and organized crime,
especially in the area of financial support, which have
contributed to my country's ranking among the top
five countries of the world in terms of commitment to
combating money-laundering and terrorist financing,
according to the Global Competitiveness Report.

At the local level, the United Arab Emirates
has strengthened its legal frameworks to combat
the financing of terrorism and implement the latest
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force
(FATF), which contribute to ensuring continued
compliance with international standards related to
combating money-laundering and countering the
financing of terrorism. Accordingly, my country
has issued wide-ranging legislation to address these
crimes, including Federal Decree No. (20) of 2018
on countering money-laundering and combating the
financing of terrorism and illegal organizations. That
law includes provisions covering the obligations under
the FATF recommendations.

My country has also established a national
committee to counter money-laundering and combat the
financing of terrorism and other illegal organizations
within the Central Bank of the United Arab Emirates.
The committee receives and analyses suspicious
transactions from financial institutions and refers them
to the competent authorities for appropriate action.
It must be emphasized that our efforts to combat the
linkages between organized crime and terrorism cannot
be effective without close cooperation with the private
sector and non-profit and charitable organizations.

In addition, the United Arab Emirates seeks to
protect its domestic financial system by applying the
latest and most efficient global systems, including by
providing financial intelligence units with the necessary
equipment and expertise, enabling them to analyse and
investigate suspicious transactions. In that regard, we
are proud to be the first country of the Gulf region
to launch the goAML platform to collect and analyse
financial information on anti-money-laundering and
combating the financing of terrorism, in cooperation
with the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

At the international level, my country has spared
no effort to combat this phenomenon. In addition to
its accession to regional and international treaties and
conventions relating to combating the financing of
terrorism, the United Arab Emirates has co-sponsored
and implemented Security Council resolutions on
this issue. Most recently, we co-sponsored resolution
2462 (2019), which calls on Member States to take
further measures to prevent and combat the financing
of terrorism. My country is also a founding member
of the Middle East and North Africa Financial Action
Task Force, which plays an important role in the
exchange of information between financial intelligence
units to combat terrorism financing in the region.
The relevant authority in my country has signed
more than 45 memorandums of understanding with
international entities to combat money-laundering and
terrorism financing.

In addition, my country co-sponsored resolution
2347 (2017), which is the first Security Council
resolution to deal exclusively with combating the
destruction and illegal trafficking in cultural heritage
by terrorist groups in armed conflict. The resolution
was adopted following the launch by the United Arab
Emirates, in cooperation with France and UNESCO, of
the International Alliance for the Protection of Heritage
in Conflict Areas. This is an international fund to
protect cultural property and combat the theft, smuggle
and sale of such property by terrorists to finance their
destructive activities. The fund has raised nearly
$60 million, of which $15 million were provided by the
United Arab Emirates.

I would like to stress that the United Arab Emirates
will continue to take all measures and implement best
practices to combat the linkage between organized
crime and international terrorism, including by
combating money-laundering and strengthening border
security in the interest of maintaining international
peace and security.

In conclusion, I would like to make the
following recommendations.
First, we must focus on implementing Security
Council resolutions and FATF recommendations.
In that context, the United Nations should focus on
strengthening the capacity of Member States to better
understand and implement their new commitments
when the Security Council adopts resolutions on these
issues, in addition to holding accountable States that
finance and support terrorist groups in clear violation
of Council resolutions.

Secondly, we must continue to promote a better
understanding of the linkage between international
terrorism and organized crime, including through
further studies and research, the sharing of experiences
and best practices, and improved regional and
international cooperation in this regard.

Thirdly, we must understand the specific context
of each region upon taking action and ensure the
implementation of programmes aimed at disrupting the
linkage between organized crime and terrorism, taking
into account the advice and opinion of the States of
these regions on the best means to combat such crimes.

The meeting rose at 3.45 pm.
