Mr. Gounden: Let me take this opportunity to
thank the President, his Permanent Mission to the
United Nations and his Government, as well as the
other members of the Security Council for giving civil
society this opportunity to present our views before
this body. Your initiative, Mr. President, is a sober
reminder of the changes taking place in international
relations.

In the report of the Panel of Eminent Persons on
United Nations-Civil Society Relations, the Chairman
of the Panel and former President of Brazil,
Mr. Fernando Henrique Cardoso, indicated that,

"The rise of civil society is indeed one of
the landmark events of our times. Global
governance is no longer the sole domain of
Governments. The growing participation and
influence of non-State actors is enhancing
democracy and reshaping multilateralism. Civil
society organizations are also the prime movers
of some of the most innovative initiatives to deal
with emerging global threats". (A/58/817, p. 3)

It is in this context and with the understanding
that the complex conflicts of today require the
collective wisdom and effort of all sectors of society in
the emergence of a new form of multilateralism based
on the opening of the Charter of the United Nations -
"We the peoples" - that we the peoples - States,
civil society and the private sector - need to forge a
new partnership. That partnership must reject
distinctions based on wealth and power and on
geographic size and population. It must be based on
collective wisdom, with each partner driven by its own
comparative advantage, expertise and opportunity.

At the outset, let me indicate that we recognize
and respect that the settlement of political disputes
between States and within States is, and should remain,
the domain of nation-States. Civil society should
complement the role of nation-States and remain
outside the formal structures of the United Nations,
since its strength, legitimacy and flexibility derive
from its independence.

However, today conflicts are multifaceted and
complex in nature, and they increasingly require a
comprehensive strategy involving a multiplicity of
actors, including civil society. There are many stages to
a conflict and many dimensions to a conflict.
Depending on the complexity of the conflict all those
stages and dimensions require different actors with
different strategies and skills.

In our own case, as the African Centre for the
Constructive Resolution of Disputes (ACCORD), we
have met and worked with warlords in Somalia when
many States where not able to meet with them. We
have trained and prepared rebel groups in Burundi and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo for negotiations,
and they will testify to the role that we have played in
empowering them to enter negotiations. We have also
assisted the Facilitator for the Inter-Congolese
Dialogue, former President Masire of Botswana, to
prepare his mediation team and advised him on
mediation process and strategy during the actual talks.

As we speak, almost 30 United Nations officials
from the Department of Peacekeeping Operations are
being hosted by our institution in South Africa, for a
course for senior mission-leaders. In January 2005, we
completed and submitted the post-conflict
reconstruction framework document for the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD) after
we were commissioned by NEPAD to develop and
manage a process for the development of such a
document.

These initiatives are practical examples of civil
society and governmental and intergovernmental
cooperation towards conflict prevention and the pacific
settlement of disputes.

I turn now to one of the most important
developments to come out of the United Nations
reform process: the Peacebuilding Commission. Its
introduction and purpose could not have been timelier
for a country like Burundi, which has just emerged
from conflict but faces huge challenges, has very few
resources, and is confronted with competing donor and
non-governmental organization (NGO) priorities for
assistance. The need could not be more urgent for the
centralized coordination of development efforts that
bring all actors together to work out, with the
Government of the host country and the local
population, a post-conflict reconstruction agenda and a
sustainable development agenda. However, the
Commission will be stillborn unless it can mobilize the
broadest set of relevant constituencies. To do that, it
must make itself accessible to all relevant actors at the
local, national, regional and international levels
through all the forums of the United Nations.

In the minute remaining, let me indicate that,
apart from a new partnership, the world needs a shared
consensus. All good conflict management practitioners
know that one cannot make headway in resolving a
conflict without first getting the conflicting parties to
have a shared understanding of the problems
confronting them. In building a new partnership, we
need to develop a shared consensus on the nature,
causes and manifestations of the security threats that
confront the world today. With such a shared
understanding, common solutions will follow.

In 1945, we united under this body to bring peace
to the world. Today, 60 years later, we are divided
about how to bring peace to the world. Let not future
generations say that here stood a people who presided
over a United Nations of divided nations. Let us forge
a new partnership and build a new consensus.

