At the outset, Indonesia thanks the presidency for having convened this briefing today. I welcome the presence of the Dominican Republic's Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Miguel Vargas Maldonado, at this meeting. I also thank the briefers, Mr. Qu Dongyu, Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Mr. David Beasley, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme; and Mr. Jan Egeland, Secretary General of the Norwegian Refugee Council. The protection of civilians will remain Indonesia's top priority. Last year, under Indonesia's presidency of the Council, we were proud to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the Council's adoption of the protection of civilians as an item on its agenda. I have said it before, and I will say it again: we are here to save lives. Protecting civilians, including from conflict-induced hunger, should always be the core aim of the Security Council. The implementation of resolution 2417 (2018) is becoming ever more pertinent, particularly at this time of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). Allow me to focus on the following points. First, starvation should never be used as a method of warfare. The parties to a conflict should respect international law, including international humanitarian law, and the resolutions of the Security Council. However, actors in most conflicts today are continuing to perpetrate violations in that respect. Attacks against humanitarian workers, medical missions and civilian assets persist, as does the deliberate disruption of humanitarian access. The Council should explore innovative ways to secure respect for global norms against the harming of civilians. We continue to support the work of the Secretary-General in pursuing avenues to prevent and end armed conflicts. To that end, it is now more important than ever for us to adhere to the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire and provide access for humanitarian assistance during the COVID-19 pandemic. Violence is never the solution. We should continue to promote dialogue, political negotiations and other peaceful means. At the same time, we need to continue to enhance coordination among humanitarian, development and peacebuilding efforts. We also call for unimpeded humanitarian access for humanitarian actors to provide relief, including food assistance, to those who are in need. Secondly, international cooperation is vital in protecting civilians. Indeed, the primary responsibility for the protection of civilians rests with each country, yet we often find that there is a gap between such responsibility and a country's capacity to fulfil it. International support, including through technical and financial assistance, is truly vital to enable such capacity-building. The promotion of a culture of peace, with a rights-based approach and the requisite laws, is equally important. Lessons learned and best practices should be shared. It is also important to open borders, safeguard the global supply chain and ensure that there is no disruption of trade. We as the Council must be able to facilitate measures to strengthen countries' capacities to protect civilians as well as sustain peace and ensure the continuity of economic activities and the availability of food. Thirdly, the imperative to protect civilians must be embedded throughout the peace continuum, from conflict prevention and peacekeeping to peacebuilding and sustainable development. The synergy is clear: for peace to flourish, sustainable development is required. The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the United Nations peacebuilding architecture are the tools we dispose of to achieve this goal. Let us utilize them. We concur with the statement made by the Minister on the imperative of combining efforts to strengthen the pillars of peace, security, development, environment and humanitarian assistance of the United Nations. We will continue to support the central role of the United Nations on this matter and endure in our determination to, as enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. That is our collective effort, and everyone should be committed to that noble cause. No civilian should be left behind or unprotected; no one should be left hungry.
