Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): It is good to see
the British presidency devote an open Council meeting to
Africa. When we planned a similar meeting for our
presidency in September we were not at all sure it would
be a success. After all, non-permanent members, who get
to chair the Security Council once or twice in a
generation, are always a bit apprehensive about what they
organize. Precisely because their presidency is such a rare
occurrence, the pressure to turn it into something
spectacular is intense, and under those circumstances it is
easy to get it wrong.

Against that background, we find it very reassuring
that the two permanent members which, by virtue of the
alphabet are called upon to chair the Security Council just
before and just after the turn of the century have both
decided to devote open meetings to Africa. Apparently we
did not get it wrong when we set this trend in September.
As a matter of fact, future presidencies will have some
explaining to do when they do not devote an open
meeting to Africa.

Some African delegations will welcome this
development, but others are bound to regard it as a sham,
a substitute for the effective involvement that Africa so
desperately needs. Our African colleagues have not yet
spoken, but my hunch is that this is what some of them
would like to say, and would say if they were sufficiently
straightforward. Next door, in our informal consultations,
we have heard plenty of statements to that effect. I hope
I am abiding by the rules you have set for this meeting,
Mr. President. This is an open debate, so we may react,
but we may also pre-empt.

The notorious double standard, which is supposedly
practised by us, is a big problem, and I would like to

make a few observations about it.

First, we agree with the French delegation that
political engagement is not enough; funding remains a
crucial factor. The Netherlands puts its money where its
mouth is. We are spending a lot of money on Kosovo, but
our total contribution to Africa has not been affected.
What is going to Kosovo is new money. There has not
been any diversion in the flow of Dutch funds destined
for Africa.

 

Secondly, there is no slackening in our involvement in
African projects that are of special interest to the Security
Council, such as our contributions to the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) in Sierra Leone and to the Arusha
process in Burundi.

Thirdly, we feel that we cannot really be blamed for
our involvement in Kosovo. The former Yugoslavia is our
backyard, and our security is at stake in that part of the
world. Due to globalization, however, ever more Dutchmen
are beginning to see Africa as their region as well. The
days when humanitarian catastrophes in Africa were
faraway occurrences that did not immediately affect us are
definitely over.

But those who claim that the international community
stands ready to intervene in Kosovo and East Timor, while
it ignores the African continent, overlook two facts. The
first is that the United Nations has deployed more
peacekeeping operations in Africa than in any other single
region. Of the 32 operations launched between 1989 and
1998, 13 were deployed in Africa. This is probably known
to most people in this room, but some may argue that these
13 peacekeeping operations cannot match the scale, speed
and cost of the actions in Kosovo and East Timor. Actions
of that magnitude are apparently only possible in Europe or
in Asia.

We appreciate this argument, but we must point out -
and this is the second point that tends to be overlooked -
that Kosovo and East Timor are far from the norm for
collective action in both Europe and Asia. The air strikes
against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia were launched
without a specific Security Council mandate, and even the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) countries that
participated in them express the hope that in future such
actions can be avoided. It is hard to imagine that the
parliaments in the 16 NATO countries would have given
the green light for these air strikes if they had not
witnessed eight years of "ethnic cleansing" at the hands of
Milosevic, first in the Krajina and Eastern Slavonia, then in
Bosnia and finally in Kosovo. It was a unique case of
political will generated by accumulated revulsion.

The East Timor case was not typical either. After
many years of stalemate, the international community had
been greatly relieved that Indonesia, Portugal and the
United Nations had finally negotiated a settlement. The
anticlimax was all the greater when it then turned out that
elements in the Indonesian armed forces did not hesitate to
violate the agreement when the East Timorese seemed to
opt for independence. Moreover, the 5 May Agreement
was curiously flawed in that it left the responsibility for
law and order with Indonesia, even in the case of a ballot
in favour of independence. At any rate, the determining
factor was that a neighbouring country was ready to lead
the humanitarian intervention.

These constitute exceptional circumstances that
facilitated the actions concerned. In other cases there may
well be circumstances that make such actions more
difficult. In Africa this may be a lack of central authority
or inter-ethnic strife. Ethnic rivalry is an exceptionally
intractable problem. Europe has its share of experience
with it, too, but over the years the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) has had
some successes in combating it.

The Organization of African Unity (OAU) took a
historic decision when in 1963 it decided to accept the
boundaries that African States had inherited from colonial
authorities. This has left Africa with secure borders, but
also with ethnically heterogeneous States. It is not for a
European delegation to tell the OAU what it could do, but
a logical sequel to the 1963 decision might be to help
devise workable African models of multi-ethnicity. Such
assistance would not be interference in the domestic
affairs of its members, but an essential complement to the
doctrine of inviolable borders. This would seem a
legitimate suggestion in light of the fact that almost all
the conflicts in Africa rage within sovereign States.

