Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I wish to extend Jordan's appreciation to Australia for
convening this meeting and for organizing the high-
level review of United Nations sanctions, bearing in
mind that the last review took place in 2006. I would
also like to express my thanks to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, and to
the Secretary General ofINTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock.

Jordan appreciates Australia's efforts to
comprehensivelyreview the sanctions regimes, including
initiating targeted measures, improving procedures and
assessing the position of States affected by sanctions

aimed at preserving international peace and security.
Sanctions regimes have become multiple and intricate.
The challenge of our deliberations under the high-level
review has been to build on the progress in sanctions
policy that has occurred in recent years through
improved procedures for listing and de-listing, as well
as the use of panels of experts for monitoring technical
sanctions and arms embargoes. Our discussions have
revealed that there is room for improvement in the
process of consultation and coordination within the
United Nations system, including the Security Council,
the sanctions committees and the concerned Member
States. The same conclusion applies to issues relating to
technical assistance and capacity-building, which have
been identified as key obstacles to the optimization of
United Nations sanctions.

It is undeniable that developing countries face the
greatest burden with respect to enforcing sanctions
throughout Africa and the Middle East. They need to
address significant challenges that include the need
to enhance their capacity to monitor and implement
increasingly technical and targeted measures over
long and porous borders, as well as to improve their
data systems. To address such tasks, my delegation
hopes that the Security Council, together with the
sanctions committees and the Secretariat, will be able
lay the foundation for an institutional dialogue among
assistance providers, donors and adversely affected
States, through which the former may be able and
willing to provide sanctions-related assistance for
clearly identified needs. In that respect, we welcome
the idea of establishing a voluntary United Nations
sanctions trust fund to aid such endeavours and
proactively involve recipient States concerning their
needs.

More importantly, Jordan hopes that the Security
Council will be able to pave the way for developing
a structured approach, as envisaged by the Charter
of the United Nations, for close cooperation between
the adversely affected States - both targeted and
neighbouring States - and the sanctions committees.
To that end, there needs to be a systematic dialogue
that can identify the views, burdens and needs of the
concerned States from the moment that such measures
are imposed. That is becoming all the more important
inasmuch as a considerable number of affected States
implementing sanctions are failed or fragile States at
best.

In other words, the main issue is not simply to
provide technical assistance, but also to pay attention to
States and regions that are disproportionately burdened.
In order to enable them to fulfil their obligations under
the Charter, it is vital to work cooperatively with them
towards finding sustainable solutions that address their
needs.

