The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

We would like to thank Special Representative
Salame' for his sobering briefing today. The key
conclusion from today's meeting is that he has the full
support of the Security Council for his work. We are
united behind him.

The recent escalating violence in Tripoli continues to

undermine an already fragile Libya. The Libyan people
deserve peace and security. We welcome yesterday's
announcement by the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) that a cessation of hostilities had
been reached. The United States stands fully with
Libya as UNSMIL continues its mediation efforts, and
we call on all Libyan parties to refrain from any action
that could undermine the ceasefire and setback Libyan
efforts to advance the political process. Any attempt to
weaken Libyan authorities and hamper the course of the
United Nations-facilitated political process is totally
unacceptable, as we reiterated with our partners from
France, Italy and the United Kingdom yesterday and
this past weekend.

Since the revolution, seven years ago, the Libyan
people have been asking for things that any of us
would want. They want an end to the fighting. They
want to see basic services, like electricity and water,
switched back on. They want to see Libya's oil wealth
invested for the benefit of the people. They want the
dignity of living in a State that respects their rights
after decades of tyranny. The sad truth is that a small
number of political spoilers, in some cases backed by
militias, block this vision. Looking out for their own
narrow interests, they undermine the United Nations'
hard work to get dialogue under way. This has to end.

There should be no military path to power in
Libya. If the violence gets worse, the only winners will
be terrorists and criminals. More fighting plays into
the hands of human traffickers, who are committing
unspeakable abuses as they funnel desperate people
onto dangerous journeys towards Europe.

A different path for Libya is possible. A handful of
political spoilers should not be permitted to hold this
process hostage. All of us, especially our European
partners, Libya's neighbours and countries of the region,
need to say "enough is enough". We need to push Libya's
different factions to enter into actual negotiations.

As the recent instability in Tripoli clearly
demonstrated, we need a realistic road map for Libya to
move towards secure, credible and inclusive elections
as soon as possible, rooted in an inclusive constitutional
process. It is obvious from today's discussions that we
are all impatient to see progress but imposing false
deadlines will backfire and could lead to even worse
divisions inside Libya. We look to UNSMIL to guide
the international community towards an understanding
of what that realistic road map entails.

The Government of National Accord is a steadfast
partner of the United States and we commend its efforts
throughout this challenging period. The Government
of National Accord shares our goal of a more secure
and stable Libya that will be a partner in international
efforts to fight terrorism. We fully endorse UNSMIL's
central role in support of the Government of National

Accord's economic reform agenda to help address fiscal
transparency and equitable distribution of resources
across Libya for all Libyans.

We were pleased that the Security Council was
able to designate six migrant-smugglers earlier this
year for their abuses in Libya. This was the first time
that we have ever used sanctions to respond to migrant
trafficking. We remain deeply concerned about the
welfare of these migrants and will also keep up our
efforts to ensure that criminal gangs involved in such
activity cannot operate with impunity.

Despite all of these challenges, one thing has not
changed in Libya - that is the potential of the Libyan
people and their keen desire to create a better country
for themselves. I would like to share the story of Fatima
Nasser, a 21-year old living in the southern city of
Seba. Fatima is an entrepreneur who realized that her
hometown had an amazing untapped resource - not
oil, but food. Women across the city were at home
preparing superb dishes in their kitchens. The food was
so good Fatima thought that people would be willing
to pay for it. She created an app that links customers
with these at-home chefs. Women are now starting to
earn income from their homes and the Libyan public is
enjoying purchases of home-cooked meals. The app is
taking off. Fatima is launching her service and Libya's
largest cities very soon. Silicon Valley should have an
eye on people like Fatima.

The point is that Libyans are ready to build a
brighter future. Our responsibility is to help them
get there.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
