Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I would like to thank Ambassador Mufioz for his very
comprehensive briefing.

The day before yesterday marked the third
anniversary of the attacks of 11 September. While we
mourn the victims deeply, we also believe that it is
necessary to look into more effective ways and means
to further cooperation in our fight against terrorism.
Much has been achieved in that fight in the last three
years. The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) have made very important contributions in that
fight. However, the specter of terrorism continues to
threaten international peace and security. The recent
terrorist attack against Chinese construction workers,
the explosion at the Moscow subway station, the
hostage-taking event in Beslan and the bombing in
Jakarta all demonstrate that we still have a long way to
go in our fight against terrorism.

Terrorism is a threat to all humankind that should
meet with a resolute response on our part, regardless of
when and where it occurs or of its motives. In that
struggle, we should follow the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and the basic
norms of international law. We should also address the
problem by examining its root causes and symptoms.
On the one hand, we must strike against all terrorist
activities. On the other, we must promote the common
development of all countries, reduce the development
gap and achieve social justice in order to eliminate the
root causes of terrorism.
There should be no double standards in our fight
against terrorism. We must promote enhanced
understanding and tolerance among different
civilizations. No country should take a firm stand vis-
a-vis a threat it is facing while choosing to remain
indifferent to other threats it considers remote. Doing
so would send the wrong signal to terrorists and lead to
further disasters. Moreover, it would create negative
serious consequences for our international fight.

China supports the United Nations in playing a
leading role in our international effort against
terrorism. We also support strengthening the roles of
the CTC and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1257 (1999), given current developments.
The fight against terrorist activities emanating from
eastern Turkestan being undertaken by the Government
and people of China is an important component of the
international effort against terrorism and Al Qaeda.
China will continue to implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions and to participate actively in the
work of both Committees. We will also make our
contribution to striking against the Al Qaeda terrorist
network.

