Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): Since this
is the first time my delegation is speaking before the
Security Council this month, I would like to start by
commending you, Madam President, for your efforts
while presiding over the Council in April. We wish you
every success. I would also like to commend the United
Kingdom for presiding over the Council last month.

Kuwait supports the statements delivered by the
representative of Jordan on behalf of the Group of
Arab States to the United Nations in New York and the
representative of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries, and that to be delivered
by the representative of Uzbekistan on behalf of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

Today, we have heard of the latest developments
on one of the key issues on the agenda of the United
Nations 4 the Palestinian question. Many United
Nations resolutions have been adopted and international
initiatives launched but not implemented because of
hardline positions on Israel and its flagrant and blunt
refusal to implement resolutions of international
legitimacy. For its part, the international community is
unfortunately unable to compel the occupying Power
to implement them. What is more worrying is the
occupying Power's contempt for the Council and its
resolutions, which should be binding on all.

The illegal and illegitimate policies of Israel in
the occupied Palestinian territories, in particular in
East Jerusalem, continue unabated. The best proof of
that are Israel's inhumane practices, which constitute
serious and grave violations of human rights and
grave international humanitarian law. Those practices
include the confiscation and destruction of properties
and homes, as well as illegal settlement activities at
unprecedented levels - with new settlements being
built and existing ones expanded, leading to the forced
displacement of the Palestinian owners of the land. It
is well confirmed that expressions of regret over those
settlement policies and pronouncements warning of the
consequences of those practices on the peace process
have not deterred Israel from pursuing them. Instead,
Israel has undermined the United Nations by failing to
implement resolution 2334 (2016).

The continuation of such aggression and attacks,
as well as of the inhumane blockade of Gaza, is the
unavoidable outcome of the Council's failure to call on
Israel to stop its repeated aggression and to abide by its
international obligations as an occupying Power under
the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War.

A just, lasting and comprehensive peace will not
be achieved by calling for the resumption of futile
direct negotiations without a timetable, or by remaining
silent over Israeli practices and policies. The desired
peace should be based on resolutions of international
legitimacy, the principle of land for peace, the road
map to a permanent two-State solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict and the Arab Peace Initiative.
That will enable the Palestinian people to attain their
fundamental rights, including their rights to self-
determination and to establish an independent State
with Jerusalem as its capital.

Kuwait supports the outcome document of the Paris
peace conference on the Middle East, held on 15 January,
which renewed the commitment of the international
community to the two-State solution as the only way
to achieve lasting peace. In that connection, we call on
the Council to shoulder its responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations to maintain international
peace and security and to take the necessary measures
to achieve a lasting solution and peace.

