Mr. Falouh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for Syria, for his briefing.

A few days ago, the fourteenth round of the Astana
process meetings took place. Its final communique
confirmed respect for the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and unity of Syria, as well as cooperation with
the Syrian Government until the terrorist groups on its
soil are eradicated. The communique also rejected the
illegal seizure of oil fields in Syria and reaffirmed the
right of Syria to retake possession of them. While we
thank the two guarantors - Russia and Iran 4 and the
host State of Kazakhstan for contributing to the success
of that round of meetings, we reaffirm the need to
ensure that all parties honour the outcome of the Astana
process, in particular the eradication of armed terrorist
groups, ending all forms of illegal military presence
and supporting the political process. We deplore that,
to date, the Turkish regime has had scant interest in
honestly and seriously honouring those commitments.

On 29 November, the second session of the small
body of the Constitutional Committee took place,
wherein no meetings among parties to the intra-Syrian
dialogue were held. Furthermore, no agreement
was reached to decide on the agenda. It was an
unfortunate occurrence for which responsibility falls
on the delegation of the so-called the High Negotiations
Committee, which came to the discussions with
a set of preconditions characterized by obstinacy,
misinformation, procrastination and contravention to
the terms ofreference, principles and rules ofprocedure
of the Constitutional Committee on which the parties
had agreed.

The delegation of the so-called High Negotiations
Committee came to discussions also supported by a
hostile media campaign that contravened what had been
agreed upon in the code of conduct. It was very clear
that the goal of that delegation was to seriously obstruct
the launching of the work of the Committee from the
very outset and to distort the facts by accusing the other
parties of doing so. The Governments of certain States
were complicit in that fabricated media campaign
through statements made by their officials and the way
in which their national media outlets portrayed the
second round of meetings to prompt the delegation of
the so-called High Negotiations Committee to practice
disinformation and take a hostile stance towards other
participants in the Constitutional Committee. Of
course, those Governments are the same ones that have
been hostile towards Syria for nine years.

Despite all that, the Syrian national delegation
withstood these flagrant and substandard acts of
manipulation and constructively adhered to the
principles of cooperation. We learned from members
of the national Syrian delegation that they had
repeatedly offered to enter the meeting room so that
both sides could present their positions. However,
the other party rejected that proposal and insisted on
imposing preconditions and put forward views and
terms of reference that had been imposed upon them
pre-emptively.

The vision of the Syrian national group was based
on creating an opportunity to build trust among the
parties to the dialogue and to engage in discussions
on everything involving Syria's future. In that regard,
we learned that the ideas of the members of the Syrian
national group, which they presented very openly and
transparently, were based on national pillars that should
enjoy the support of all Syrian citizens, including
renunciation of terrorism, extremism and violence;
the rejection of any aggression or occupation; and
the struggle against the adverse consequences of the
economic embargo imposed on the Syrian people. In
that regard, we reiterate that the Syrian national group
has sufficient freedom and flexibility to make the
proper decisions required during the course of intense
and serious consultations among its members so as to
arrive at positions and present constructive prospects
to settle any issue before the Constitutional Committee.

My delegation listened with great interest to the
briefing by Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General. Accordingly, the Syrian Arab
Republic reaffirms the need to support Mr. Pedersen's
efforts to facilitate the work of the Committee, ensure
its independence and that it is exclusively Syrian-
owned and Syrian-led, and support the two co-Chairs
of the Constitutional Committee to ensure that they can
guide the meetings in an effective way, in accordance
with agreed parameters and the critical components of
the rules of procedures for these meetings.

We have heard statements by the representatives
of certain States members of the Security Council, in
particular the United States of America, the United
Kingdom, France and Germany, that clearly reflect
an interventionist policy with regard to domestic
Syrian issues. It is all too clear that the Governments
of these States, as well as the Turkish regime and other
parties, will not stop blatantly interfering in Syrian
affairs, whether by continuing to support the terrorist
group Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham in Idlib, extending
support to its allies, conducting direct acts of military
aggression on Syrian territory or imposing unilateral
coercive economic measures on the Syrian people. We
want to ensure that the situation is clear to all. Those
Governments will not stop the playing same negative
roles and will continue to exert political and economic
pressure on Syria.

I urge all present to recall that those who attack
the Syrian Government here in the Security Council
are the representatives of States whose military forces
are occupying areas of Syrian territory and whose
Governments are imposing an economic blockade
that is suffocating the Syrian people. Those States are
preventing reconstruction and recovery, obstructing
the voluntary return of refugees and displaced persons
to their homes and occupying oil and gas fields in
Syria. They have publicly declared how much they love
Syrian oil, that they have seized it and will do whatever
they wish with it. Can we therefore reasonably expect
any positive results from the involvement of those
Governments or the Turkish regime in building a future
for my country or ensuring the well-being and security
of the Syrian people?

In conclusion, the Syrian Arab Republic has
adhered and will continue to adhere to an independent
national policy in line with the interests, beliefs and
sovereignty of the Syrian people. Once again, that leads
us to call on certain members to refrain from exploiting
the Security Council as a tool to exert pressure on the
work of the Constitutional Committee, which must be
able to operate independently so as to meet the needs
and aspirations of the Syrian people, reassuring them of
their Constitution and their future.

The meeting rose at 12.10p.m.
