Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, the delegation of Chile wishes to sincerely
congratulate the Pakistani presidency on its excellent
work in guiding the Security Council during this month
of May and on the very timely choice of the theme
"Conflicts in Africa: Security Council missions and
United Nations mechanisms to promote peace and
security" for this wrap-up meeting.

For those of us who in recent months have been
obliged to assess - not without anguish - the
situation of a number of African countries that seem to
be teetering unavoidably on a precipice of
disintegration and violence, there could not be a more
important theme than this one in the United Nations
system. Without really knowing what to do, we have
witnessed a macabre vicious circle marked by internal
and external war; the dissolution of the authority and
administrative capacity of the State; the gradual
elimination of the economic and social potential of
countries; the systematic violation of human rights; the
existence of millions of refugees fleeing to countries
that in turn are affected by grave economic crises; an
increase in HIV/AIDS and in other epidemics and
illnesses; the indiscriminate traffic in small arms and
light weapons; the illegal exploitation of natural
resources that finances such traffic; and, everywhere,
hunger. And, amid that horror, we have witnessed the
suffering of the weakest: the forced recruitment of
children and the violation of rights that is suffered
daily by African girls and women. The slow dissolution
of colonial borders, the collapse of States and the
emigration of the elite threaten the world with a
humanitarian catastrophe that cannot fail to affect all of
us.

We know full well that many others compiled that
list of horrors before we did, and we are fearful and
anguished at the lack of solutions. We sincerely hope
that the dialogue that the Security Council missions
undertake with political leaders in Central and West
Africa will be translated into progress and effective
commitments. However, we believe we must not
harbour too many illusions. Experience shows that the
exercise of finding out, listening and agreeing is
insufficient if it is not accompanied by real and
resolute political will to translate those experiences and
exchanges into decisions and, later, into the
implementation of stable and long-term policies.

Today, the Security Council is obliged to
intervene in conflicts requiring urgent action by the
international community - particularly in those whose
dimensions and effects have a regional nature. The
most illustrative cases are probably Liberia and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We cannot allow
those situations to lead to tragedies such as those that
we have witnessed in the past. Chile welcomes the
commendable attitude of France and other countries
that have offered troops to assist the small group of
Uruguayans who make up the peace force in Bunia.

However, even if we are able to prevent the
continuation of those tragedies, we need to assess the
effectiveness of the mechanisms currently used by the
United Nations so that we can move from a focus on
conflict management to one on conflict prevention and
support for the role of regional and subregional
organizations in managing such situations.

The demobilization and reintegration processes,
which have been referred to repeatedly in these
discussions, must be maintained and further
emphasized. As was stated this morning by
Ambassador Kumalo of South Africa, the African
Union and initiatives such as the New Partnership for
Africa's Development are awaiting support from the
Security Council to promote the common vision of
peace and sustainable development for the region,
which has brought so many African leaders together.

We have seen the main tasks in the area of peace
and security carried out by the African Union and by
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) in Sierra Leone in the past and today in
Cote d'Ivoire. We also recognize the usefulness of, and
the need for, the expansion and strengthening of
coordination between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council. But that will not be
sufficient unless the international financial
organizations are also involved.

Conspiring against greater effectiveness of the
mechanisms to which I referred earlier is, undoubtedly,
a chronic shortage of resources. Greater investment by
States with economic capacity in this area quite likely
would benefit not only the local population but also, in
future, the developed world, and would also help to
avert greater migratory pressure than already exists.

Before concluding, let me say that we cannot fail

to reflect on some of the underlying causes of the
African conflicts. Underpinning each of our
discussions on national cases is the issue of poverty
and extreme underdevelopment in the region. There is
no doubt that much bloodshed could be prevented and
money saved if developed countries spearheaded a
programme open to the entire international community
aimed at intervening economically in those countries,
providing them with appropriate technical experts,
monitoring their economic decisions, generating
investments and opening wide their doors to exports.

The promotion of national cases that have been
successful in the area of development might have a
very positive ripple effect in the region and enable it to
emerge from the situation it is now in. But to that end
political will is required. Political will means, for
example, the reduction of subsidies to agricultural
products that are presently in force in the markets of
the rich countries. Political will means, for example,
forgiving Africa's external debt. Measures such as
these might be even more effective in alleviating
poverty in Africa.

In this regard, we welcome the initiatives which
many Governments have developed. We deem it
important to highlight the initiative of the Government
of the United States, and those of other countries,
decisively to combat the AIDS epidemic in the
continent. We hope that this is but one example of
many more such examples in future that will contribute
to the well-being of millions of African citizens.

The very credibility of our Organization once
again is being put to the test in this African crisis. The
United Nations must act. Our country is prepared to
participate in all of the collective efforts launched and
sacrifices made by the international community in this
area.

