Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): It
is a pleasure to see you here, Mr. President. Your
presence testifies to the importance of our discussion
today.

We are pleased to welcome President Kagame
back to the Council and have listened carefully to his
remarks. When the Security Council met with President
Kabila five days ago, I said that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has the right under the United
Nations Charter to insist on the withdrawal of all
foreign forces from its territory. I also said that the
Government of Rwanda has a right under the United
Nations Charter to insist that Congolese territory not be
used as a launching pad for attacks against Rwanda.

There are obvious mutual interests here that
should form the basis for a discussion. We hope that
President Kagame and his colleagues in the region can
begin to work together, instead of against each other, to
forge a common security regime. We do not believe
that Rwanda can secure its long-term security interests
via a policy of military opposition to the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Likewise,
we do not believe that the withdrawal of foreign forces
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo can be
accomplished through military means.

We believe that we are at the crossroads in the
peace process. The Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and
multiple Security Council resolutions constitute the
expectations of the region and the international
community. Now is the time to translate words into
action. Now is the time for concrete steps.

It is important that all parties cooperate in
creating and sustaining the conditions necessary for the
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC), something that we all want to see happen
quickly and safely. It is also critical that the ceasefire
hold, that no forward military movement occur and that
the disengagement of forces begin. We welcome
Rwanda's readiness to withdraw from Pweto and urge
that this offer be supported and immediately
implemented. In addition to the priority of
disengagement, we agree with the Secretary-General
that Pweto represents a critical confidence-building
measure and a barometer of political will.

As we emphasized to President Kabila last week,
all the Governments in the region have a common
interest in neutralizing armed, non-State actors. We
believe that lasting security for both Rwanda and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo can come about
only when their Governments build a cooperative
relationship based on common interests, one that leads
to the marginalization of the former Rwandan Armed
Forces, Interahamwe and all other armed groups. In the
case of the ex-FAR and Interahamwe, those under
indictment by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda should be brought to justice, and the rest need
to be offered a credible and voluntary process of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration or
resettlement.

We must be frank with President Kagame. The
human rights situation in areas under Rwandan
occupation or the control of the Congolese Rally for
Democracy (RCD) is deeply troubling. Information
from the United States Government, the United
Nations, other Member States, Congolese civil society
groups and international non-governmental
organizations paints an alarming picture. Rwanda's
claims to the right of self-defence are badly undercut
when so many Congolese civilians are victimized. We
urge President Kagame to ensure that his forces and
their Congolese allies respect fully the human and civil
rights ofthe Congolese people.

During his recent visit, President Kabila
reaffirmed his support for the Lusaka process. We are
hopeful that these positive statements will create new
openings for a peace so that all sides can address the
common security interests that can and should form the
basis of lasting peace in the region.

