Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I thank Mr. Zahir Tanin,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing and again assure him of our full support. I also
thank Mr. Ivica Dacic', First Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Ms. Vlora Citaku for
their statements.

My delegation has taken note of the conclusions
and observations of the most recent report (S/2016/666)
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
today's briefing on developments in the political and
security situation in the territory of Kosovo.

Ukraine welcomes the reported improvements in
the political conditions in Kosovo,

"accompanied by a significant decrease in
the pattern of protests, aggressive actions and
disruptive tactics by various parties" (S/2016/666, para. 3).

At the same time, we regret that the practical
implementation of agreements reached under the
European Union-facilitated dialogue process between
Belgrade and Pristina has not moved forward as
significantly as we could have expected. Ukraine
actively supports the pursuit of political dialogue
between the two sides under the auspices of the
European Union (EU).

In our view, there is no alternative to cooperation
within the Brussels process. We hope that the
implementation of the Stabilization and Association
Agreement between Kosovo and the European Union
will be a factor in further stabilizing the situation and
promoting a better atmosphere in the talks between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, we fully support
the Secretary-General's call on both sides not only
to resume their engagement, but to show renewed
creativity and flexibility for compromise in order to
decisively anchor Kosovo and the broader region on a
path towards stability and development.

We also call on Belgrade and Pristina to put aside
existing differences and to concentrate on issues such
as the implementation of the agreement on energy and
telecommunications, the opening of the Mitrovica
bridge and the establishment of the association of Serb
majority municipalities, among other things. Those
particular issues could serve as an impetus towards
further constructive dialogue. Ukraine believes it is
now the precise moment to redouble efforts in fulfilling
the provisions of the agreements of 19 April 2013 and
25 August 2015.

Ukraine maintains that another issue to which
the parties should pay special attention is the safe and
sustainable return of refugees and internally displaced
persons. As the Council knows, the problem is very
much applicable to Ukraine as well. Due to external
aggression, we already have over 1.8 million internally
displaced persons. My country is making every possible
effort to resolve the issue and, in that light, we fully
support the overall approach of the Secretary-General,
such that the rights of those who wish to return to
their places of origin should be met. We believe that
is an important precondition for durable reconciliation
between Belgrade and Pristina.

Special attention should also be paid to the
continuing assaults on the cultural and religious
heritage of non-majority communities, which can
further complicate tensions. Ukraine is convinced that
the resolution of those problems will promote further
political stability in Kosovo.

Ukraine strongly supports the important work
carried out by UNMIK and the other international
missions operating in Kosovo in promoting
reconciliation, transitional justice and human rights
and in supporting the normalization process between
Belgrade and Pristina. In that regard, we welcome
the extension of the mandate of the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo for another two
years. The decision taken by the EU Council in June
is essential in furthering the effective work of the
international mechanism for political stabilization and
inter-communal reconciliation.

