Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): I
should like to begin by thanking you, Sir, for your
outstanding initiative in organizing this briefing on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). I also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs,
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Ambassador Vale de Almeida,
Head of the Delegation of the European Union to the
United Nations, and Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi,
Permanent Representative of Spain and facilitator
for the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), for
their briefings.

On 20 July 2015, the Security Council endorsed,
through resolution 2231 (2015), the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) as the culmination of 12 years
of the sustained diplomatic efforts of the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany, with
the participation of the European Union. They reached
an historic agreement on the Iranian nuclear issue. Six
months later, on 16 January 2016, following confirmation
by the International Atomic Energy Agency that Iran
had taken all the necessary steps - in particular those
stipulated in sub-paragraphs 1 to 11 of paragraph 15 of
annex V of the JCPOA - and aware of the complexity
involved in the harmonious implementation of the
resolution, the Security Council took the precaution of
appointing a facilitator for the process.

The delegation of Senegal commends the
outstanding work done by our colleague, Ambassador
Oyarzun Marchesi, who has managed - with the
generous and able assistance of the Secretariat and with
his own ingenuity, rigour and transparency - to render
the content of resolution 2231 (2015) more intelligible
and comprehensible, thereby making it less difficult for
the parties and the rest of the international community
to monitor its implementation. In the letter and spirit of
the note of the President of the Security Council dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/44), Ambassador Oyarzun
Marchesi has successfully put in place what he himself
referred to as the 2231 format, which has provided a
good platform for communication, interaction and
creating synergies between the different components
of the network created by the Council to guarantee the
implementation of the resolution.

The interface thereby created between the Security
Council and the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
has worked well. It has guaranteed visibility, inclusivity
and transparency. There is also a dedicated website
that has already been visited 70,000 times, according
to the report (S/2016/589). The Member States thus
have access to the necessary information to meet their
obligations under Article 25 of the Charter of the
United Nations, with respect to accepting and carrying
out the decisions of the Security Council, including
the provisions of paragraph 7 of resolution 2231
(2015), which terminates the provisions of the previous
resolutions and establishes new ones.

I can affirm that the Senegalese delegation now
sees things much more clearly, with respect to both
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action and the
follow-up of those actions that might not be in line
with the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). The
matters of supply lines, confidentiality, notification,
exemptions - not to mention questions of transparency
and dissemination - are more comprehensible. The
updating of the list of entities and individuals concerned
by the sanctions established in resolution 1737 (2006) is
also relevant.

We should also welcome the fact that the
mechanisms and procedures that have been in place
since January have allowed for good follow-up and
processing of allegations of non-compliance with the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). This is the case
even though, as indicated in the report, the facilitator
has called for unity as vital among Council members
in order to create the legal certainty necessary, with
the political will expressed by all, to ensure that the
provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) are implemented
fully as long as they remain in force.

It is in that spirit that we should address the
question of Iran's launch of ballistic missiles and the
seizure in the Gulf of Oman of quantities of weapons
that are probably destined for Somalia or Yemen. The
Senegalese delegation is of the view that the stocktaking
for the first six months of implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) has been positive overall. To that end, it
encourages the facilitator and all other stakeholders
involved in the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, as
well as all other States Members of the United Nations,
to continue in the right direction.

