Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to join others
in taking this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam
President, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council. I would also like to congratulate Sweden on
its successful presidency last month. We thank Special
Envoy Martin Griffiths for his useful briefing and his
continued diplomatic efforts to facilitate a peaceful
solution to the Yemeni crisis. We are also grateful to
Director John Ging for his briefing. We commend the
tireless efforts of the Special Envoy and his shuttle
diplomacy with the parties. It is indeed encouraging
that he has been able to have positive and constructive
discussions with them. We hope that the upcoming
discussions in Geneva will yield positive results. We
support his diplomatic endeavours and the negotiation
framework that he has laid out, which gives priority to
addressing the issue of Al-Hudaydah as a first step to
resuming political dialogue. We encourage the parties
to continue their constructive engagement with the
Special Envoy.

Meanwhile, we note that Al-Hudaydah port remains
open and operational and that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners have continued to deliver aid.
However, the humanitarian situation is still concerning
and we are worried by reports on the possibility of a
new cholera outbreak due to the escalating violence.
The attacks on civilians and civilian infrastructure
are worrying, as are the attacks on oil tankers passing
through the Bab-El-Mandab Strait, as they have serious
implications for the safety and security of commercial
ships passing through that major sea lane. We look
forward to the discussion on the relevant reports and
updates of the Panel of Experts on Yemen on this
and other issues at the level of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140
(2014).

Finally, we all agree on the need to find a political
solution to the crisis in Yemen and, thanks to the efforts
of the Special Envoy, there appears to be a window of
opportunity that we must take advantage of to restart
serious talks. That is why we also believe that the
Council should continue to support him to ensure that
his efforts succeed. That is the only way to resolve the
Yemen crisis and end the suffering of its people.

