Mr. Gasana: Within three weeks' time, the
Security Council has gathered twice to address ways
and means for the United Nations to live up to its
pivotal role to build and sustain peace. This high
frequency of Security Council meetings in recent
months and weeks testifies to an increasing conviction
that sustaining peace is a multidimensional and
complex undertaking. It calls for broad partnership
among security, political and development actors. It
calls for bold and innovative approaches.

Three weeks ago, my predecessor and good
friend Mr. Peter Wittig, Permanent Representative of
Germany, addressed the Council's debate on
institution-building (see S/PV.6472) and affirmed that
the engagement of Peacebuilding Commission (PBC)
offers a political forum necessary to facilitate among
national stakeholders the development of their own
prioritization for peacebuilding. While the
Commission's record shows that some of these
priorities may be categorized under political or
security-related aspects of peacebuilding, such as
security sector reform, the rule of law, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and national
reconciliation, one can hardly fail to note the organic
linkages of these aspects with the overarching
objectives of the socio-economic transformation of the
societies concerned. In fact, the questions of health,
education, infrastructure development, youth
employment and economic generation have been
repeatedly underscored as critical peacebuilding
priorities.

The facts and statistics presented earlier by the
Secretary-General on the linkage between the
challenges of post-conflict settings and achieving the
Millennium Development Goals speak of the
seriousness and urgency of the task at hand.

Peacebuilding is a term that we like to use in
describing the interlinkages between security and
development interventions in post-conflict situations.
The Peacebuilding Commission is the unique organ of
the United Nations that brings together security and
development actors to promote common, integrated
and mutually reinforcing approaches to building and
sustaining peace. In that connection, allow me to share
with the Council three points for further reflection.

First, the actions and measures designed to guide
the United Nations security and development
engagement with countries emerging from conflict
should be conceived and put in place early enough
following the cessation of hostilities, with the full
participation of national stakeholders. The earlier we
are able to agree on a common vision for what will
sustain peace in a specific context, the more likely we
will be able to ensure carefully sequenced and
mutually reinforcing actions focused predominantly on
security and socio-economic engagement in countries
emerging from conflict.

Secondly, the Council plays an important role in
fostering early and mutually reinforcing engagement
on the security and development ends of the post-
conflict spectrum, most prominently through
mandating multidimensional peacekeeping missions.
The investment we collectively make in those missions
can be further optimized by encouraging coherence and
more meaningful integration of efforts between
missions, United Nations country teams and other
development actors, including the World Bank.

(spoke in French)

Today's presentation on the upcoming World
Development Report reflects the fact that the World
Bank is always evolving and that it is now an essential
partner of the United Nations in our joint search for
lasting peace in the world. In that regard, the PBC is a
flexible and inclusive political forum that can
strengthen that partnership with the Bank and with
other development actors on the ground. Moreover,
through its various country-specific configurations, the
PBC makes that partnership a crucial priority.

In reviewing the mandate, structure and
configuration of peacekeeping operations, the Council
can rely on the views of the Commission in optimizing
the contribution of those missions to reconstruction and
development. That also means ensuring that the
partnership on the ground functions with greater clarity
when it comes to the roles and responsibilities of
security and development actors. That would help us to
avoid redundancy and wasted energy, as well as to
more efficiently channel the necessary resources to
support development following conflict.
11-23119
Thirdly, the Council should benefit from an
ongoing and speedy assessment of the security
situation on the ground and an awareness of elements
for effective peacebuilding. An in-depth analysis of the
causes and factors contributing to conflict should serve
to highlight the manner in which security and
development actors coordinate their efforts on the
ground. In that regard, I believe that the PBC is the
body best suited to carry out such a holistic analysis, in
order to allow the Council to adapt its strategies on an
ongoing basis and come up with realistic criteria to
monitor and assess the progress made towards
peacebuilding and minimize the risk of a relapse into
conflict. Such an analysis would also help the Council
to develop a realistic exit strategy, whether for
peacekeeping or peacebuilding operations.

In conclusion, following the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission, five years ago, the United
Nations as a whole now has sufficient experience as to
the links and interdependence between security and
development. That experience should now be translated
into a resolute political commitment and concrete
tailored actions on the ground. The populations of
countries emerging from conflict should not be doubly
affected, first by devastating conflicts and subsequently
by our difficulties in harmonizing and coordinating our
efforts to help them build their future. Those people
deserve our collective attention. The PBC is at the
Council's disposal in achieving that goal.

