Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is an
honour to have Your Excellency here with us today,
setting the tone of Equatorial Guinea's presidency for
this month of February. Let me also congratulate you
and your delegation for having convened this very
open debate on an important theme. Rest assured that
Indonesia will fully support your presidency.

We would like also to thank the Secretary-General,
Antonio Guterres, and Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat,
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, for
their respective statements.

Mercenaries, whether local entities, foreign fighters
or private military or security companies involved in
illegitimate operations, have exacerbated numerous
conflicts in many parts ofthe world, including in Africa.
These guns for hire, driven not only by monetary gains
but at times also by various ideologies and other raisons
d'etre, have been used by some States, non-State actors
and businesses.

As also reported by the Working Group on the use
of mercenaries as a means of violating human rights
and impeding the exercise of the right of peoples to
self-determination, mercenaries run a wide gamut,
from the criminality of human, arms and drugs
trafficking to the theft of precious natural resources,
targeted killings, kidnappings and other savagery at the
behest ofparties desiring a particular conflict outcome.
Mercenaries create a vicious circle of crime and human
rights abuses. They have many faces, ranging from
commercial criminals to foreign terrorist fighters and
radical extremists.

Indonesia is deeply concerned at the danger that
the activities of mercenaries represent for international
peace and security. We call for full respect of the
sovereignty, constitutional order and territorial
integrity of countries and non-interference therein. In
that light, we concur with the need to better regulate the
mercenary phenomenon.

To ensure that mercenary activities do not cause
insecurity and destabilization, Indonesia additionally
underlines the following four points: first, capacity-
building; secondly, regional and subregional
contributions; thirdly, the responsibility of States;
and, fourthly, respect for international law and
humanitarian law.
First, State capacity-building and the consequent
writ of a State over all of its territory are crucial.
Examples abound of situations in which conflict and
weak institutions have led to lands being exploited by
terrorists and mercenaries for their nefarious purposes.

The strengthening of capacity must also entail
rule-of-law, judiciary and other law-enforcement
machinery. Effective State prosecution of mercenary
activities provides credible deterrence. While the State
must be accountable to citizens for their protection, it
is also vital that civil society, media, youth and women
all play positive and cohesive nation-building roles.
Economic development and assistance to countries is
also important in order to achieve economic resilience,
which would deter civilians from becoming mercenaries
or helping mercenary causes.

Secondly, we emphasize the contribution of
regional and subregional organizations.

In that context, Indonesia fully supports the
African Union (AU) Agenda 2063, with its key pillar
of a conflict-free Africa, as well as the five thematic
priorities of the African Union Master Roadmap of
Practical Steps to Silence the Guns in Africa by 2020.
The AU initiative Silencing of the Guns: Prerequisites
for realizing a conflict-free Africa by the year
2020" - is an essential plank for curbing mercenary
activity and very laudable. A successful outcome of
that mechanism, including the AU-United Nations
Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063
and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development will
significantly elevate peace, security and development
on the continent. Africa knows what is best for Africa.
However, those mechanisms need the full support of
the United Nations and other partners. We need to
engage other international and regional organizations,
including those in the field of transnational crime, as
well as other organizations.

For its part, Indonesia, through its bilateral
assistance programmes to Africa in multiple fields,
as well as its contributions to eight United Nations
peacekeeping operations, has been relentless in that
regard. We have approximately 1,757 Indonesian troops
and police deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Africa. We remain determined to stand
shoulder to shoulder with our African brothers and
sisters. In that regard, we also urge the Council
to examine how mercenary activity has created
greater threats to United Nations peacekeepers in the
fulfilment of their mandates and to their personnel
safety and security.

Thirdly, we reiterate that all countries need to
exercise high vigilance against the menace posed by
mercenaries, including by ensuring that any territories
under their control are not used for and their nationals
do not take part in any negative activities involving
mercenaries. These include financial, material
and political support to them for the purposes of
destabilizing the legitimate Government of any State.
No business organization should be left unaccountable
for the unlawful use of mercenaries to promote its
commercial interests. Furthermore, private military
and security company personnel worldwide must
also be held fully accountable for any illegal actions.
Indonesia fully supports General Assembly resolution
73/159, on the subject of mercenaries, and we urge
everyone to abide by it.

Fourthly, recognizing that regulation is
inconsistent and that many gaps exist, it is very
important that everyone fully respect international
law, international humanitarian law and related
norms regulating mercenary activities, particularly in
conflict and near-conflict situations, where they are
most lethal. Businesses must be held accountable and
abide by international law and resolutions pertaining
to mercenaries.

In conclusion, mercenaries survive due to the
simple principle of supply and demand. It is high
time that we take action to suppress the demand for
mercenaries in the global market. At the same time, we
must halt mercenary exports and supplies. Only then
will we have success in ourjoint endeavours. Let us all
strip the soldiers of fortune of their fortune.

