Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): I would first
like to thank Luxembourg for organizing this meeting
on children and armed conflict and to congratulate it on
its leadership and continued commitment to protecting
children. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative for Children and
Armed Conflict and the Executive Director of UNICEF
for their briefings. I also welcome the presence and
testimony of Mr. Alhaji Babah Sawaneh, a former child
soldier in Sierra Leone.

Children are often the most vulnerable and most
exposed victims in armed conflicts. They remain

scarred for life by the atrocities and consequences of
war.

That is why protecting them in war time remains
and will remain an ongoing concern of the international
community. Despite the adoption of the international
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, as well as such regional legal
instruments as the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, we are far from being able to
protect children during armed conflicts. The atrocities
to which children are subject in Syria and the Central
African Republic unfortunately corroborate that sad
reality.

In the Central African Republic, children are
increasingly targeted because of their community
or religious affiliations. The violence perpetrated
against them is unprecedented. Some are killed and
disemboweled, or even have limbs amputed. Such
barbarous acts in the Central African Republic
and elsewhere are grave human rights violations.
Investigations should be launched and prosecutions
undertaken so that the perpetrators of those terrible
crimes are punished.

The frequency, intensity and new warfare strategies
emerging today test the framework for prevention
and the protection of children in situations of armed
conflict. In various areas, children are the targets
of indiscriminate bombing, sometimes in schools.
They are recruited into armed forces willingly or
by force. Given the many unacceptable situations,
the international community unfortunately remains
powerless or reacts too late to prevent a disaster. At any
rate, the international community needs to step up its
efforts and commitment to ensuring implementation by
States of the engagements undertaken in the context
of protecting children in armed conflict. Similarly, we
need to strengthen the monitoring tools and mechanisms
in areas of armed conflict to better prevent violations of
the rights of children.

In my country Chad, as is known, owing to a
long civil war and the many outside aggressions that
it has suffered, children have been recruited and used
for years in the ranks of numerous groups and armed
forces. However, with the restoration of stability and
the strong political will of the highest authorities, Chad
has resolutely undertaken to establish a professional
army by putting an end to the recruitment of children
in its ranks and by demobilizing all those who were
there. Achieving that object was a major challenge
to meet, but thanks to to the tireless political will of
His Excellency the President of the Republic, the wise
advice of Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflicts, to whom I would like to pay tribute, and the
consistent assistance of UNICEF, Chad succeeded in
that goal, to the satisfaction of all.

As I said yesterday at the launching of the joint
"Children, not soldiers" campaign, Chad has fully
implemented the plan of action agreed with the United
Nations and now no longer has children in its armed
forces. That has been confirmed by independent external
verification in the eight military regions, 11 areas of the
national gendarmerie and six national guard groupings.
Chad reaffirms its commitment to working with the
United Nations office and UNICEF to further strengthen
cooperation at the regional and subregional levels with
a view to promoting the protection of children, as we
have undertaken in the framework of the so-called
N'Djamena Declaration, adopted and signed on 9 June
2010 by the representatives of Chad, the Central African
Republic, the Sudan, Nigeria, Niger and Cameroon. We
are aware that our gains need to be consolidated daily
in order to be sustainable and to avoid a backsliding,
but the progress and results obtained are tangible and
should be taken into account in appraising the situation.

At the international level, we believe that the
international community needs to mobilize in order to
support the agenda of the United Nations system with
a view to putting an end to the recruitment and use of
children by 2016. In that regard, it would be desirable
to take action at the national and the regional levels in
order, inter alia, to evaluate international legislation
on the rights of the child so as to ensure harmony
and consolidate prevention and protection measures;
expand the number of parties to the instruments on the
rights of the child through well-targeted programmes
and robust incentive measures with respect to certain
States; support the efforts of affected States in order
to develop or adapt their legislation to better deal with
violations of the rights of the child; and, lastly, promote
cooperation on prevention and the protection of children
in armed conflict at the regional and subregional levels
through seminars and workshops.

Lastly, I would like once again to thank the United
Nations system, in particular Ms. Leila Zerrougui,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
UNICEF, whose support has been very useful to Chad
in the implementation of the commitments undertaken
within the framework of its plan of action. Chad will
remain open to their advice and suggestions with regard
to what remains to be done.

