Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China appreciates the Kuwaiti initiative to convene
this debate on counter-terrorism and the protection of
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks. The
delegation of China thanks Ambassador Meza-Cuadra
for his briefing.

Terrorism is the common enemy of all humankind.
Faced with the threats of terrorism, all countries have
a shared destiny. The international community should
embrace the concept of a community with a shared
future, closely follow new trends and characteristics in
the evolution of such threats, enhance cooperation and
jointly respond to terrorist threats.

First ofall, in the face ofall forms ofterrorist threats,
the international community should uphold a unified
standard and enhance counter-terrorism synergy. All
countries should adopt a zero-tolerance policy without
differentiation, regardless of terrorist locations,
justifications, target countries or tactics. Terrorists
must be met with resolute measures. International
counter-terrorism efforts must fully respect the
sovereignty of countries concerned. Affected countries
should assume the primary responsibility to combat
terrorism. International cooperation in the field of
counter-terrorism must be in keeping with the purposes
and principles of Charter of the United Nations and
promote the leading role of the United Nations and the
Security Council.
Secondly, the international community should
jointly respond to and address the root causes that
breed terrorism. The international community should
help States Members of the United Nations to achieve
socioeconomic development, alleviate and eradicate
poverty and conduct dialogue on an equal footing
among civilizations and religions. We should refrain
from linking terrorism with any specific ethnicity or
religion, build a new form of international relations
and construct a community with a shared future for the
benefit of humankind.

Thirdly, all countries must take concrete measures
to stop the movement of terrorist fighters and curb the
spread of terrorist and extremist ideologies. Currently,
a major challenge is the movement and return of
terrorist fighters who have launched many attacks on
infrastructure in their countries of origin, transit and
destination. All countries should enhance border control
and enforcement cooperation. The counter-terrorism
bodies of the United Nations and relevant international
organizations should play an important role in that
effort. On the basis of respecting the sovereignty
of Member States, the United Nations and relevant
international bodies must respond to the specific needs
of Member States and enhance the capacity-building
of those countries and their ability to respond to the
movement of terrorist fighters. The international
community should also follow the new trends and
evolution of the terrorist threat and scale up efforts to
counter the use of the internet for the spread of terrorist
ideologies and the commission of terrorist attacks.

Fourthly, concrete measures should be adopted to
implement Council resolution 2341 (2017) and other
relevant resolutions so as to protect key infrastructure
from terrorist attacks. Member States should implement
relevant Council resolutions, identify relevant security
policies and take concrete measures with regard to any
potential terrorist attack on key infrastructure as a
high-risk factor, as well as establish early-warning and
emergency-response mechanisms. All countries should
shoulder the responsibility of ensuring the safety and
security of their own infrastructure, enhance domestic
legislation and bring to justice perpetrators of terrorist
attacks on infrastructure. The international community
should enhance international cooperation in the field
of protecting key infrastructure and help developing
countries to scale up their capacity-building.

Over the past few years, the violent terrorist
elements in eastern Turkistan - represented by the
Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement (ETIM) - have
planned and carried out a number of terrorist attacks
in China. They have also posed a serious threat to
countries in the Middle East and Central Asia. Fighting
the violent terrorist forces of ETIM. should be part of
international counter-terrorism efforts. Such forces
should be met with resolute measures.

As a very important member of the international
counter-terrorism alliance, China has actively
participated in recent years in multilateral cooperation
mechanisms, such as the United Nations and the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, and have made
important contribution to international counter-
terrorism efforts. Beginning in 2017 and for the next
five years, China will support INTERPOL in carrying
out three joint global initiatives annually to combat
terrorism and organized cybercrime.

China supports the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) concerning counter-
terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate and the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities in their efforts to enhance cooperation with
the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism, and
will provide counter-terrorism supplies and capacity-
building assistance to developing countries, within the
scope of their capabilities. China stands ready to work
together with all countries to jointly respond to the
threat of terrorism and to maintain peace and stability.

