Mr. anald (Norway): Permit me at the outset to
express my Government's sincere condolences to the
representative of Guatemala, to his Government and to
the bereaved families of the eight Guatemalan
peacekeepers who were recently killed in the line of
duty as they worked on behalf of the United Nations.

Norway supports the encouraging developments
in several countries of the Great Lakes region,
including the positive election process in Burundi and
the ongoing transition process in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Norway acknowledges the
importance of continued active United Nations
engagement and of the African commitment to
peacekeeping and mediation in the Great Lakes region.
Norway strongly supports regional initiatives to
enhance stability in the Great Lakes region, including
the forthcoming second Great Lakes Summit and the
adoption of the proposed Security, Stability and
Development Pact, as well as the Tripartite Plus One
Commission.

The recent history of the Great Lakes region has
shown very clearly that national borders are porous and
that loyalties transcend State frontiers. As a
consequence, the security of any one country cannot be
seen in isolation; it is part of the larger regional
picture. Internal war or conflict in one country
produces a spillover effect in other countries in the
region. That is particularly visible in terms of the
movement of refugees, weapons and rebel groups.

The recent killing of eight peacekeepers of the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) by the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) clearly illustrates that
regional security dimension. A positive outcome of the
transitional process in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is essential for the stability of the entire region.
The Government of Norway is therefore very
concerned about the negative impact of the LRA's
activities in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The conflict between the Government of Uganda and
the LRA not only has grave consequences for the
Ugandan civilians living in camps in appalling
conditions; it also affects the security of civilians in the
whole region. In addition, the conflict affects the
security and operational space of United Nations
peacekeeping missions: MONUC and the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan.

The International Criminal Court (ICC) has taken
an important step by issuing its first arrest warrants for
five Lord's Resistance Army commanders. Norway
will continue to support the ICC in its efforts to bring
an end to impunity for grave human rights violators.

The Government of Norway acknowledges the
fact that the responsibility to protect all Ugandan
citizens lies with the Government of Uganda. However,
it is also Norway's view that the LRA represents a
threat to regional peace and security. Norway therefore
urges the Security Council to address, at the earliest
possible date, the grave impact of the actions of the
LRA.
