Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): My delegation wishes to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alexandr Vondra, a First Deputy Foreign
Minister of the Czech Republic in his capacity of
President of the Security Council today.

We wish also again to extend our condolences to the
people and Government of the United States on the loss
of so may lives caused by the deplorable, criminal attack
that took place in Oklahoma City two days ago.

 
My delegation wishes to express its appreciation for
the report provided by the Co-Chairrnen of the Steering
Committee of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia. Once again, this report tells us that the Mission
continues to have full freedom of movement in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and that the cooperation of the
authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues
to be satisfactory. For this reason, the report, in its final
part, certifies - or reaches the conclusion - that the
Belgrade Government is continuing to meet its commitment
to closing the land border between the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the areas of the Republic of Bosnia and
Herzegovina under the control of Bosnian Serbs.

My delegation knows from its own experience how
difficult a task it is to close a border completely, especially
in an area of conflict and war. During the Central
American crisis in the nineteen eighties the international
community required something similar of Honduras. In
many cases it was physically impossible for us to do what
we were asked to do, and we thereby were the object of
international condemnation or censure. For this reason, we
understand today the situation in the former Yugoslavia
and, having studied the periodic reports of the Co-Chairmen
of the Steering Committee of the International Conference
on the Former Yugoslavia, transmitted through the
Secretary-General of the United Nations, we support the
temporary suspension of the sanctions against that country
and we urge it to continue to cooperate towards securing an
indefinite suspension of the sanctions.

The report has been prepared by a mission of
responsible and qualified persons from more than 18
nations, and we therefore have no doubt that it has been
impartial in submitting the report.

My delegation wishes to reiterate the ideas presented
by the Secretary-General in regard to sanctions regimes in
his "Supplement to An Agenda for Peace", which was
endorsed in a recent statement by the Council. I would
venture to recall, as I have done on previous occasions, that
the purpose of sanctions is to modify the conduct of the
party or parties to a conflict which is threatening
international peace and security, and not to punish or exact
any other kind of reprisals. All this must be seen in the
context of Article 41 of the Charter of the United Nations.

With the aim in mind of taking firm and lasting steps
towards bringing peace to the Balkans, the Council recently
adopted three distinct resolutions relating to three peace-
keeping operations: in Croatia, in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and in Macedonia. We hope that the draft resolution that
we shall be adopting today will help promote trust and
cooperation between all the parties involved in the
conflict.

Finally, I wish to call attention to the letter
(S/1995/313) addressed to the Secretary-General, and
hence to the Security Council, by the Permanent
Representative of Greece to the United Nations,
concerning the impact of the sanctions on countries such
as Bulgaria, Greece, the Republic of Moldova, Romania
and Ukraine. The Foreign Ministers of those countries,
meeting in Athens, decided to initiate action in the
Security Council as a result of the economic problems
caused by the sanctions regime imposed on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. My delegation takes the view
that this matter should be given consideration as soon as
possible.

As on other occasions, my delegation wishes to
acknowledge the positive attitude of the authorities of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, and urges them to
continue to cooperate with a view to achieving a just and
lasting peace in the former Yugoslavia, for well-being and
peace for its neighbours will also mean well-being and
peace for the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. For that
reason we support the draft resolution on which the
Council will soon take action.

