Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I wish
to extend a special welcome the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, International Cooperation and la Francophonie
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Argentina
joined the consensus on resolution 2098 (2013) for three
main reasons.

The first reason is the concern among the
international community about the ongoing
deterioration of the humanitarian situation owing to
the armed violence in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the need to ensure the protection of human
rights and international humanitarian law, the rule of
law and an end to impunity, in particular in the eastern
part of the country. Those objectives are clearly set out
in the resolution we have just adopted, which calls on
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to play a
central role.

Secondly, the resolution responds to the request
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and has the support of the countries ofthe region.
Argentina believes those two aspects, namely, national
ownership and respect for regional initiatives, to be key
not only in the area ofpeacekeeping operations but also
in the Security Council's consideration of any action
that it takes in the context of its primary responsibility,
that is, to maintain international peace and security.

Thirdly, we also underscore the fact that, in
the resolution, the tasks of the military contingents
are separated from those of the Mission's civilian
components. That underscores the importance of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the countries of the region cooperating with the
International Criminal Court in order to bring to justice
the perpetrators of war crimes and crimes against
humanity in the country.

Our agreement on those points does not mean that
we do not harbour some concerns and well-founded
doubts as to the establishment of the Intervention
Brigade, in particular with regard to its ability to use
force in offensive actions, even though paragraph
9 of resolution 2098 (2013) refers to that decision as
being "on an exceptional basis and without creating a
precedent or any prejudice to the agreed principles of
peacekeeping".

We believe that the consultations that preceded
the adoption of the resolution were not as inclusive
or as in-depth as called for by a resolution of this
kind. In that regard, with a view to the future and in
a constructive attitude, Argentina believes that we
will also be responsible for ensuring that this does not
have an unfavourable impact on the very concept and
principles of neutrality and impartiality with regard to
peacekeeping missions.

I reiterate that we believe that we are facing a
conceptual change of the traditional understanding
of peacekeeping operations. The inclusion of
a peace-enforcement dimension in the concept
of peacekeeping, even when justified under the
circumstances, requires in-depth consideration and
responsible action. Faced with that challenge, I
emphasize that more than one week of negotiations
would have been needed so that all the concerns of the
members of the Council could have been reasonably
addressed, including consultations with the entire
membership and, in particular, with the major troop-
contributing countries, not only those contributing to
MONUSCO but of the entire Organization, taking into
account the new tasks that could be called for and the
impact that this decision may have on the entire system
of peacekeeping.

Lastly, in the context of the new offensive mandate
that is being established, it is also important to us that
it has been made abundantly clear that the first and
foremost priority of MONUSCO is, and must be, to
protect civilians. That clear interpretation has allowed
countries such as Argentina to join the consensus on
the resolution.

