Mr. Troya (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): It is a
great pleasure for my country to participate in this open
debate organized by the presidency of the Security
Council under the leadership of Guatemala, which we
thank for having convened this meeting.

Without justice there is no peace. Ecuador is
convinced that the International Criminal Court is the
only means by which the victims of the serious crimes
under its jurisdiction can make their heard and see
their suffering addressed. As expressed in the fourth
paragraph of the preamble of the Rome Statute, the most
serious crimes of concern to the whole international
community must not go unpunished.

To this end, the best tool in the fight against
impunity is specifically the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court. In its 14 years of
existence, it has allowed for the prosecution of some
of the worst violators of human rights, as shown by
the recent sentence issued in the Lubanga case, which
brought to an end one of the bloodiest chapters in the
history of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and demonstrated the contribution of the
International Criminal Court to the maintenance of
international peace and security.

The punishment of those who commit crimes
referred to the International Criminal Court
complements the Security Council's task ofmaintaining
peace and security. It does so because, in rendering
justice and punishing those who commit criminal
acts, it contributes to overcoming the trauma of the
victims of armed conflict around the world and lays the
groundwork for building lasting and strong peace.

Cooperation between the two bodies is essential,
within the framework of the greatest respect for the
work of each, ifthe Court is to support the maintenance
of international peace and security by judging those
who seek to undermine it, and if the Security Council
is to act within and in favour of the rule of law at the
international level.

The Court cannot do its work without the firm
political support not only of Member States, but also of
the Security Council, expressed through respect for the
Rome Statute and compliance with the commitments
that led to the establishment of the Court, including
those relating to its financing. For my delegation, it is
indispensible for the International Criminal Court to
enjoy the financing necessary to allow it to meet its
objectives as set out in the Rome Statute, especially in
the light of the increase in the caseload submitted to the
judges, in the investigations being undertaken by the
Prosecutor's Office, and in the general workload.

The delegation of Ecuador is of the view that
the cases referred to the Court by the Security
Council continue to create a financial burden for the
States parties to the Rome Statute, while there is an
unnecessary delay in compliance with the stipulations
of article 13 of the Relationship Agreement between the
ICC and the United Nations and article 115 of the Rome
Statute, relating to the financing for expenses incurred
by the Court due to cases referred to it by the Security
Council.

The relevant arrangements must be made without
further delay to fulfil what is stipulated in those articles.
The Secretary-General and the General Assembly, each
within its respective area of competence, must take the
steps necessary to include in the United Nations regular
budget the financial contributions of this Organization
to the budget of the Court.

Ecuador believes that progressive universalization
of the Rome Statue and of the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court is an irrevocable goal.
Beyond political considerations of the day, it is essential
to progress toward the creation of genuine international
criminal justice in order to take on the most heinous
crimes and to punish the guilty, without regard to their
nationality, position or office. Along those lines, we
strongly call for every necessary effort for the effective
operation of the 2017 provisions on the crime of
aggression, without delays or excuses.

Unfortunately, it must be acknowledged that on
innumerable occasions we have witnessed instances
of a double standard being applied in referrals to
the International Criminal Court. That kind of
decisions - based on political considerations and
using different measures for similar behaviour,
condemning or defending on the basis of political
interests or ideological leanings rather than on clear
norms - detracts from the credibility of the Security
Council's work and encourages impunity, with the
regrettable consequences that that implies.

Particularly regrettable is that three of the
permanent members of the Security Council continue
to refuse to recognize the valuable contribution of
the International Criminal Court and to accede to the
Rome Statute, when their example would lead other
nations to join the Court and contribute to the effort
to fight impunity and strengthen the rule of law at the
international level.

To conclude, we call on all States parties to the
Rome Statute and on all organs of the United Nations
to cooperate with the Court, not only by complying
with the stipulations in article 3 of the Relationship
Agreement between the Court and the United Nations
and article 86 of the Rome Statute, but also by
honouring the principles that nourished the founding of
our Organization and that guide its work.

