Mr. Qin Huasun (China) (interpretation from Chinese): It is very useful for the members of the Security
Council and the troop-contributing countries to gather here
today to exchange views on United Nations peace-keeping
operations and the question of regular consultations between
the Council and troop-contributing countries, and it is
helpful that this will be done on a regular basis.

According to the provisions of the United Nations
Charter, the Security Council is the United Nations organ
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Undoubtedly, the decisions
and decision-making process of the Security Council should
reflect the will and wishes of the general membership. With
the expansion and deepening of United Nations peace-
keeping operations in recent years, the United Nations
requires the timely support of the Member States. In this
regard, the suggestions of troop-contributing countries and
the contributions they have made to the best of their
abilities have enabled the United Nations to deploy various
peace-keeping operations and to carry them out as rapidly
as possible. We appreciate the efforts and contributions
made by those countries.

Mounting peace-keeping operations is one of the
means by which the United Nations eases and resolves
conflicts and creates conditions for the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Only by observing the purposes and
principles of the United Nations Charter, as well as such
effective principles as obtaining the prior consent of the
countries concerned, strict neutrality and the non-use of
force except in self-defence, can United Nations peace-
keeping operations develop on the right track. Moreover,
peace-keeping operations should be kept within the
confines of capabilities.

In order to improve its working methods, the
Council has started, in recent years, to have regular
consultations and exchanges of views with troop-
contributing countries on various important stages of
peace-keeping operations, such as their establishment, the
definition and extension of their mandates, and the
conclusion of their missions, with a view to jointly
discussing and resolving problems in peace-keeping
operations. This approach has not only helped to enhance
the transparency of the work of the Council, it is also
conducive to fostering mutual communication and
understanding. It also enables the Council to listen to the
views and requests of the numerous troop-contributing
countries in a timely manner, so that appropriate and
reasonable decisions can be made during deliberations.

The purpose of summarizing experience is to draw
on the past as a guide to our future. The problems faced
by the United Nations in peace-keeping operations require
that the members of the Council and troop-contributing
countries jointly discuss them for a resolution. We
understand the desire of troop-contributing countries to
expedite the improvement of the Council's working
methods. We will carefully study their proposals. It is our
hope that the Council can enhance its efficiency and, at
the same time, improve its working methods and increase
its transparency so that it can better fulfil the lofty
functions entrusted to it by the Charter.

