Mr. Tanin (Afghanistan): As this is the first time
that I am taking the floor this month, permit me at the
outset to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Council for November. We thank you
for holding today's debate on the work of the
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council dealing with
terrorism.

Afghanistan remains the primary victim of
international terrorism. Nearly a decade ago,
Afghanistan and the international community joined
hands to end the rule of the terrorists and extremists
who used our country as a base for international
terrorism. Today, notwithstanding important progress
on the political, social and economic fronts, the
terrorist campaign of the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other
extremist groups continues to be the main challenge to
Afghanistan's security, reconstruction and
development.

As we have echoed time and again in this very
Council, terrorism in our part of the world is a growing
threat to international peace and security. The enemy
we face is part of a complex and sophisticated network,
with safe havens and sanctuaries in our region from
which terrorists still enjoy support. Afghanistan
remains alarmed at the presence of those support
centres and reiterates that, unless they are addressed,
the terrorism that has been raging like wildfire will,
regrettably, continue.

As we speak, our national army and police are
engaged in fierce combat against enemy forces in joint
military operations with international forces. We have
taken the fight to the terrorists and prevented their
ability to carry out large-scale conventional attacks.
That is why they resort to desperate tactics, such as
suicide bombings, assassinations and abductions.

Further, as we get ready to begin the transition
process, we have given new focus to building the size
and strength of our national army and police. A
detailed plan for the transition strategy will be
presented at the NATO summit in Lisbon later this
week. We are confident that a stronger and more
efficient security force will lead to further progress in
the fight against terrorism and to improvement in the
security situation.

As long as terrorism remains a threat, the fight
against it will continue. By the same token, it is widely
recognized that military efforts alone are not the
solution to Afghanistan's security problem. The
reconciliation and reintegration of former combatants
with no links to terrorist organizations are critical to
achieving lasting peace and security.

Afghanistan commends the Security Council for
the able manner in which it is leading international
efforts in combating terrorism. In that regard, we
highlight the importance of the Security Council
Committees established pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004).

The 1267 Committee remains one of the most
important instruments of the Security Council in
countering terrorism. Consistent with resolution 1904
(2009), the Committee has taken a number of important
steps to increase the transparency and effectiveness of
its work. In July, the Committee revised its working
guidelines. Another important achievement is the
publication of narrative summaries for listing. That
new practice provides Member States with concise
information, such as the date of and reason for listing.
Moreover, in August the Committee concluded its
review of all individuals on the consolidated list, which
led to the de-listing of additional names.

We join other speakers in underscoring the
importance of a periodic review of the list so as to
ensure its accuracy. In that connection, Afghanistan
welcomes the de-listing of 10 former Taliban members
during the course of the year. Such measures will
benefit Afghanistan's peace and reconciliation
initiative. That said, we urge the Committee to also
give consideration to Afghanistan's additional de-
listing requests, and we look forward to the Monitoring
Team's Visit to Kabul at the end of this month.

In regard to the 1373 Committee, we underscore
its important work and welcome the continued efforts
of the Committee and its Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate for increased collaboration with Member
States.

Terrorists have proved their readiness to terrorize
people, societies and countries as a demonstration of
their strength. They will spare no effort and go to all
lengths, including resorting to nuclear, chemical and
biological terrorism. In that connection, we commend
the ongoing efforts of the 1540 Committee to prevent
non-State actors from participating in the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction.

Afghanistan is actively engaged in implementing
the relevant Security Council resolutions on terrorism,
on which we have presented national reports. Needless
to say, Afghanistan is party to all 13 conventions on
terrorism. Moreover, Afghanistan's relevant national
institutions, in particular the security and judicial
sectors, are working diligently to further strengthen our
counter-terrorism efforts.

In conclusion, I should like to state that the fight
against terrorism is a key component of our partnership
with the international community, and we look forward
to strengthening that partnership in the coming years.

