Mr. Loedel (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): First
of all, Uruguay expresses its solidarity with all those
countries that in recent days have fallen victim to
violent climatic events - including Mexico, which
suffered a second earthquake yesterday that caused
death and destruction.

I would like to thank the Ethiopian presidency,
in particular the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Mr. Hailemariam Desalegn, for convening this
timely and important debate on the process of reform
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. I also
welcome the open and transparent way with which
Ethiopia conducted the negotiations for the adoption
of a resolution as important as that adopted today
(resolution 2378 (2017)).

I welcome the statement by the Secretary-General,
and I thank him for the clarity of the concepts contained
therein, which bring the vision of the Secretariat on this
issue of great importance to the membership.

Similarly, we thank the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the representative of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations for
their briefings.

Allow me to reaffirm once more the commitment of
my country to peacekeeping operations, a commitment
that was made even before they were called peacekeeping
operations. Despite its small population, Uruguay has
deployed more than 43,800 personnel in its extensive
history as a contributor of contingents and police in
more than 20 operations around the world. Today the
contribution of Uruguayan troops places our country
among the major contributors in the Americas and
among the top 20 in the world. That decades-long effort
has provided our country with very rich experience in
peacekeeping operations, especially bearing in mind
that more than 80 per cent of our generals, more than
70 per cent of officers and 70 per cent of our troops
have already participated in such operations.

Our country has followed the evolution of
peacekeeping operations in the debate and on the
ground. As an elected member of the Security Council,
we take this opportunity to state Uruguay's support
of the reform process, whose objective is to make
peacekeeping operations more efficient and effective,
and to ensure that they can continue to filfil the
mandates for which they were designed.

Peacekeeping operations continue to be the most
efficient and economic way that the international
community has to contribute to peace. Therefore,
we should be conscious that budgetary decisions and
policies must always go together, so as to prevent one
or the other from rendering a mandate non-viable. In
that regard, I should like to share some considerations
that are central to my country at a time when there is
talk of reforming the process. They reflect the national
position, which we have systemically made known and
defended during our 21 months in the Council.

First, we believe that there are two documents that
constitute the absolute starting point of the current
reform process. Those are the report of the High-
level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446) and the subsequent report ofthe Secretary-
General on the implementation of the recommendations
(S/2015/682). The contents of both documents remain
valid and current. Although there has been progress in
the implementation of the recommendations contained
therein, much remains to be done, bearing in mind
above all that the way forward should be based on the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and the basic principles of peacekeeping.

Secondly, we believe that the success of a
peacekeeping operation depends, to a great extent,
on the plans made by four parties with shared
responsibility, namely, the Security Council, the States
or parties in control of the territory in question, the
troop- and police-contributing countries, and the
Secretariat. The Council must remain united when
agreeing on political strategies that allow for the design
of operations that encourage national actors in conflict
to make real commitments to lasting and peaceful
political solutions. That must be in addition to more
flexible and adaptable operations, with clear mandates
based in real and appropriate priorities and resources.
There have been improvements in those areas, but they
are insufficient.

Once an operation is deployed with a valid mandate,
the Council has the responsibility to demand and obtain
from the host States full respect and compliance with the
terms agreed in the status-of-forces agreements. Those
documents guarantee the protection of the personnel
that a country voluntarily contributes, and ensure the
functionality of the operation. We must prevent any
State, least of all a State that is part of an operation,
from obstructing missions established by the Council.

As a historical troop-contributing country, Uruguay
attaches particular importance to the responsibilities
of troop- and police-contributing countries, with the
understanding that they are the ones active in the field
and the ones who should implement the mandates.
In that regard, the training of what in our country is
called "the peace worker of the twenty-first century" is
essential, that is, training in the complexity of the tasks
to carry out the whole of the mandate. That includes
avoiding the absence of command, avoiding refusal to
obey orders, avoiding the failure to protect civilians, or
insufficient equipment, to mention some of the issues
that should not be tolerated.

We have seen more than we would wish of that,
in particular when it comes to protecting civilians in
pressing situations. I am not going to relate the national
position on this issue now, because it is well known
and respected. But I would like to emphasize the
contribution of the Kigali Principles on the Protection
of Civilians to the reform process, given that they refer
to efficiency in the protection of civilians derived from
training and conduct in the field and accountability.

As for the Secretariat, its role is decisive in terms
of guidance and recommendations, its capacity to bring
together basic and higher criteria regarding the operation
and fulfilment of the mandates, and the determination
of the reconfiguration needs of the missions. The recent
budget and staff cuts force Uruguay to reaffirm that any
reconfiguration should be evaluated on a case-by-case
basis and with the full evaluation of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations.

Thirdly, I would like to relate our position on the
evolution of the reform process. We believe that the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34)
has an important contribution to make, as do the Fifth
Committee, the Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, and the Secretariat. We
believe that we must begin to overcome the rivalry
between bodies or committees, which slows the process,
since each one has specific tasks that, when summed
up, make a positive contribution. We understand that
the efforts of the Secretary-General point to this in his
initiative to reform the peace and security architecture
of the Organization.

I wanted to make an express reference to the C-34,
since our country has consistently defended its work,
for it carries out substantial and relevant work that, in
our view, deserves special mention, in particular that
having to do with consideration of the recommendations
of the reports of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations and of the Secretary-General.

Finally, I wish to speak on how to ensure the
implementation and follow-up of the reform. The
resolution we adopted today includes elements that
will allow the Council to be more active, in particular
through the consideration of reports of the Secretary-
General on progress made, as well as the holding of
open annual debates. We applaud these elements.

In conclusion, reaffirming the ongoing and
unchanged commitment of Uruguay, I wish to recall
that without making systematic the participation of
women, peacekeeping operations will be unable to
achieve optimal efficiency or success.

