Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia wishes to thank your delegation, Mr. President,
for having convened this meeting. We also thank the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC),
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her briefing. We extend our
support to Ms. Bensouda in the carrying out of her
tasks. We value the efforts the ICC has made since 2011
in the implementation of the review carried out through
resolution 1970 (2011) and we reiterate that its effective
implementation depends on the full collaboration of all
stakeholders within and outside of Libya.

In that regard, we call on the Libyan Government
of National Accord, the stakeholders and the countries
of the region to redouble their collaborative efforts
so that the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC can
conduct its investigative tasks. We also reiterate that
all States, regardless of whether they are States parties
to the Rome Statute, bear the primary responsibility of
taking action to contribute to facilitating of the Court's
investigative tasks and thus preventing impunity.

We take due notice of the briefing and the activities
carried out by the Office of the Prosecutor during the
reporting period. We express our deep concern over
the news of extrajudicial killings, murder and arbitrary
detention in the current year that beset the affect
parties to the Libyan conflict. We urgently call on
the parties and armed groups to definitively cease all
violent acts. Any action that is contrary to international
criminal law can be investigated in order to identify
and penalize the responsible parties. With regard to the
Al-Werfalli case, we again call on the Government of
National Accord and all stakeholders to collaborate and
contribute to the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
during the investigations of the alleged activities.

We note with concern the repeated reports of the
use of sexual violence and harassment committed
against innocent civilians by the parties as tactics
of war. Moreover, there are reports of violations of
the rights of migrants, who are vulnerable to human
trafficking networks and are subject to slavery and
sexual exploitation. The investigations of the Office
of the Prosecutor can not only determine who is
responsible but, in the case of crimes against humanity,
they can exercise their competence to prosecute the
perpetrators. We hope that for the following report, we
will see significant progress on cases that are currently
being investigated.

The public circulation of reports linking the former
ICC Prosecutor, Luis Moreno Ocampo, and other
people associated with the Office of the Prosecutor
with activities of potential interference with the
ongoing investigation in Libya must be promptly
and thoroughly investigated in Court to determine
the scope of such actions. The integrity of the Court
is key to ensuring its credibility and effectiveness in
the eyes of the international community. We stress
that the ICC is a global endeavour in the interest of all
States, and its mission is critical to the strengthening of
international criminal law, peace and security, respect
for human rights and the assurance of due process. In
that regard, we call on all States that have not yet done
so, to ratify the Rome Statute with a view to achieving
its universalization.

We conclude by saying that absolutely nothing can
justify the commission of crimes against humanity, war
crimes or genocide, but we must recall once again that
what occupies the attention of the Council does so as
a direct consequence of regime change policies, the
result of which affect millions of people, not only in
Libya but worldwide.

