Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): 1 should like through you, Mr. President, to express my sincere gratitude to Under-Secretary-General General Lacroix for his excellent briefing, in which he laid out the plan to strengthen the force in order to make it even more operational and effective. I am pleased to make this statement on behalf of the African members of the Security Council - the Niger, South Africa and Tunisia - on this very important item on the agenda, the situation in Mali. I wish to emphasize three points, as did the Ambassador of France - not on the same issues, but three points nonetheless. First, we appreciate the international and regional efforts towards peace, security and stability in Mali, including the efforts of the United Nations, the African Union and African regional and subregional organizations, including the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), the West African Economic and Monetary Union and the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), which have always put security in Mali at the top of their agendas. We thank the Secretary-General for his report (S/2019/983), which contains relevant information on the recent developments in Mali in the political, security and development areas, and we very much appreciate the work done at the level of the secretariat of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and that done by the United Nations entities in Mali and in the region to help to meet the multiple and complex challenges that Mali and the region face today. We pay tribute to all victims of terrorist attacks in Mali and in the Sahel region, including civilians and members of the national defence and security forces as well as personnel of the G-5 Sahel and all allied international forces. We welcome the progress made in_ the implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali following on from the Algiers process, particularly in the area of political and social reform, with the successful holding, from 14 to 22 December 2019, of the inclusive national dialogue, which had more than 3,000 participants, including representatives of the movements signatories to the agreement, the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad and the Platform coalition of armed groups. We welcome also the headway made in the areas of security and defence with the integration of 1,330 former combatants from the signatory movements and members of the Operational Coordination Mechanism, as well as the adoption of the action plan of the National Council for Security Sector Reform. Also encouraging is the promulgation of the texts that constitute the legal and institutional framework of the Northern Development Zone in Mali, as well as the establishment of a sustainable development fund with $72 million. We welcome also the process of national reconciliation, with the promulgation of the law on national accord and the start of hearings for the victims in December 2019. In the spirit of the progress made recently, we welcome the calls made by the President of the Republic and the Malian Government for the people to continue to support the international forces on the ground. I take this opportunity to call on bilateral and multilateral partners to step up their support for the Government of Mali in the implementation of the agreement in a context that, as the Council is aware,is particularly difficult. We believe that the situation in Mali and across West Africa and the Sahel urgently requires that concerted efforts be deployed to help the defence and security forces by strengthening logistical, operational and intelligence capacities. These kinds of measures will undoubtedly help the Malian authorities to re-establish their control and influence across the national territory and to resume the provision of indispensable social services for their people. We also welcome MINUSMA's strategy aimed at increasing its mobility and support for the people of the centre. In that regard, we support the second strategic priority laid out in resolution 2480 (2019) regarding the renewal of MINUSMA's mandate, which provides for support to the Malian authorities in their efforts to protect civilians in the centre of the country. The intensification of the actions of and attacks by terrorist armed groups in the northern andcentral regions of Mali as well as in the tri-border area - between Burkina Faso, Mali and the Niger - is a cause for real concern. In the Niger, for example, all the attacks in the Tahoua and Tillaberi regions, including the recent ones in Inates and Chinegodar, which killed 71 and 89 lives, respectively, have been perpetrated by terrorist groups operating in the border zone with Mali. That is why it is urgent for the implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement in Mali to be speeded up within the context of the Agreement Monitoring Committee and that the presence of the Malian State be effective throughout the country. I should like also above all to strongly urge partners to honour their commitments with regard to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. I welcome the expansion of the tripartite technical arrangement between MINUSMA, the European Union and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force to other operational areas and would recall that, for reasons of effectiveness, there is a need to ensure the prior involvement of the Joint Force in the delivery of the required support, and I welcome the comments made by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix on this front. We propose that this should be done through existing United Nations channels in the countries concerned. In the same vein, we invite the international community, especially the United Nations, to take into account the highly relevant conclusions of the ECOWAS Summit held in Abuja, which adopted a 2020-2024 action plan with an initial allocation from member countries of $2.3 billion, including $1 billion of our own funding. To conclude, we call on regional and international partners to expedite the implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and its support plan. We believe that the strategy is a key element of international and national efforts for sustainable peace, stability and development in Mali in particular and the Sahel region in general. Lastly, I align myself with the statement delivered by Ambassador Nicolas De Riviere of France on the decision taken on 13 January in Pau between the President of the G-5 Sahel and the President of France, with the participation of the Secretary-General, the Chairman of the African Union Commission, senior authorities of the European Union and the International Organization of la Francophonie.
