Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Since the open debate
on 29 April on the situation in the Middle East (see S/PV.7164), political efforts towards a negotiated two-
State solution have reached an impasse. It is important
that international efforts continue to create the
conditions for the resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations.

Council members will recall that following the
last meeting of the Security Council on the situation
in the Middle East, the Secretary-General appealed to
all concerned parties and the international community
alike to use time constructively to find a meaningful
path forward, lest continued inaction furthered
instability or jeopardized the viability of the two-
State solution. He also urged both the Israelis and the
Palestinians to exercise prudence and avoid unilateral
steps, in an effort to convince each other anew that they
are partners for peace. This was also reflected in the
recent European Union (EU) Council conclusions of
12 May, which highlighted the EU special privileged
partnership on offer and called for both sides to find
the political strength to identify common ground for
the process to resume.

Meanwhile, discussions continued on the
implementation of the intra-Palestinian unity
agreement of 23 April between the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) and Hamas. On 5 May, President
Abbas and Hamas political leader Meshaal met in Doha
to discuss the detailed aspects of that agreement. PLO
officials traveled to Gaza on 14 May for the same.
The formation of a Palestinian national consensus
Government consisting of technocrats remains one of
the top priorities of the agreement.
The United Nations continues to support
intra-Palestinian reconciliation but notes that it is
paramount to reiterate to all factions that the future
Government abide by the PLO commitments to
recognition of Israel, non-violence and adherence
to previous agreements. The EU also reaffirmed
its support for the potential national consensus
Government in its Council's conclusion so long as it
adheres to the principles set out in President Abbas'
Cairo speech of4 May 2011. Ifthese conditions are met,
we hope that the international community will assist the
Government in developing a positive agenda to tackle
difficult political, security, economic and humanitarian
challenges, in particular in Gaza.

Following the deposit with the Secretary-General
in April of the instruments of accession to a number of
international treaties, on 2 and 7 May five of the nine
core human rights treaties plus one of the substantive
protocols entered into force. The International
Covenants on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
and Civil and Political Rights will enter into force on
2 July. The United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights commends the commitment of the State
of Palestine to being bound by the international human
rights standards contained in these treaties and to
engage with the associated human rights treaty bodies
that monitor their implementation.

While worrying trends on the ground continued, we
take note that the parties avoided a further escalation
during this delicate period, in spite of unhelpful rhetoric
from various quarters. Israel transferred 463 million
Shekels in value-added tax revenues to the Palestinian
Authority after deducting 120 million Shekels for water
and electricity payments.

In the West Bank, Israeli security forces carried
out a total of 219 search-and-arrest operations. A
total of 331 Palestinians were arrested, with two
Palestinians killed and 146 injured, including in
clashes during demonstrations against the barrier.
Eight Israeli security personnel were also injured. Of
these, the most significant took place on 15 May, during
demonstrations by Palestinians to commemorate the
sixty-sixth anniversary of what they call "Al-Nakba
Day", which led to clashes with Israeli security forces
in the West Bank. Two Palestinian stone throwers,
both teenagers, were shot dead, with 23 more injured,
including some by live fire. It is of serious concern
that initial information appears to indicate that the two
Palestinians killed were both unarmed and appeared
to pose no direct threat. The United Nations calls for
an independent and transparent investigation by the
Israeli authorities into the two deaths, and urges Israel
to ensure that its security forces strictly adhere to the
Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by
Law Enforcement Officials.

Settler attacks resulted in four Palestinians injured,
including a child and in damage to Palestinian property,
including 283 trees. On two separate incidents on
5 and 9 May, respectively, anti-Arab and anti-Christian
graffiti were sprayed on the property of Notre Dame
Church and the walls of St. George's Church in
Jerusalem. Palestinian attacks, mostly consisting
of stone and Molotov cocktail throwing, resulted in
injuries to two settlers, including a child, and material
damage to six vehicles.

Demolitions continued during the reporting period,
with 26 structures demolished, including 10 residences,
displacing 48 Palestinians, including 30 children. In a
separate, worrisome development, on 28 April Israeli
authorities issued eviction orders to at least five out
of 12 families of Palestinian Bedouins and herder
communities living in Sateh Al-Bahr, near Jericho.
The Israeli State has yet to respond to the temporary
injunction issued by the Israeli court on 4 May. We
are also concerned by demolitions in and near the
E-l/Maale Adumim area, including on 19 May. Since
the beginning of this year, 13 demolition incidents have
been reported in that sensitive area, which is higher than
the combined total of 11 demolition incidents recorded
in the same area over the preceding four years, between
2010 and 2013.

Continued settlement activity, including in
occupied East Jerusalem, is illegal under international
law and erodes hope for the two-State solution. On
14 May, Israeli authorities began demolishing structures
in the illegal settler outpost of Maale Rehavam,
near Bethlehem, after failed attempts at a voluntary
evacuation.

We remain concerned about the conditions of
some 125 Palestinian prisoners, including some
90 administrative detainees, including several members
ofthe Palestinian Legislative Council, in Israeli prisons
on continued hunger strike since 24 April to protest
the Israeli policy of administrative detention. On
8 May, approximately 5,100 other Palestinian prisoners
observed a one-day hunger strike in solidarity with those
administrative detainees. It remains the Secretary-
General's position that administrative detainees should
be tried or released without delay.

In Gaza, the situation was relatively calm compared
to recent reporting periods. Nevertheless, Palestinians
fired three rockets that landed in Israel. On 2 May,
Palestinian militants reportedly shot at an Israeli
military patrol near the border fence, which returned
fire. None of these incidents resulted in injuries or
damage. In separate incidents, Israeli forces reportedly
shot and injured six Palestinians near the border fence,
including five civilians and one militant, causing injury
to four Palestinian fishermen.

At the same time, the persisting dire economic
and humanitarian situation resulting from a tightened
access regime and violence remains of serious concern.
Unemployment rates reached 41 per cent in the first
quarter of 2014, 10 percentage points higher than
the first quarter of 2013. An alarming 66 per cent of
economically active 20-to-24-year-old Gazans were
jobless at the beginning of2014. Gaza remains in urgent
need of materials to maintain essential services and to
upgrade critical infrastructure, such as water networks
and sanitation. We repeat our calls for immediate steps
to help improve conditions and ensure a full opening of
crossings into Gaza, including Rafah, in order to allow
legitimate trade and movements of people.

The current situation further highlights the need
to advance a sustainable structural solution to Gaza's
energy problems. Gaza's only power plant, facing
near shutdowns every couple of months, continues
to operate as a result of a second Qatari contribution
of another $32 million to procure industrial fuel for
the plant. The Qatari contribution is expected to
enable the Gaza power plant to continue generating
until mid-June. Meanwhile, the emergency stop-gap
donation by the Turkish Government to replenish
on-site reserves for critical health and water facilities
has been implemented. Another such donation by the
Islamic Development Bank is scheduled to expire in
June. We appeal to donors to step in and sustain this
interim safety net to redress Gaza's electricity needs,
which are bound to increase with the summer months
approaching.

In the meantime, we welcome the resumption
of some 10 United Nations construction projects,
worth around $14 million, as well as the approval of
an housing project of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
in Rafah, valued at around $17 million. A remaining
six pre-approved projects worth $12 million remain
stalled. In addition, an estimated $105 million-worth
of construction works have yet to be approved by the
Government of Israel. In short, much more is required
to address Gaza's humanitarian and development
needs and alleviate the deteriorating conditions of the
civilian population, including a more predictable Israeli
Government approval process.

In a separate development, on 7 May two
Palestinians, one of them a civilian, were executed in
Gaza. Both were reportedly convicted based on the
claim that they were collaborating with Israel. The
executions were carried out without the approval of
President Abbas, as required by Palestinian law. We
have serious concerns with regard to the lack of due
process, the use of military courts to try civilians, the
lack of compliance with rigorous fair trial standards in
Gaza and allegations of ill-treatment and torture during
interrogations of persons later sentenced to death. The
United Nations urges the de facto authorities in Gaza to
impose an immediate moratorium on executions.

Council members were briefed on 6 May on
developments in Lebanon. I would note that the two-
month presidential election period there started on
25 March. Four parliamentary sessions have been
scheduled so far by Speaker Berri for the purposes of
the election. In the first session, none of the declared
candidates gained the required number of votes. In
the subsequent sessions, the most recent on 15 May,
there was no quorum, and therefore no vote took place.
The term of President Sleiman, whose leadership in
difficult times the Council has recognized, expires on
25 May. Council members have in the past underscored
the importance of successful elections in Lebanon for
the continuity of State institutions.

On 11 May, in a statement on behalf of the
International Support Group for Lebanon, the United
Nations Special Coordinator emphasized that the
process should be entirely Lebanese-owned and free
of foreign interference, but equally stressed the keen
interest of the international community in its successful
completion on time in accordance with constitutional
practice. I take this opportunity to reiterate that call.
We hope that members of Parliament will engage fully
in the coming days to elect a President by the date set
by law. It is important for confidence and stability in
Lebanon that a vacancy in the presidency be avoided.

The security plan approved by the Government
of Prime Minister Tammam Salam has continued to
contribute to an improved security situation in Tripoli
and in the Bekaa Valley, although there have continued
to be incidents connected with the conflict in Syria
close to the border, particularly in the area of Arsal.

In addition, there have been violent incidents in
the Palestinian refugee camps. On 7 April, clashes in
Mieh Mieh led to eight fatalities. On 9 and 21 April,
there were incidents in which two persons were killed
by gunmen in Ain Hilweh. On 12 May, further Clashes
between armed groups occurred in the same camp.

The situation in the area of operations of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) along the
Blue Line remained relatively calm. Close cooperation
by the parties with UNIFIL during such fragile times
and the continued efforts in that regard are critical
to safeguarding the calm along the Blue Line. Israeli
violations of Lebanese airspace continued on an almost
daily basis.

The Council was extensively briefed on Syria
last week by Joint Special Representative Brahimi, so
I will not repeat his clear messages. However, in the
Golan, ongoing clashes in the central and southern
parts of the area of separation underline the volatility
of the situation. On 8 May, heavy fighting between
the Syrian armed forces and the armed members of
the opposition occurred east of Quneitra, in relative
proximity to the crossing gates between the Alpha and
Bravo sides, further threatening the ceasefire between
Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic. In the context of
those clashes, tank rounds and an artillery shell landed
across the ceasefire line. There was no response from
the Alpha side. Such developments have the potential
to escalate the situation between Israel and the Syrian
Arab Republic and to jeopardize the ceasefire between
the two countries.

In conclusion, last month, Mr. Serry reminded
the Security Council that, without a credible political
horizon, we risk putting the Oslo paradigm in real
jeopardy (see S/PV.7164). Yet we cannot rush the parties
back to the table without the proper parameters in place.
The current pause in the talks allows for both parties
to consider their next steps, building on the intensive
engagement by the United States over the past nine
months. The Secretary-General remains committed
to working with the parties and international partners
for an end of the occupation that began in 1967 and
the establishment of a Palestinian State, living side by
side in peace with Israel within secure and recognized
borders, and a just, lasting and comprehensive peace
in the Middle East, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the road map and the
Arab Peace Initiative. It is the responsibility ofthe two

sides not to take unilateral steps, which will further
complicate efforts to return to negotiations.

