Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Mueller and Ms. Fore for their briefings. I welcome the presence of the German Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs and your own, Sir. There is an urgent need to silence the arms in Idlib and to establish an immediate cessation of hostilities. France condemns in the strongest possible terms the intense bombardments being carried out by the regime's air force and its allies, in particular Russia. Those bombardments indiscriminately target the population and civilian infrastructure in the north-west, includinghospitals, schools and displaced persons camps. These crimes - for they are crimes, if words have any meaning - must not go unpunished. We will continue to support all the mechanisms put in place by the United Nations and we will maintain our commitment within the framework of our national jurisdictions. We are very well aware of the presence of terrorist groups in Idlib. We will never take the problem of terrorism lightly. We fight it with resolve and France is engaged on the front line in the fight against Da'esh and other such groups. In Idlib, as elsewhere in Syria, the fight against terrorism means fighting the groups that are under Council sanctions and not, as Syria and Russia do, indiscriminately striking all opponents, be they terrorists or not, and any civilians in the way. But the fight against terrorism cannot justify violations of international humanitarian law. War has rules and respect for international humanitarian law is binding on all. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure, must remain a top priority. In Idlib and elsewhere in Syria, children are dying under the bombs or in the cold. That must end. The Executive Director of UNICEF will back me up on that. Today we must join efforts to achieve an immediate and lasting ceasefire in Idlib. Fourteen Foreign Ministers of States members of the European Union, including Mr. Le Drian and Mr. Maas, expressed that view yesterday. We call on Russia to continue negotiations with Turkey to achieve immediate de-escalation. However, the Astana format has proven incapable of preventing humanitarian catastrophe and escalation. We therefore have a responsibility to mobilize collectively to silence the guns. France and Germany are working towards that end. The United Nations has a central role to play here, as provided for in resolution 2254 (2015). France reiterates its full support for the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Special Envoy, from whom we await cease-fire proposals. At the same time, everything must be done to ensure humanitarian access to those in need of assistance. It is essential that the parties, in particular the Syrian regime, ensure humanitarian actors safe and unhindered access to populations in need. We call on Russia to engage to that end. The figures Ms. Mueller cited speak for themselves. There is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism for delivering assistance in the north-west. It must be safeguarded and we are determined to do so. It is a matter of life or death for millions of Syrians. With regard to the north-east, we thank the Secretary-General for his report on the review of alternative modalities for the border crossing of Al-Yarubiyah (S/2020/139), which highlights the lack of progress in delivering cross-line medical aid from Damascus. We condemn the Syrian regime's obstruction. Its recent statements must be reflected in lasting action and we will be vigilant: we are not fooled by its strategy of instrumentalizing humanitarian aid. We further condemn the fact that the Security Council did not extend its authorization for the use of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing point. It is essential that solutions be reached without delay to allow for the sustainable transportation of medical equipment in the north-east. The Secretary-General's recommendations are clear. It is necessary to combine cross-border and cross-line aid. It is therefore up to the Security Council to assume its responsibilities and act accordingly. For our part, we will remain highly vigilant regarding the delivery of humanitarian aid to the north-east, where the stakes are crucially high. We are talking about relief for an area where poverty and exclusion fuelled the emergence of Da'esh. The tragedy unfolding before our eyes makes a political solution more necessary than ever. The offensive in Idlib leaves no doubt about the intentions of the Syrian regime, aided by its external supporters, principally Russia: to regain control of Syria by force, without negotiating anything, and to make a show of seeking a political solution while working towards a total and bloody military victory. It is more urgent than ever to get the political process back on track with a view to implementing all provisions of resolution 2254 (2015), in particular through confidence-building measures and the holding of free and transparent elections supervised by the United Nations in which all Syrians can take part. Only a political solution will, moreover, enable the 6 million Syrian refugees to return to their country in safe and dignified conditions. We regret that such conditions are not yet in place.Finally, France, as well as its European Union partners, stands ready to finance reconstruction and lift the sanctions as soon as a political settlement is firmly and irreversibly under way, and not before. The key for overcoming the deadlock is thus in the hands of the regime and its allies. Faced with the tragedy unfolding before our eyes in Idlib, we must today unite our efforts to put an end to the continuing humanitarian, political and security disaster.
