The President: As agreed in prior consultations,
the Security Council is pleased to invite His
Excellency Mr. Mihai-Razvan Ungureanu, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Romania, to participate in this
meeting in accordance with rule 37 of its provisional
rules of procedure.

As agreed in prior consultations, the Security
Council is pleased to invite the following
representatives of regional organizations to participate
in this meeting in accordance with rule 39 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure: Mr. Erkki
Tuomioja, representing the Presidency of the European
Union; Mr. Jose Miguel Insulza, Secretary General of
the Organization of American States; Mr. Lauro L.
Baja, Chairman of the New York Committee of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations; Mr. Amre
Moussa, Secretary General of the League of Arab
States; Mr. Karel de Gucht, Chairman-in-Office of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe;
Mr. Vladimir Rushaylo, Chairman of the Executive
Committee of the Commonwealth of Independent
States; Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, Secretary General
of the Organization of the Islamic Conference;
Mr. Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, Secretary General of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization; Mr. Nikolai
Bordyuzha, Secretary General of the Collective
Security Treaty Organization; and Mr. Terry Davis,
Secretary General of the Council of Europe.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in the course of its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/590, which contains the report of the
2
Secretary-General entitled "A regional-global security
partnership: challenges and opportunities".

I should also like to draw the Council's attention
to document S/2006/719, which contains a letter dated
6 September 2006 from the Permanent Representative
of Greece addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting a background paper on the item under
consideration.

I wish to welcome the presence at this meeting of
Secretary-General Kofi Annan.

Allow me to open this debate with the following
introduction in my capacity as Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Greece.

First of all, I wish to express my gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his presence here today. We
greatly appreciate his tireless efforts to bring
increasing significance to the issue of the relationship
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in maintaining peace and
security. We fully share his stated vision of a mutually
reinforcing regional-global mechanism for peace and
security, which, in our View, will prove critical to
effectively addressing future threats and security
challenges in the twenty-first century. We strongly urge
the next Secretary-General to continue those efforts
and to further strengthen that partnership.

I also wish to express my appreciation to the
representatives of regional organizations for being here
today to share with us their views and experiences on
this most important subject.

This debate provides a good opportunity to
discuss the developments that have taken place
recently in implementing resolution 1631 (2005),
which was adopted last year under Romania's
presidency of the Council. But most importantly, this
meeting can stimulate an interesting discussion on the
vision of creating a regional-global security
mechanism. The report of the Secretary-General in
response to resolution 1631 (2005) identifies
challenges and opportunities to make the relationship
with regional organizations more effective, and paves
the way for the construction of a mechanism that will
enable the world community to handle future threats
and challenges in a more consistent and coordinated
way. For our part, we would like to raise three issues
that are relevant to the findings and recommendations
of the report.
06-52873

First, in previous Security Council debates it was
recognized that, given the nature of the new security
threats, greater involvement by international
organizations in conflict prevention and management,
in cooperation with the Council, was required. We fully
subscribe to that position. We believe that a greater
role by regional agencies in the area of peace and
security would not only lessen the burden of the
Security Council in that field, but it would also
increase the legitimacy of the Council through more
balanced input into its decisions and deliberations from
various regions with different cultural, religious and
historical backgrounds.

Secondly, many important developments have
taken place in this regard, particularly through the
Secretary-General's convening of six high-level
meetings that have been marked by a high level of
attendance and [a] broadened substantive agenda. The
meetings have identified an important set of modalities
for cooperation on conflict prevention and for guiding
principles in the area of peacebuilding. It is now
important to ensure that there is more effective
implementation of those principles in close
coordination between the United Nations and
international organizations.

For its part, the Security Council has conducted
its own meetings with regional organizations and has
developed an enhanced relationship with regional and
subregional organizations, focusing on peace and
security challenges such as conflict prevention and
management, peacebuilding and counter-terrorism.

However, despite those developments, many
challenges remain to be addressed to make this
relationship more substantive and operational. While
Chapter VIII of the Charter refers to regional agencies
and arrangements and sets forth the functional
relationship with the Security Council - in Articles 52
and 53 - it is silent with regard to their constitutional
relationship with the Security Council. We believe that
the time has come for greater clarity as regards a series
of issues that will facilitate the shaping of the Vision of
a global-regional mechanism for peace and security
agreed by both the Security Council and the regional
organizations.

We need to identify regional and subregional
agencies and to clarify the criteria on the basis upon
which those agencies are distinguished, for the purpose
of applying Chapter VIII of the Charter, from other
06-52873

international organizations. Such clarity will give real
meaning to the envisaged global-regional mechanism,
and should restore more authority to the Security
Council and greater reliance on constitutionally
delegated executive functions to genuine regional
agencies under Chapter VIII of the Charter.

The importance of this issue has been identified
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2006/590),
prepared in response to resolution 1631 (2005), which
emphasizes the need to clarify both the membership
and the mandate of regional and other organizations, to
make coordination more effective and ensure a clearer
collective effort. We endorse his recommendations on
that issue. In that respect, we have suggested in our
concept paper some basic elements to be applied for
the potential identification of regional and other
organizations. We also support all other
recommendations contained in the report.

In conclusion, I would like to express our full
support for all the efforts aiming at building the
capacity of regional and other organizations. The
United Nations and Member States should promote the
capacity-building of those organizations through the
provision of human, technical and financial assistance
if they really wish to develop an effective partnership.
In that respect, the seventh high-level meeting that will
take place immediately after this meeting, to which I
have been invited as President of the Council to report
on the findings and decisions of the Council, will focus
on the implementation of the 10-year process of
sustained capacity-building for African regional and
subregional organizations. We are looking forward to
the report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations contribution to that effect, in accordance with
the World Summit Declaration.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now invite the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, to make a statement.

