Mr. Mamabolo: I am grateful for the opportunity
to brief the Council on the situation in Darfur for the
first time since having been appointed head of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).

The three strategic priorities established by the
Security Council in its resolution 2148 (2014) continue
to provide a framework within which UNAMID
implements its protection-of-civilians mandate,
mitigates intercommunal conflicts and mediates
between the Government of the Sudan and the
non-signatory armed movements.

We continue to work with the Government at
all levels in pursuance of this mandate with the full
understanding that the primary responsibility for
the protection of Sudanese civilians rests with the
Government of the Sudan.

The Darfur of today is a very different place
from what the region was in 2003, when the armed
conflict began, and from that of a year ago. Fighting
between the forces of the Government of the Sudan and
the main three non-signatory armed movements has
considerably diminished.

The Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid al-Nour
(SLA/Abdul Wahid) is no longer capable of mounting
and sustaining significant military operations and
has experienced a series of defections that have left it
weakened by defections to the Government side. As a
result of the military campaign of the past three years,
the Government has been able to take control of every
area previously held by the movement in and around
its heartland of Jebel Marra, leaving SLA/Abdul Wahid
with a few pockets of resistance.

The unilateral ceasefire that was extended by a
further six months in January is largely holding. SLA
Minni Minawi and the Gibril Ibrahim faction of the
Justice and Equality Movement have also declared a
ceasefire, with SLA Abdul Wahid consistently refusing
to do so.

Against the backdrop of economic hardship and
social depression, however, banditry and criminality
continue to be widespread. The proliferation of
small arms and light weapons feeds those negative
phenomena, as does intercommunal violence, which
is usually triggered by competition, mostly over land,
water, grazing and mineral resources. The efforts of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel,
with the support of UNAMID, to get the parties to
the conflict in Darfur to sign a cessation of hostilities
agreement and to start direct negotiations towards an
inclusive peace agreement to end the conflict have
remained inconclusive. The current status is hurting
all parties and, most importantly, is not sustainable and
can only lead to more bloodshed.

On 8 March, President Al-Bashir issued a decree
pardoning 259 rebels captured in the fighting with
Government forces, including 66 combatants from
Darfur armed movements who were on death row. That

is a welcome development that we hope will contribute
to affirming mutual trust between the Sudanese parties.
SLA Abdul Wahid continues to refuse to join the peace
process and seems to want to continue to fight. We
would like to appeal to the Council and those with
influence and leverage over him to persuade him to
recognize the importance of a political settlement and
to desist from bringing more suffering upon the very
people that he professes to represent.

With regard to the implementation of the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, the 12th meeting of the
Implementation Follow-up Commission was held on
6 March under the chairmanship of the State of Qatar.
Efforts will continue towards improving coordination
and mobilizing resources for the implementation of
the remaining issues related to the Doha Document,
particularly with the return of internally displaced
persons (IDPs).

The past three months have also witnessed a
continued reduction in the number of intercommunal
security incidents, in particular as a result of the more
effective involvement of the native administration
and the impact of security measures taken by State
Governments, leading to an increased number of peace
agreements, the implementation of which is supported
by UNAMID. Seasonal disputes over access to land
and resources during the migration and farming season
have nevertheless continued.

According to figures provided by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 97,400 people
were newly displaced in 2016. Of those, approximately
39,600 have reportedly returned, including some 25,500
who were verified and assisted in Golo, the centre
of Jebel Marra. An additional 99,400 people remain
unverified. We have not seen any new displacement in
2017. IDPs continue to recquire UNAMID protection
and humanitarian assistance on a daily basis. Durable
solutions to enable their return to their places of origin
or reintegration have to be identified and should be the
main priority of our collective efforts.

The cooperation of the Government of the Sudan has
noticeably improved. Although UNAMID experienced
intermittent movement restrictions during the reporting
period, there has been significant improvement in that
regard. In addition, UNAMID and the United Nations
country team have repeatedly been able to Visit areas in
Jebel Marra that were previously off-limits. Our United

Nations humanitarian partners are commencing regular
helicopter flights to Golo. UNAMID remains focused
on efforts to work with authorities of the Government of
the Sudan to overcome the remaining access challenges.
We have also seen some improvement in the issuance
of visas and the clearance of essential equipment.
However, delays in the clearance of UNAMID goods
and equipment remain a concern, with some shipments
pending since 2015.

The African Union, the United Nations and the
Government of the Sudan are actively discussing how
best to configure a strategy for UNAMID to eventually
leave Darfur as part of constructive discussions
within the joint working group. On 26 February, the
joint working group met in Khartoum and referred
its conclusions to the strategic tripartite mechanism,
which will meet later this month. From 5 to 17 March,
UNAMID received an African Union-United Nations
strategic review team, which met with the Government
of the Sudan in Khartoum and Darfur and travelled
throughout Darfur. UNAMID awaits the outcome
of these deliberations. However, without necessarily
prejudging the outcome of the strategic review, I should
like to say that, in View of the current circumstances in
Darfur, a pragmatic reconfiguration of UNAMID will
become necessary, and the AU and the United Nations
will have to focus on how best that could be done
without compromising the gains made thus far.

In conclusion, I would like to express UNAMID'S
appreciation to the Council for the support we have
received. We continue to count on it as we continue
to implement the mandate given to us by the United
Nations and the African Union.

