Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by expressing appreciation to you, Sir, and the
Pakistani presidency for the opportunity provided to us
to address this important topic once again in this
Chamber. This is a burning issue in contemporary
international life and I thank you very much for having
chosen it as a topic to end your very successful
presidency.

I would like to say that we are very pleased with
the statements and the presence here of Ambassador
Rasi, President of the Economic and Social Council,
and the Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Mr. Egeland.

It is our expectation that today's discussion will
be a contribution to improving the methods and to
further identifying appropriate means to deal with the
complex crises that, in recent years, have so negatively
impacted on the lives of so many people and become
the cause of great concern to the international
community and a real threat to peace and security. A
number of very relevant suggestions have been
advanced this morning and we would like to welcome
and register them for further discussion.
The complex crises we are dealing with today
stem invariably from situations of total insecurity,
often with a regional dimension, including ethnic
conflict, genocide, uncontrolled violence, civilian
deaths in overwhelming numbers, generalized suffering
and massive displacement of populations within and
across borders. Contemporary complex crises have led
the international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to an awareness of the need to address the
issue from a three-fold perspective: by establishing a
link between security and development, by recognizing
that what happens inside a given country may impact
on international peace and security, and by
understanding that human security and peace-building
are areas of legitimate international concern and are
interlinked. Policies envisaged to address this new
security threat have been developed by the United
Nations, international regional organizations, non-
governmental organizations, civil society and even the
business community.

The Secretary-General's report on the prevention
of armed conflict spelled out the basic premises of
those policies and how the United Nations system can
best interact in order to prevent armed conflicts and
enhance States' capacity to prevent them. Three main
ideas emerged from the report. First, conflict
prevention is one of the primary responsibilities of
Member States and preventive action should be
initiated at the earliest possible stage of a conflict cycle
in order to be more effective. Secondly, an effective
preventive strategy requires a comprehensive approach,
both short- and long-term, and conflict prevention and
sustainable and equitable development are mutually
reinforcing activities. Thirdly, a successful preventive
strategy depends on the cooperation of many actors in
the United Nations, as well as the Bretton Woods
institutions, Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations, non-governmental
organizations, civil society and so on.

While assigning a key role to the Security
Council in the prevention of armed conflicts, the report
recognized that, in reality, the focus of the Council
remains almost exclusively on crises and emergencies.
As the primary centre for international efforts in crisis
management and peace-building, the Security Council
has in the past decade established a number of
peacekeeping operations with the primary aims of
stopping bloodshed, enforcing peace and addressing
the root causes of conflicts.

Contrary to the disengaged nature of past United
Nations operations, the main operations presently
deployed are multi-dimensional in character. By
involving civilian and military tasks, their objective is
to end wars and to promote long-term peace-building
by encroaching upon domains that were once seen as
the exclusive realms of sovereign States or primarily
dealt with through development assistance. Some of
today's operations involve the direct administration of
territories and populations and the rebuilding of States
against the background of the grossest violations of
human rights and the total destruction of the social and
economic fabric, as was the case of Kosovo and Timor-
Leste.

The international community's response to the
challenges of peace-building has been translated into
practice by the implementation of programmes in the
spheres of governance, security reform and the rule of
law, aimed fundamentally at managing change
peacefully and advancing constitutional and lateral
processes, ensuring disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes and advancing the
fundamental structuring or restructuring of security
institutions such as the police and army, and putting
them under civilian control. That response also
includes promoting national reconciliation through
accountability for past crimes and justice for the
victims, and by promoting human rights and legal and
penal reform.

The Economic and Social Council has been called
upon to play an ever-increasing role in the prevention
of conflict, in the framework of an integrated approach
recognized by the international community as valuable
to achieve peace, security, respect for human rights and
sustainable development. Specific cases of the
involvement of the Economic and Social Council and
the Security Council in Africa - in Guinea Bissau and
in Burundi - are very good examples, which have
been cited several times this morning.

The critical role that the Economic and Social
Council plays in addressing the root causes of conflict
and its contribution to a comprehensive and
multidisciplinary discussion on the prevention of
armed conflicts in the regional context are recognized
as valuable contributions to the prevention of armed
conflict and to peace-building. In addition, the ad hoc
working groups and advisory groups on countries
emerging from conflict have produced commendable
work, and their recommendations are important
contributions in conflict prevention and resolution.

After more than a decade in which large number
of multidimensional United Nations peace-building
missions have been established, with some drawing to
a close, the international community, with the lessons
learned through this cycle of peace-building, is in a
better position to evaluate the outcomes of key
components of the peace-building agenda with regard
to inter-agency collaboration and coordination and to
apply the best practices to peace-building. This
morning's meeting is again a very valuable
contribution to the debate.

It is our conviction that the major investments to
be made by the international community - including
political, diplomatic, financial, economic, cultural,
analytical and moral - must be in prevention. The
main and subsidiary bodies of the United Nations -
the General Assembly, the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council and the Secretariat -
regional and subregional organizations, financial
institutions and civil society, non-governmental
organizations, schools, the press and all social actors
should make conflict prevention the cornerstone of a
universal and common endeavour to promote a more
peaceful, equitable and prosperous world. That
objective is an attainable one.

