The Secretary-General: The Security Council has
today taken strong action on one of the most enduring
and pressing peace and security challenges of our
time - the nuclear and ballistic missile activities of
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. I welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2321 (2016).
Maintaining such unity is crucial to tackling security
challenges on the Korean peninsula and beyond.

The Council first adopted a resolution on the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea nuclear issue
in 1993 (resolution 825 (1993)). Twenty-three years
and six sanctions resolutions later, the challenge
persists. This time, the Council has taken longer than
ever before - nearly three months - in responding
to a nuclear test by the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea, the fifth such act. The time taken to reach
agreement on the resolution vividly illustrates the
complex nature of the challenge.

This year, the Council has met on nine occasions
in emergency consultations in response to nuclear
tests and ballistic missile activities of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. This is an unprecedentedly
high number. Since January, the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea has conducted two nuclear tests and
at least 25 launches using ballistic missile technology,
including launches of a satellite, submarine-launched
ballistic missiles, and medium- and intermediate-range
ballistic missiles. We must assume that, with each
test or launch, the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea continues to make technological advances
in its pursuit of a military nuclear capability. The
increase in and nature of these activities pose an ever
growing threat to regional security and the global
non-proliferation regime.

Today's resolution includes the toughest and most
comprehensive sanctions regime ever imposed by the
Security Council. It sends an unequivocal message that
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea must cease
further provocative actions and comply fully with its
international obligations. Targeted sanctions matter.
Security Council sanctions represent the clear and
unified will of the international community.

Yet sanctions are only as effective as their
implementation. It is incumbent on all States Members
of the United Nations to make every effort to ensure
that these sanctions are fully implemented. Some
States may have difficulty translating sanctions into
their national regulatory regimes. Others may lack
the capacity to enforce them within their territories.
That is why we need international partnerships for
capacity-building. Sanctions should be anchored in a
comprehensive strategy for lasting peace and security.

We must remain committed to a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution to this complex and
dangerous situation. As demonstrated by the agreement
on Iran's nuclear programme, a diplomatic solution
can be achieved if there is the will. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea must reverse its course and
move onto the path of denuclearization through sincere
dialogue. I reiterate my call on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to take the steps necessary to reduce
tensions in the region.

It is important not to forget the country's acute
humanitarian needs. The civilian population of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, including
vulnerable groups such as the elderly and children,
are particularly exposed to hardships, which are
further aggravated by natural disasters. International
humanitarian assistance remains vital for safeguarding
the lives of millions in need. I also reiterate my call on
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea authorities
to engage with the international community to address
the grave human rights situation and improve the living
conditions of the country's people.

In addressing all these challenges, I would like to
conclude by reaffirming the readiness of the United
Nations to assist in any way possible.

