Mr. Masood Khan (Pakistan): We would like to
thank Secretary of State John Kerry for having presided
earlier over this special meeting ofthe Security Council.
The initiative of the United States gives fresh impetus
to the quest for peace and security in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and its neighbourhood. Today's
debate brings together the Secretary-General, the
President of the World Bank, Special Envoy Mary
Robinson and leaders of the region. This is synergy in
action.

We pay special tribute to the Secretary-General,
who, despite heavy odds and some setbacks, assembled
the leaders of 11 countries and four guarantors - the
United Nations, the African Union, the International
Conference of the Great Lakes Region and the Southern
African Development Community - in the common
cause of peace and stability in the Great Lakes Region.
That is a big-picture approach.
The big picture requires that countries in the region
build a strong nexus between peace and development.
There can be no development without peace in the
region. Regional economic integration should replace
the toxic legacy of pogroms and the reign of terror
imposed by militias and armed groups.

The Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
holds out the promise to deliver peace. Special Envoy
Robinson has testified that some progress is being
made. We should maintain the momentum generated by
positive developments.

The big picture dictates that killings must end,
violations of international, human and humanitarian
laws - such as executions, sexual violence and forced
recruitment - must cease. Impunity should not be
condoned. Perpetrators should be held accountable.

The Intervention Brigade under the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) is being deployed.
It must succeed. The Brigade is one of the tools in the
overall strategy to act as a deterrent. It is not meant to
be a substitute for the Congolese army, nor a panacea
for the problems in the eastern part of the country.
As resolution 2098 (2013) underlines, ultimately, a
well-trained and adequately equipped rapid-reaction
force within the Congolese army will take over
responsibilities from the Brigade. MONUSCO remains
a cornerstone of the new strategy.

We all know that the process of implementing the
Framework is not going to be easy. It is important that
regional partners and the neighbours of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo be fully on board and that they
implement the Framework in good faith. It is also
critical that all countries respect the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of neighbouring States. Credible
and verifiable measures should be taken to disarm,
disband and demobilize groups that defy the writ of
the State. Allegations can be investigated and truths
established. Realistic and time-bound benchmarks
should be developed to monitor the progress in the
implementation of the Framework.

We welcome the initial steps taken by the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and to establish the national oversight
mechanism. The responsibility for the maintenance of
peace and security in the eastern part ofthe Democratic
Republic of the Congo should be gradually transferred
to its armed forces and police. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo should expand security sector reform,
consolidate State authority and work towards national
reconciliation.

Pakistan is strongly committed to the goals ofpeace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region. Pakistani peacekeepers in
MONUSCO have played an important role in restoring
and bolstering stability in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. They have carried out daring operations
against armed groups, contributed to the training and
capacity-building of the Congolese national security
forces and worked on community welfare projects.
Many of our soldiers have laid down their lives on the
soil of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Our
peacekeepers will continue to protect civilians and to
implement MONUSCO's mandate.

We hope that there will be a new dawn for the people
of the Great Lakes region. This century is Africa's
century. As Africa moves towards robust economic
growth and attains political clout, the Great Lakes
region should not be held back by strife and conflict.
The illicit exploitation ofminerals should stop. The rich
resources of the region should now be harnessed for the
benefit of its people. The countries of the region should
assume their rightful place in Africa and the comity of
nations. The Great Lakes region should become an ark
of stability and prosperity in the continent. The United
Nations should succeed in its mission.

