Yesterday the Israeli occupation forces once again launched a series of attacks, firing guided missiles at the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic over the occupied Syrian Golan. This act of aggression, which gives a morale boost to the remaining pockets of terrorist proxies of Israel, is in flagrant violation of the 1974 Agreement on Disengagement between Israeli and Syrian Forces, international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant Security Council resolutions. These attacks would not have taken place had the Security Council not, for several decades, failed to enforce its resolutions related to the Arab-Israeli conflict, and had certain permanent members of the Council not extended unstinting support to the rogue entity, encouraging it to intensify its crimes, violations and acts of State terrorism with impunity. For 53 years the Israeli occupation entity has continued to occupy Arab territories, including the Syrian Golan, in flagrant disregard for the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international law and hundreds of United Nations resolutions. It continues to commit grave and systematic violations of international humanitarian law and human rights, amounting to war crimes, such as the forcible transfer of population, the destruction of homes, the confiscation of land and property, the theft of natural resources, the siege of cities and the destruction of crops. In doing so it has benefited from the protection of certain permanent members of the Security Council, chief among them the United States of America. Under the current Administration, United States support for Israeli expansionist settlement plans has reached an unprecedented level, as evidenced by the United States Administration's provocative occupation deals, its declaration of occupied Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, its recognition of so-called Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan and the occupation authorities' attempt to annex territories of the West Bank. The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member States, strongly condemns those decisions and considers them as a merely unilateral act undertaken by a party that has neither the status nor the political, legal or moral capacity to decide the fate of the peoples of the world or to dispose of lands that are an integral part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. Syria supports the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination and the establishment of an independent State encompassing all of its national territory and its capital, Jerusalem, and the right of refugees to return to their homes in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). That resolution was adopted after Count Folke Bernadotte was assassinated in Jerusalem by the Zionist Stern Gang for stating, in his report (see S/863) to the Security Council in 1948, that Palestine refugees had the right to return to the cities, villages and homes from which they had been expelled. My country reiterates its demand that Palestine be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations. The citizens of my country living under occupation in the occupied Golan have the right to question whether the United Nations can credibly and effectively uphold their just cause. How could it be otherwise? They can see Israel flouting internationally recognized resolutions demanding that it withdraw from the entire Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. Has the time not yet come to enforce United Nations resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict? Is it not time for certain members of the Security Council to break free from their contempt for the principles of international law and the provisions of the Charter, all of which repudiate occupation and aggression? How could it be otherwise? The citizens of the occupied Golan are not seeing any genuine international effort to stop the Israeli settlement campaigns in their territory. Those campaigns include, but are not limited to, confiscating 4,500 dunums of Syrian land to set up a project to build wind turbines to generate power; concluding contracts with and granting permits to the United States Genie Energy Company, whose Executive Board is headed by former United States Vice President Dick Cheney, to drill for oil and plunder natural resources; and coercing our people in the Golan to register land they inherited from their parents and grandparents with the Israel Land Authority under penalty of confiscation. Furthermore, Israel continues its settlement activities and has announced the establishment of a new settlement in the occupied Syrian Golan called Trump Heights. This new settlement was a present from the Prime Minister of the Israeli occupation to American President Trump for his flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and international law in unilaterally recognizing what he termed Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan. How could it be otherwise? They cannot see any international effort being made to put an end to systematic Israeli violations and repressive and racist policies, including, but not limited to, seeking to organize illegal local elections in the occupied Syrian Golan; refusing to open the Quneitra border to our people in the occupied Syrian Golan who wish to visit their homeland and relatives in Syria; and failing to provide adequate medical care to the people of the Golan amid the coronavirus disease pandemic, which places their lives at further risk. Moreover, the Israeli occupation authorities continue to treat our people in the occupied Syrian Golan in a discriminatory manner because they refuse to carry Israeli identity cards. How could it be otherwise? They can see no international attempt to put an end to the Israeli occupation's policy of arbitrary detention and mock trials. The most recent instance of this policy was the unjust and arbitrary ruling handed down by the Israeli occupying forces on 10 June, imposing a three-year sentence on the activist Nihal Suleiman Al-Madt, sister of the released prisoner Sidqi Al-Maqt, the Syrian Mandela, and a resident of Majdal Shams in the occupied Syrian Golan. The ruling is illegal and void because it was issued by an illegal occupation force as part of a series of arbitrary repressive measures against the population of the occupied Golan, in an act of reprisal against their patriotic stand and their commitment to their nation and their Syrian identity. It amounts to an act of retaliation against the valiant Al-Maqt family, a patriotic Syrian family that is resisting occupation and aggression. My Government emphasizes that the occupied Syrian Golan is an integral part of the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic and that its restoration to the line of 4 June 1967 by all means guaranteed by international law will remain a priority for Syrian policy and a fixed point from which it will not deviate. Lastly, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that, in order to ensure stability in the Middle East and preserve the credibility of the United Nations, measures must be taken to implement all international resolutions aimed at ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan, and compelling Israel to withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including, in particular, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).
