Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate,
which is an excellent opportunity for delegations to
hear from the Chairs of the key subsidiary bodies of
the Security Council and to provide input into their
activities. I also wish to commend the Chairs of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) and
1540 (2004) for their work and their briefings today.
We hope that this debate will help to revitalize and
strengthen international cooperation in combating the
threat of terrorism under the auspices of the United
Nations.

We have all acknowledged and emphasized the
important contribution that the United Nations counter-
terrorism mechanisms can and should make to our
collective effort to fight terrorism. It is in that belief
that my Government has been committed to
cooperating with these mechanisms, including the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001). We highly appreciate the work done by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) under the able
chairmanship of His Excellency Ambassador Apakan.

The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a clear victim of
terrorism, has taken great steps to implement the
Security Council's resolutions on terrorism, including
resolution 1373 (2001). We have submitted six national
reports on our implementation of the resolution, in
which we have set out the concrete steps that our
country has taken to implement the provisions of that
and other relevant resolutions. Those steps include
stepping up border control security and surveillance
measures at entry and exit checkpoints.

Moreover, we have intensified our fight against
drug trafficking originating mainly from an eastern
neighbouring country. Given the fact that very often
proceeds from narcotic drugs are used as a source for
the financing of terrorism, Iran's efforts in that regard
have undoubtedly made a fundamental contribution to
the global fight against terrorism. Just as importantly,
we are committed both to fighting terrorism through
effective measures that prevent the planning,
preparation and execution of acts of terrorism as well
as by combating other forms of transnational crime,
within our borders and beyond.

In that regard, I should like echo the conclusion
of the Chairman of the CTC in his recent report,
namely, that the Executive Directorate and the
Committee, as important international counter-
terrorism bodies and subsidiary organs of the Security
Council, could play a great role by "work[ing] with
their neighbours so that their common counter-
terrorism defences are as effective as possible."
(S/2010/569, annex, para. 39)

The Islamic Republic of Iran has provided its
national report to the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) on the measures it has taken
to implement the resolution. As clearly stated in that
report, based on its principled positions and contractual
commitments and as a State party to all international
instruments banning weapons of mass destruction -
namely, the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention, the
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and the
1925 Geneva Protocol - the Islamic Republic of Iran
is very keen on the implementation of those treaties.
However, the continued existence and development of
weapons of mass destruction, the possibility of their
use or threat of use and the prospect of non-State actors
acquiring such weapons make them all the more
threatening to the whole international community.

Despite limited bilateral and unilateral arms
reductions, such efforts fall far short of international
expectations for real and effective steps towards the
total elimination of nuclear weapons. Nuclear-weapon
States are obligated to comply with their legally
binding commitments to fully work towards the
elimination of their nuclear weapons. It is obvious that,
as long as those weapons exist, their continued
existence itself and the development and deployment
of thousands of nuclear warheads will not only threaten
international peace and security; there is also always
the risk that they could fall into the hands of terrorists
and non-State actors. Therefore, the compliance of all
Member States with all their obligations under existing
WMD disarmament and non-proliferation conventions,
including the universality of those instruments, is vital
to eliminating the risk that such weapons could fall
into the hands of terrorists and non-State actors.

I would like to reiterate that we will continue to
work closely with the counter-terrorism mechanisms
established by resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001)
and 1540 (2004). The scourge of terrorism requires the
international community to act in concert and in a
comprehensive manner, free of double standards and
selective and discriminatory considerations and
narrowly defined political objectives. The necessary
political will and resolve need to be constantly in
evidence for the international community to send a
truly strong and unambiguous signal of our resolve to
fight terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.

Before I conclude, I would like to respond to the
reference made to my country by the representative of
the Israeli regime. I would like to place on record that
my delegation rejects the baseless allegations and
distortions in his statement. This is yet another tired
practice by that regime to distract the attention of the
international community from its State terrorism and
possession of a nuclear arsenal, as well as its criminal
policies and abhorrent atrocities in the region.

