Mr. Moreno Fernandez (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): I have the honour to address the Security
Council on behalf of the 118 members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM). In compliance with
your request, Mr. President, I shall deliver an abridged
version of the statement prepared by the Movement,
which will be circulated in its entirety in the Council
Chamber.

The Non-Aligned Movement condemns Israel's
continuing occupation of Palestinian territory in breach
of international law and United Nations resolutions. In
that regard, the Movement condemns in the strongest
terms the recent Israeli military aggression against the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza, which resulted
in the death of more than 1,400 Palestinians, including
hundreds of children and women, the injury of more
than 5,500 Palestinians and widespread displacement,
making thousands of Palestinian families homeless and
deepening the suffering and fear that overwhelm the
population.

The Non-Aligned Movement also condemns
Israel's wanton destruction of thousands of Palestinian
homes and businesses, vital civilian infrastructure and
United Nations facilities, including several schools
where frightened Palestinian families had sought refuge
but were nonetheless attacked by the Israeli occupying
forces. The Movement calls upon Israel to immediately
cease its military aggression against the Palestinian
people and stresses the importance of attaining a
permanent and lasting ceasefire, beginning in the Gaza
Strip and extending to the West Bank. The Movement
also expresses its support for Egypt's efforts in that
regard.

We reiterate our condemnation of Israel's
inhumane and unlawful closure and blockade of the
Gaza Strip, which has resulted in the virtual
imprisonment of the entire Palestinian civilian
population. The Movement expresses its serious
2

concern about the grave deterioration of socio-
economic conditions and the deepening humanitarian
crisis as a result of the blockade, which has caused
increased and widespread privation, poverty and
hardship, in addition to the vast trauma and suffering
inflicted by the military aggression.

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
cease such illegal practices against the Palestinian
people and put a permanent end to its illegal blockade
of the Gaza Strip by allowing the immediate and
sustained opening of all Gaza border crossings needed
to alleviate the humanitarian crisis and to meet the
urgent reconstruction and economic recovery needs of
the Palestinian people.

The Movement reminds the international
community, including the Security Council, of its
responsibility to guarantee an in-depth investigation of
all the crimes and Violations committed by Israel in the
Gaza Strip and to ensure that serious follow-up efforts
are made to ensure that the perpetrators of such crimes
answer for them. Israel's impunity and its blatant
disregard for and defiance of the law must come to an
end. We await the report of the Board of Inquiry
dispatched to Gaza by the Secretary-General. We call
for immediate action to follow up the findings of the
Board's investigation and for the immediate dispatch of
the fact-finding mission called for by the Human
Rights Council as recently called for in Geneva by the
non-aligned countries.

The Movement reiterates its strong condemnation
of Israel's continuing intensive campaign of building
settlements throughout the occupied Palestinian
territories, in particular in and around occupied East
Jerusalem. Such Israeli policies and measures constitute
grave breaches of international law and flagrant
defiance of United Nations resolutions and the 9 July
2004 advisory opinion of the International Court of
Justice. We stress the incompatibility of negotiations on
the peace process with such unlawful colonization
activities, which are clearly aimed at the illegal
acquisition and de facto annexation of more Palestinian
land and at forcibly imposing a unilateral solution. The
Movement emphasizes that the illegal Israeli
colonization campaign in its entirety is gravely
undermining the contiguity, integrity, viability and
unity of the occupied Palestinian territory and
jeopardizing the prospects for physically achieving the
solution of two States living in peace.
09-28062

The Non-Aligned Movement demands that Israel
immediately cease all of its colonization activities in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and reaffirms that those unlawful measures
cannot alter the terms of reference of the peace process
nor negate the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. The Movement also demands that the
international community take urgent action to compel
the occupying Power to abide by all of its obligations
under international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention, United Nations resolutions, the advisory
opinion and its obligations under the road map.

The Government of Lebanon has continuously
endeavoured to stabilize the situation in its territory
following Israel's bmtal aggression and serious
violations of its territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The Non-Aligned Movement reiterates its satisfaction
with the steps taken by the Lebanese Government to
implement resolution 1701 (2006), including the
deployment of its armed forces along the northern and
eastern borders of Lebanon to ensure security and
stability on the borders.

The Movement remains deeply concerned about
Israel's ongoing air and land violations of the Blue
Line in breach of resolution 1701 (2006). We strongly
urge Israel to end the occupation of the northern part of
Ghajar village, north of the Blue Line, and refrain from
any violation of Lebanese sovereignty and of
resolution 1701 (2006), as well as any provocation of
the Lebanese armed forces or the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon.

The Movement also calls for the prompt
settlement of the question of the Shaba'a farms, in full
respect for Lebanese territorial integrity, as stipulated
in resolution 1701 (2006). We urge all parties to
cooperate in protecting Lebanon's sovereign rights in
that area and we note the important efforts made by the
Secretary-General in that regard.

The Movement is fully aware of the enormous
challenge facing Lebanon as a result of the 1.2 million
cluster bombs launched by Israel during its aerial
attack on the country. The Movement once again
condemns the use of such weapons by Israel and
deplores the resulting death toll. The Non-Aligned
Movement strongly urges Israel to provide the exact
location of explosives planted on Lebanese territory, as
well as maps of the location of the landmines planted
during its occupation of southern Lebanon.
09-28062

The Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms that all
measures taken or to be taken by Israel, the occupying
Power, that purport to alter the legal, physical or
demographic character or institutional structure of the
occupied Syrian Golan, including efforts to impose its
jurisdiction and administration there, are null, void and
have no legal effect. We also reaffirm that all of those
measures, including the illegal construction and
expansion of Israeli settlements in the Syrian Golan
since 1967, constitute violations of international law,
international agreements and the United Nations
Charter and its resolutions, including Security Council
resolution 497 (1981), as well as the Fourth Geneva
Convention. They are also in defiance of the
international community. The Movement demands that
Israel abide by resolution 497 (1981) and withdraw
completely from the Occupied Syrian Golan to the
borders of4 June 1967.

At this critical period in the Middle East,
particularly with regard to the long and tragic question
of Palestine, the Non-Aligned Movement reaffirms its
intention to continue to lend its support and actively
contribute in every possible way to achieve a just,
comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East
based on all relevant United Nations resolutions, the
terms of reference of the Madrid Conference, the
principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the road map.

