Mr. Nesho (Albania): The Albanian delegation
welcomes the presence of, and the presentation made
by, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Michael Steiner, at today's meeting. We
also support the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). In particular, we would
like to commend the tremendous activities of UNMIK
and the vision and great commitment of Special
Representative Steiner in leading UNMIK towards the
creation of an open and democratic society in Kosovo
that is capable of respecting the will of the people and
its great aspiration to become a part of Europe and its
democratic institutions.

The outstanding leadership of UNMIK and
Special Representative Steiner has provided concrete
results towards the establishment of functioning
democratic institutions and the rule of law,
decentralization, a market economy and the fight
against organized crime. It has also contributed to the
creation of an open, democratic and multi-ethnic
society, in which no one is above the law and where,
above all, Albanians, Serbs, Bosnians and others can
live and work together and share responsibility for their
common country in an undivided and democratic
Kosovo that is part of democratic Europe.

The great contribution made by UNMIK and
KFOR in Kosovo since the very beginning of their
activities is proof of the legacy of the international
community's efforts to make Kosovo a success story.
Today Kosovo's democratic and representative
institutions have successfully carried out general
elections for its parliament and for local governments,
and have re-established the education system in which
420,000 pupils attend 120 schools and 50,000 students
attend university.

Kosovo has embarked on a fast-track to build
infrastructure and telecommunications and to
regenerate energy sources. Kosovo is expanding its
economic, social and commercial relations with Balkan
countries, continuing along the path of integration into
south-eastern Europe as a necessary precondition for
its further integration into a united Europe.

The implementation of the benchmarks presented
here in the Security Council by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Steiner -
such as creating functioning democratic institutions,
institutionalizing the rule of law, freedom of movement
everywhere for everyone, the return and integration of
displaced people, regenerating the Kosovo economy
and property rights - is the necessary condition that
will lead Kosovo towards Europe. The benchmarks
also represent the heaviest burden in terms of orienting
the will of the people in the right direction.

Obviously, all this success is achieved in an
environment where the different parties do not yet trust
each other, where the tragic past is trying to cast its
shadow on the future, where Kosovo is still considered
by some as part of nationalistic scenarios intended to
gain political power. Furthermore, the parallel structure
and paramilitary groups in northern Kosovo try to
compromise the establishment of a multi-ethnic
society. Finally, the traditional policy and the Balkan
mentality of mistrust continue to hold hostage the
opposing parties, preventing them from seeing in the
future a positive, irreversible reality that will serve
stability and regional peace, creating the ground for a
prosperous and integrated region.

For this reason, the Albanian Government will
continue support UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in order to
successfully implement their work. The Albanian
delegation had requested, at a previous meeting of the
Security Council, that the legitimate representatives of
democratic institutions of Kosovo be present at this
meeting, at which the future of their society is
discussed.

We commend the initiative of Mr. Steiner, who
invited a group of representatives of the Kosovo
Assembly to today's meeting. Unfortunately, this
farsighted action was wilfully and wrongfully
misinterpreted within the confines of some narrow
interest. We are of the opinion that the Special
Representative must continue to insist on the presence
of the legitimate representatives of the people of
Kosovo in this body.

