Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We appreciate the French
presidency for organizing this ministerial-level
meeting on the situation in the States of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). We very much appreciate
the presence among us of the French Minister and
his presiding over the meeting. We also welcome the
participation of other ministers at the meeting.

This meeting could not be more timely or relevant,
coming as it does after the Security Council mission to
the G-5 Sahel region. The visit has certainly helped the
Council have a far more comprehensive understanding
of the enormity of the challenges faced by the G-5
Sahel countries and reinforced the appreciation of the
need to fully and speedily operationalize Joint Force,
with the support of the international community. We
welcome the report (S/2017/869) of the Secretary-
General pursuant to resolution to 2359 (2017) on the
activities of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, including on its
operationalization, on challenges encountered and on
options concerning possible United Nations support for
the Force. We wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his report, for today's briefing and for his demonstrated
efforts to try to address the challenges facing the Sahel
region as a matter of priority. No doubt, his commitment
in that regard is partly the result of the conviction that
what happens in the G-5 Sahel region has broader and
global implications.

1 must stress that there is a full convergence of
views on the matter with the Chairperson ofthe African
Union Commission. Of course, we are very pleased
to have Chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat with us
via video-teleconference during this very important
occasion and to listen to his views on the challenges
faced by the G-5 Sahel countries, We appreciate his
leadership and commitment to supporting the Sahel
region within the framework of the African Union
Peace and Security Architecture.

We are also very pleased to see Minister Abdoulaye
Diop of Mali, the rotating Chair of the G-5 Sahel, who
only a few days ago welcomed us in Bamako. We also
wish to welcome his colleagues, the other ministers of
the G-5 Sahel member States. I must acknowledge with
thanks the hospitality we enjoyed it in Mauritania and
Burkina Faso.

The G-5 Sahel countries have demonstrated their
commitment to fighting terrorism and transnational
organized crime by mobilizing their forces and
allocating their limited resources. We take note of
the efforts that they have made to fully operationalize
their Joint Forces, but we recognize the enormous
constraints they face in doing so. The challenges and
threats to peace and security in the Sahel region are
not only a matter of concern to the G-5 Sahel countries,
but has broader implications for international peace
and security. It is not very difficult to imagine the
consequences if we fail to address the situation in
the region by assisting the efforts of the G-5 Sahel
countries, and we cannot agree more with what the
Secretary-General said in that regard.

That is why we believe there is an urgent need to
mobilize international support for the G-5 Sahel. In
that regard, we note the commitments made by some
bilateral and multilateral partners in financing the
Joint Force. We appreciate the efforts by France and
Germany to mobilize additional support by hosting
planning meetings in support of the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, and welcome the pledge made by European
Union member States to provide various forms of
technical and logistical support. However, what has so
far been pledged falls far short of what is required to
cover the preliminary budget required to sustain the
Force for one year, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General. We look forward to the holding
of the Brussels donor conference in December, in
line with resolution 2359 (2017), which we hope will
contribute to mobilizing additional support for the G-5
Sahel countries.

We commend the Secretary-General for his
commitment to be personally involved in the resource
mobilization endeavour, and welcome the various
options that he has proposed for possible United
Nations support to the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It is indeed
vital that the Council support this important regional
initiative, which adds greater significance to the fight
against terrorism and transnational organized crime.

After having visited the countries in the region
and witnessing firsthand the multiple and complex
challenges they are facing, the importance and
urgency of the matter cannot be overemphasized. We
therefore hope the Council will seriously consider the
options proposed by the Secretary-General, which
were developed by drawing lessons from previous
experiences, and make appropriate decisions soon.

The Security Council should be ambitious, as the
Secretary-General said earlier. We fully agree with
the Secretary-General on the complementarity of the
Joint Force and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
with proposed options for support to the Joint Force
also benefitting the work of MINUSMA. We also
agree with him on the need to ensure cooperation
and interoperability of the Joint Force with other
operations and frameworks, including the African
Union-led, Nouakchott process, Operation Barkhane
and MINUSMA. Overall, the close coordination of
the G-5 Sahel countries with other regional actors, the
African Union and the United Nations, as well as the
support of other bilateral and multilateral partners, is
key to the success of the Force.

The multifaceted challenges facing the Sahel region,
as stressed in the Secretary-General's report, can be
effectively addressed only through a comprehensive
strategy thatO encompasses security, governance,
development, human rights and humanitarian issues.
Therefore, the rapid and effective implementation of
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, as
called for in resolution 2359 (2017), is absolutely critical.
We hope that countries of the region, in cooperation
with bilateral and multilateral partners, will redouble
their efforts in implementing the Strategy.

