Mr. Maas (Germany): "I wish for a life without war and shelling. I wish I could be successful at school." Ten-year-old Amina said that to an Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs team a few days ago. She is one of more than 500,000 children in Idlib who are displaced, many of them for the second or third time. Children like Amina have never experienced peace; they have never gone to school, and now some of them are freezing to death. It is becoming more and more difficult to put the human suffering in Idlib into words, but we all heard the shocking facts and figures that our briefers just presented. We owe them and all humanitarian workers our gratitude and full support and respect. Mr. Lowcock recently called the situation in Idlib the biggest humanitarian horror story of the twenty-first century. The Executive Director of UNICEF spoke of a child-protection crisis of unprecedented scale, and Ms. Bachelet called the current attacks on civilians cruel beyond belief. Germany calls on the Syrian regime and on Russia to listen to those voices and to stop ignoring the facts. As parties to the conflict, they have an obligation to protect civilians. Instead, they are bombing civilian infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools. Let me be clear - conducting counter-terrorism measures does not absolve anyone, especially the countries represented in this Chamber, from respecting international humanitarian law, and indiscriminate attacks against civilians are war crimes. Those responsible must be held accountable. There is more that the Council can and must do to stop the suffering. First and foremost, we must ensure full humanitarian access. The Secretary- General's report (S/2020/139) on alternative access routes leaves no doubt that cross-border aid remains of vital importance. The Council needs to look at every possibility to meet all humanitarian needs in accordance with humanitarian principles. As co-penholders, we are committed to ensuring just that. Aid must reach those in need, including in north-eastern Syria. The cold is a threat to thousands of people. Germany has stepped up its assistance by €25 million to provide shelter for those in need, and last week the European Union also decided to increase its humanitarian support. But all of us need to do more. Secondly, a humanitarian ceasefire is essential. I discussed that a few days ago with my Turkish and Russian colleagues at the Munich Security Conference, and together with France we stand ready to continue working towards such a ceasefire, at the highest level, with Russia and Turkey. We heard from our briefers that civilians need a break from the horrors of war and they need it now. Finally, we must step up our efforts to find a political solution. A regime that has been killing and torturing its own people cannot bring lasting peace and stability to Syria, and reconciliation without accountability for the terrible crimes committed will not work. Those who continue to fight in this war should finally realize that. A political solution overseen by the United Nations and in line with resolution 2254 (2015) is the only way to resolve this conflict. While we are sitting here, 3 million civilians in Idlib are in fear of their lives; 80 per cent of them are women and children. We have failed them for far too long. We owe them a better future - a future in which children like Amina are going to school instead of hiding in bomb shelters.
