Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): The Plurinational State of
Bolivia thanks Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs, for his briefing on the
fourth report (S/2017/97) of the Secretary-General on
the threat posed by ISIL (Da'esh) to international peace
and security and the range of United Nations efforts and
activities in support of Member States in countering
the threat.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia reiterates its
emphatic, categorical condemnation of terrorist acts in
all their forms and manifestations - regardless of the
motives for committing them, where they take place
and who their perpetrators may be - since they are
a deliberate attack on international peace and security
and they represent flagrant violations of international
law. At the same time, we wish to stress that terrorism
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization.

We recognize the assessments of the reports of
the Secretary-General that Da'esh is an unprecented
threat to international peace and security and that it is
able to quickly adapt to changing environments and to
persuade or inspire terrorist groups that are similar to
it throughout the world to facilitate and commit acts
of terrorism.

We value the regional focus of the Secretary-
General on this occasion, in particular on the regions
of Europe, the Maghreb and West Africa. We view with
concern the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
returning to their countries of origin in Europe, as well
as the online dissemination of designs for improvised
explosive devices. While Da'esh has been forced out of
cities such as Sirte in Libya, it continues to threaten
neighbouring countries in the Maghreb and West
Africa. We also note the efforts made by countries of
those regions in the context of combating terrorism in
order to respond to the unprecendented threat posed
by the so-called Islamic State to regional stability
and security. We encourage them to continue making
progress and coordinating their efforts in that direction.

We are particularly concerned by the situation of
women, girls and boys, asylum-seekers and refugees.
The Plurinational State ofBolivia also wishes to publicly
recognize the efforts, sacrifices and achievements
of the peoples of Iraq, Syria and Libya and all those
who are on the front lines in combating the scourge of
terrorism in conflict areas and on the international level,
especially with regard to the threat that Da'esh poses
to international peace and security. We also recognize
the efforts of Turkey, Iran and Russia in reaching a
ceasefire agreement on Syria, in December 2016, and
the efforts of Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura. Those
efforts deal a great blow to the progress of the Islamic
State and represent hope in being able to resolve the
conflict through negotiations among the parties and the
necessary fight against the Islamic State.

While we acknowledge Member States for their
contributions set out in the fourth report, Bolivia believes
that we must not forget the root causes of the problem
of terrorism and the development of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant - intervention and regime-change
policies. If we do not learn those lessons, we will be
condemned to repeat history. We would not be sitting
here dealing with this issue, denouncing the situation
and the loss of over 1.5 million lives, had it not been for
the invasion of Iraq, the attempts to not recognize and
overthrow the Government of Syria and the planned
destruction of Libya. Furthermore, it is ironic that some
Governments responsible for those policies are the very
ones that refuse to welcome refugees who are victims
of terrorism in the conflict areas.

The Plurinational State of Bolivia once again
acknowledges the work done by the United Nations to
greatly alleviate the situation of victims of terrorism
and to bolster the work of States in fighting this threat
to international peace and security.

