Mr. Thoms (Germany): Let me express our
gratitude to the Presisdent for convening this open
debate on non-proliferation.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
made by the observer of the European Union.

While it is undisputable that substantial progress
has been made in the 12 years since the adoption of
resolution 1540 (2004), there is no doubt that the risk
of non-State actors acquiring, developing, trafficking
in or using weapons of mass destruction (WMDs) and
their means of delivery remains high. Unfortunately, it
is a risk that can quickly become a reality, as the use
of chemical weapons by the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham in Syria, particularly in Iraq, has clearly
shown. We therefore urge all States to continue to
work towards the aim of full implementation, bearing
in mind the importance of a global, multilateral and
binding approach to non-proliferation.

Germany reaffirms its unwavering commitment to
the full and universal implementation of the obligations
deriving from resolution 1540 (2004). That of course
includes enhancing the security of nuclear materials
worldwide. Germany continues to encourage and assist
other States in implementing resolution 1540 (2004).
We have done so, for example, by sharing experiences
and identifying effective practices.

Against the background of recent proposals
to intensify efforts to combat the use of chemical
weapons by terrorists, we need to carefully examine
the contribution that resolution 1540 (2004) can make
in that context, while working closely with other
forums, such as the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons. The key to preventing such acts
is without any doubt the national implementation of
Security Council resolutions and other obligations. We
need to think more carefully about ways to enhance the
implementation of the relevant resolutions. Resolution
1540 (2004) requires States to take a number of
specific measures, adopti and enforce effective laws
and establish export controls of dual-use goods and
technologies.

At the same time, we need to keep in mind that, in a
globalized world, the involvement of the private sector
is vital for successful non-proliferation. After all, it is
the private sector that must implement many of the rules
and laws. Against that backdrop, Germany initiated the
Wiesbaden process in 2011, which focuses on private
sector engagement in the context of resolution 1540
(2004). To date, four international industry outreach
conferences have taken place. Industry representatives
from diverse sectors, such as the aviation, biosecurity,
banking, finance, electronics, energy, public-health,
pharmaceutical and transportation sectors, have shared
best practices in export control and compliance. We are
proud that Wiesbaden has become a brand and that the
issue is part ofthe agenda on this resolution. Listening to
concerns and proposals of industry representatives has
helped and will facilitate more effective implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) - first, by strengthening
export controls, secondly, by controlling access to
intangible transfers of technology and, thirdly, by
controlling information that could be used for WMDs
and their means of delivery.

The fourthWiesbadenConference,heldinNovember
2015, aimed at contributing to the comprehensive review
by focusing on lessons learned from past conferences.
There are three outcomes that I would like to mention
in particular: first, ways and challenges to effectively
implement compliance programmes within enterprises;
secondly, the creation of industry networks, especially
to help small- and medium-sized enterprises to comply
with all national regulations and requirements; and,
finally, the establishment of regional forums.

Moreover, on a broader scale, Germany is engaged
in fighting the proliferation of biological and chemical
weapons. We are of the opinion that it is crucial to
raise awareness of illegal procurement activities and
dual-use risks among enterprises in the biotechnology
and chemical industries. As producers of products that
are critical owing to their dual-use risk, enterprises play
a key role in the implementation process of resolution
1540 (2004).

Let me conclude by stressing that Germany stands
ready to broaden the scope of the Wiesbaden process
by addressing the issues of biosecurity, chemical and
nuclear security, transport, brokering and export control.

