Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Mr. Minister, we are pleased to welcome
you here to preside over the Council and pay tribute to
your personal contribution to improving the working
methods of the Council.

We thank the delegation of Azerbaijan for
convening today's important meeting on cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). We listened attentively
to the statement made by the OIC Secretary-General,
Mr. Ekmeleddin Ihsanoglu, which highlighted the
OIC's work on many of issues that are also on the
United Natons agenda and that, no less important, it is
doing so in a similar direction.

Currently, issues relating to the maintenance of
international peace and security make it increasingly
necessary for the international community to turn to
regional and subregional formats. Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations states that the Council
shall make every effort to achieve pacific settlement of
local disputes through regional arrangements.

At the same time, we note that in addition to a
geographical commonality serving as an effective
unifying factor, in many cases a common cultural
history serves the same purpose. The Organization of
Islamic Cooperation brings together countries whose
peoples profess common spiritual and moral values.
Such a unifying factor can and should play a crucial
role in resolving the many complex tasks facing the
world community. That applies first and foremost to
the prevention of conflicts, mediation, and political and
diplomatic settlement, where the potential of the OIC is
greatly needed.

Today the Arab world is experiencing a period of
turmoil, often accompanied by bloody conflicts behind
which lurk deep-rooted differences in values. Preventing
nations from sliding into the abyss of sectarian strife
is not just the responsibility of the Council; it is also
a common task in which the OIC, alongside regional
and subregional organizations, is destined to play an
irreplaceable role.

In a number of ways, the pooling of efforts in
fighting terrorism will serve to test the mettle of both
the Security Council and the OIC. Unfortunately, this
global evil is often and mundanely associated in people's
minds with Islamic extremism. We are convinced
that terrorist actions, regardless of where, why and
by whom they are committed, require unconditional
condemnation. Any form of support for such criminal
activity must be resolutely confronted and resisted.
Given the increasing threats posed by terrorism,
particularly sectarian and ethnic violence, we must
make especially strenuous efforts to counter the rising
incidence of defamation of any particular religion.

Against that turbulent backdrop, promoting the
ideas ofpeace, tolerance and non-violence; the dialogue
of civilizations, cultures and religions; and universal
moral values is more pressing than ever before in
order to fully uphold human rights and freedoms. All
this must harmoniously complement the principle of
international law enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations, including non-interference in internal affairs,
the territorial integrity of States, the inadmissibility of
the use or threat of use of force.

Russia's relations with the OIC have been built
on the basis of dialogue and mutual respect, and
goes back two decades. It would be remiss of me not
to recall that in 1993 I had the pleasure of being the
first Russian official representative, in my capacity as
Russian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs, to visit
OIC headquarters.

Our country, with its 20 million Muslims, is an
observer at the OIC and is consistently developing
cooperation with the organization's member States.
Early this month, the OIC Secretary-General Visited
Moscow, where a framework agreement of cooperation
was signed between the Federation Ministry for
Foreign Affairs of Russia and the OIC secretariat. That
important document serves as the principal road map
for close cooperation on the entire scope of our shared
agenda. Mr. Ihsanoglu also took part in the economic
summit between Russia and the OIC in Kazan.

In conclusion, I would like to voice the hope that
today's presidential statement on cooperation between
the United Nations and the OIC (S/PRST/2013/16) will
stimulate the further strengthening and development
of cooperation between the two organizations and
complement it with concrete practical steps of common
interest.

