Ms. Lnj (Denmark): At the outset I would like to
fully associate myself with the statement made earlier
by the Italian presidency of the European Union (EU).
The EU has, for a number of years, both collectively
and bilaterally placed strong emphasis on supporting
justice reform and the rule of law in our development
cooperation in general and in post-conflict situations in
particular.

Allow me to offer a few complementary
comments on these issues from a Danish perspective
and to share some lessons learned from our own
assistance efforts in three specific post-conflict
situations.

We can only echo the call for ensuring the
establishment of strong local institutions in post-
conflict societies. But that does not exempt the
international community from the obligation to assist
in building rule-of-law institutions. On the contrary, the
challenge is addressed through financial and technical
assistance, transfer of know-how and advice to support
local efforts and to be open to innovative ways of
carrying through these efforts.

In this context, let me offer three examples where
Denmark, in post-conflict societies, has sought to
contribute to the rule of law.

Danish transitional assistance to Albania after the
Kosovo crisis in 1999 consisted both of technical and
financial support and was instrumental in setting up a
number of rule-of-law institutions, including the office
in Tirana of the Albanian Ombudsman.

Today the Ombudsman Office is processing
impressive numbers of complaints from Albanian
citizens, some of them leading to resolution of difficult
problems between citizens and the State. The Office
reports to Parliament and constitutes an important
building block in the country's rule-of-law efforts.
The Danish Transitional Assistance Programme
to South Africa, which was initiated in 1994, included
support for the process of reconciliation and
democratization by strengthening the democratic
institutions and ensuring popular participation and the
promotion of good governance, respect for human
rights, accountability and efficiency in the public
sector, particularly within the police and the judiciary.

The process in South Africa shows that
reconciliation on the one hand and the very firm
application of the law and legal justice on the other do
not always sit together easily and that national
reconciliation in post-conflict societies may require
greater reliance on a process-oriented rather than a
result-oriented legal process.

Finally, in the West Nile region of Northern
Uganda, Denmark and other donors have been heavily
involved in facilitating peace-building between the
rebels and the Government of Uganda. A Peace
Agreement was signed on 24 December 2002. The
successful implementation of this Agreement is of key
importance in promoting peaceful resolutions to other
ongoing conflicts in Northern Uganda. This assistance
to Uganda serves to illustrate the role of justice and
rule-of-law assistance in what could be termed "pre-
post-conflict resolution", that difficult period where
bringing an ongoing conflict to the end by political
means may mean hard choices between full justice and
peace.

Overall, our experiences in supporting judicial
reform and the rule of law seem to indicate the
following important lessons learned.

First, close coordination between both bilateral
and multilateral donors is of the utmost importance in
order to avoid wasteful duplication and competition
between different concepts and approaches.

Secondly, interventions in the legal area are often
highly delicate and politically sensitive processes.
Impartiality is crucial, which gives the United Nations
a comparative advantage. We would like to see the
United Nations Development Programme further
develop and target its capacity in that area. Broader
interagency consultations between various United
Nations actors on a possible division of labour and
further specialization in that field should also be
considered in order to better prepare and harness the
United Nations to render assistance in the often very
complex post-conflict situations.

Finally, we should also be cognizant of the
possibilities of tapping into the vast resources of the
community of non-governmental organizations (NGOs)
in the areas of the rule of law and legal reform. Many
local NGOs, including human rights groups and so on,
are highly skilled and can sometimes, in cooperation
with international NGOs or United Nations
organizations, play an important and very cost-
effective role in training and building capacity in the
area of the rule of law in the public administration of
many countries.

