Ms. L¢j (Denmark): Let me begin by thanking
you, Sir, for convening this meeting on children
affected by armed conflicts. Without the tireless efforts
of France, we would not have been able to secure the
positive developments that have taken place since our
last debate on the issue.

I also want to express my appreciation for the
introductory statements made this morning by the
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, the Executive Director of UNICEF, the
Associate Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the representative of the
World Bank.

Let me also align Denmark with the statement
that was delivered by the representative of Finland on
behalf of the European Union.

With the adoption of Security Council resolution
1612 (2005), we managed to achieve what many had
already discarded as impossible: to propel the subject
of a thematic debate from an issue of general, if
somewhat uncommitted concern to a matter with very
concrete and operational implications for the work of
the Security Council.

By now, a monitoring and reporting mechanism
on children has been established in a number of
conflict situations. Systematic and reliable information
is already pouring into the newly established Security
Council Working Group, which will shortly present its
first recommendations to the Council, initially on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and later in the year
on other situations of concern, including the Sudan, Sri
Lanka and Somalia.

Those developments constitute substantial
progress that will make a real difference in the daily
lives of thousands of children. The process illustrates
that, when political determination is present in the
Council, our efforts can move beyond mere rhetorical
declarations. We hope that all Council members will
keep this in mind as we move forward on other related
issues, including the protection of civilians and
women, peace and security.
As we look at the established framework for child
protection, it is clear that some aspects need to be
reviewed in the future. The scope of both the
monitoring and reporting mechanism and of the
Working Group must, as envisaged in resolution 1612
(2005), be made truly thematic in nature, covering all
situations of concern. Furthermore, the Security
Council must reaffirm its willingness to use all tools at
its disposal and not shy away, even if the situation calls
for more difficult measures, such as sanctions, referral
of Violators to international courts or stronger
enforcement of peacekeeping mandates to protect
children.

However, the immediate objective for the next 12
months should be to develop the established protection
framework for children. Denmark looks forward to
engaging in substantial discussion on future reports
presented to the Working Group and to translating
these discussions into concrete results on the ground.

With the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), the
Security Council clearly underlined the imperative of
providing protection for children affected by armed
conflict. A broad variety of actors must be involved to
ensure this overarching objective. First of all, it should
by now be clear that the eyes of the international
community rest firmly on the actions of all parties
involved in armed conflict, be it in Darfur, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, northern Uganda or
Sri Lanka. All parties must and will be held
accountable for failure to fulfil their obligations to end
all violations and abuses committed against children.
To achieve progress, it will be key to develop concrete
action plans at the national level to halt the recruitment
and use of child soldiers.

Secondly, the Council expects national
Governments to do their utmost to facilitate the
establishment of the protection framework, cooperate
with national monitoring and reporting task forces and
support dialogue between warring parties. Allow me in
this regard to commend the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sri Lanka and
Uganda for their constructive cooperation with the
Working Group. We also commend the Special
Representative and UNICEF on the establishment of
national monitoring and reporting mechanisms.

Thirdly, I would like to underline that the active
involvement of civil society is essential. Without the
dedicated work and courage of many national and
international non-governmental organizations on the
ground, it would not be practically possible to establish
and maintain the protection framework for children in
armed conflict.

Finally, it has been extremely encouraging to
witness the strengthened cooperation between UNICEF
and the Special Representative's office. We strongly
support this expanded partnership, which has been
paramount in achieving the results in front of us today.

The past 12 months have clearly demonstrated
that, when the Security Council displays the necessary
political will, genuine advances can be achieved in the
protection of children affected by armed conflict. Such
determination will inevitably translate into a greater
willingness by donors to provide the adequate
resources, allowing all involved to reinvigorate their
efforts in areas where support is needed. One of these
key areas is the establishment of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes, with a
greater focus on the specific needs of girls affected by
armed conflict.

For the remaining part of its tenure on the
Council and beyond, Denmark will continue to provide
all possible support to this important process. The
protection of children affected by armed conflict is
integrated as a crosscutting theme in Danish
development assistance. We believe that, as a
minimum, children should be provided access to the
basic requirements necessary for them to exploit their
full potential as human beings. Key among these are
education, health and, in particular, peace and security
of the person.

