Mr. Mutaboba: It is a pleasure to be here today
to introduce the thirty-sixth report of the Secretary-
General on developments in Guinea-Bissau and on the
activities of the United Nations Peacebuilding Support
09-5946]

Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) (S/2009/552).
Allow me just a few words to update Council members
on developments in Guinea-Bissau since the report was
published.

In the political arena, on 28 October, President
Malam Bacai Sanha issued two decrees changing the
structure of the Government and reshuffling the
Cabinet, aimed at better addressing Guinea-Bissau's
challenges and at reducing expenditure. The new
Cabinet was sworn in on 29 October and now has 16
ministers, as compared with 21 previously, and 12
secretaries of State, as against 10 in the previous
Cabinet. It also includes five women. The major
changes are in the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, the
Interior, and Defence and in the Ministry in charge of
the Council of Ministers. There are no changes in the
key posts of Economy and Finance.

On 3 November, President Sanha opened the
2009-2010 legislative year and called for a national
stability pact and revision of the Constitution. This is
very new. He also called for a holistic reform of the
State, not confined only to public administration and
the security sector. He called on promoters of the
national conference to work with similar initiatives and
come up with durable and coherent solutions. The
Speaker of Parliament, Mr. Raimundo Pereira, called
on Parliament to expedite laws related to security
sector reform. The session has been suspended for
three days' mourning for Antonia Mendes Teixeira, the
parliamentary leader of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC),
who died last week in a car accident.

In the field of justice, on 3 November President
Sanha issued a decree appointing a new Prosecutor
General, Mr. Amine Saad, to succeed Mr. Luis Manuel
Cabral, who was in charge of the investigations into
the March and June assassinations. Mr. Saad held the
same position in 2000 when President Sanha was the
Interim President of the Republic.

With regard to the commission of inquiry,
ensuring transparent and fair investigation of the high-
profile political assassinations of March and June 2009
remains a key national priority. While the Government,
the African Union, the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and the United Nations
are still working together to provide experts, logistics,
funding and security to the ongoing national
09-59461
investigations, financial commitments from partners to
support the overall assistance package are necessary to
move the process forward.

In the military arena, the Chief of General Staff
of the Armed Forces, Zamora Induta, and his deputy,
Antonio N'djai, were sworn in on 27 October. The
Chief of General Staff was promoted from Navy
Captain to Vice-Admiral, while his deputy was
promoted from Colonel to Major General. President
Sanha stressed that the new military chiefs need to
continue the process of building a republican, modern
and disciplined army that is subordinate to the civilian
authorities.

On security sector reform and drug trafficking,
UNOGBIS organized on 21 October a meeting of the
Guinea-Bissau Security Sector Reform International
Partners Group to discuss the level of support provided
by the international community to the Government's
security sector reform programme and to achieve
consensus on ways of enhancing international
coordination and assistance. The diplomatic
community with accreditation to Guinea-Bissau, based
in Dakar, participated in the meeting through audio
link.

As Chair of the Security Sector Reform
International Partners Group and in accordance with
Security Council resolution 1876 (2009), UNOGBIS
will continue to hold regular consultations and pursue
contacts with relevant partners, including the European
Union, to ensure synergies in our strategies and
approaches towards security sector reform in Guinea-
Bissau. On 3 November, the special envoy of the
African Union, Joao Bernardo de Miranda, led a joint
African Union-ECOWAS delegation to Bissau for a
two-day mission focusing on security sector reform,
post-conflict reconstruction and combating drug
trafficking.

Although there seems to be a downward trend in
the trafficking of cocaine through West Africa over the
past few months, drug trafficking and organized crime
remain a significant challenge to stability in Guinea-
Bissau and the subregion. On 27 and 28 October,
UNOGBIS participated in a conference in Dakar aimed
at discussing the implementation of the West African
Coast Initiative (WACI) involving the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime, the Department of Political Affairs
and INTERPOL in support of the ECOWAS Regional
3
Action Plan to address drug trafficking, organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa (2008-2011).

In order to pursue WACI's objectives, our Office
has agreed to further strengthen inter-mission
cooperation in the subregion, especially with the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the United Nations Operation in C6te d'Ivoire, as well
as the United Nations Office for West Africa. In
addition, in coordination with relevant donors,
UNOGBIS remains committed to help tackle linkages
between organized crime and the trafficking of small
arms.

With regard to the Peacebuilding Commission,
the review of the strategic framework for
peacebuilding in Guinea-Bissau is progressing. The
Government has established six thematic working
groups which are being proactively supported by our
Office and is assessing the activities undertaken in the
areas of security sector reform; strengthening of the
justice sector; consolidating the rule of law and
fighting drug trafficking; measures to jump-start the
economy and rehabilitate infrastructure; elections and
institution-building; and social questions critical for
peacebuilding.

As to social and economic matters, the economic
and fiscal situation remains very fragile. The
International Monetary Fund (IMF) is planning to field
a mission from 5 to 18 November to review the
emergency post-conflict assistance to Guinea-Bissau
and to discuss a poverty reduction and growth facility.
A World Bank mission was in Bissau from 26 to
29 October to conduct a portfolio performance review.
The Administrator of the African Development Bank
(ADB) for Guinea-Bissau will be in Bissau from 4 to
7 November. The ADB Director of Operations will also
be in Bissau from 15 November, towards the end of the
IMF mission, to discuss budgetary support, among
other matters.

On border security, the media have reported very
widely on a rebel offensive begun in early October,
against the Senegalese military in Casamance, close to
the border between the two countries. Besides
reporting alleged incursions of Senegalese troops into
Guinea-Bissau in hot pursuit operations, the media also
reported the alleged displacement of border markers on
the extreme western part of the demarcation line
between Senegal and Guinea-Bissau, in an area of
tourist and offshore petroleum potential. The
President's spokesperson denied the existence of any
tensions between the two countries and reiterated
Guinea-Bissau's willingness to support a resolution to
the Casamance problem through dialogue.

A meeting between representatives of Guinea-
Bissau and Senegal took place in Bissau on 23 October
to discuss border issues, and both sides agreed to
revive a joint cooperation commission and, among
other measures, to create a joint commission to survey
the area of the extreme western part of the demarcation
line between the two countries to ensure that the border
markers are correctly in place.

With respect to the Integrated Peacebuilding
Office, Council resolution 1876 (2009) gives the future
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) a robust mandate to
support the Government of Guinea-Bissau in the areas
of political dialogue and national reconciliation,
security sector reform - especially with respect to
policing and internal security - the promotion of
human rights and the rule of law, combating drug
trafficking and organized crime, and assisting the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund. The overall budget proposal for
the new integrated office will be considered by the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions next week, and it is our hope that the
resources requested will be provided to help enable the
much-needed and coordinated support to national
authorities and the people of Guinea-Bissau.

To conclude, allow me to highlight some key
points. First, the country has a Government that
achieved an absolute majority in the legislative
elections in November 2008, and a President from the
same party who also won the presidential elections by
a large margin. The defence leadership has been
legitimized through the confirmation of both Chief of
General Staff and his deputy. In principle, the
conditions are in place for institutional harmony and a
stable Government. The momentum is very favourable
and we should maintain it.

However, two threats exist, one of which is
internal. People do not realize the degree of hegemony
in politics, with the same party ruling forever, without
any opposition. The second threat comes from inter-
party divisions relating to personal rather than
ideological differences and which have a negative

09-5946]
impact on Government stability. Much depends on the
governing party's ability to evolve away from
exclusionary politics and to develop inclusiveness and
accountability. I am confident that it will overcome this
problem if we continue to support it.

Secondly, the Government's attention during a
good part of the year has been focused on managing
the consequences of the March and June events, and
there is a perception that in other critical areas limited
progress has been made. The Government must get
back on track with its programme but, as I mentioned
so often before in this Council, Guinea-Bissau cannot
pursue this agenda alone. There is a window of
opportunity for change that requires commitment and
results on the part of the Government and adequate
international support to address the country's short-
term challenges and the long-term goals of building
capacity and strengthening State institutions.

It is encouraging that the World Bank, the IMF
and the ADB have fielded important missions to review
their portfolios and discuss strengthening their support
for the country. The international partners and the
Government are planning a donor round table
conference early in 2010 to address the country's
development and fiscal, public administration and
security sector reform needs. This agenda needs to be
supported.

Thirdly, the weakness of justice has eroded the
confidence of the people in public authorities. In a
country with a history of unresolved politically
motivated violence, a transparent and thorough
investigation of the political assassinations in March
and June, as well as of the alleged coup d'e'tat in June,
is important if we are to fight impunity, re-establish the
confidence of the people in the justice system and, in
establishing truth, contribute to forward-looking
reconciliation. The investigation process and its
aftermath should not lead to further destabilization, but
rather should be part of the overall reconciliation
process. In that connection, the international
community should spare no effort to accompany this
country in its pursuit of justice and reconciliation.

