Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting and to underscore the particular importance
of the topic of today's Security Council meeting for
all Members of the United Nations family. This open
debate should serve as our common contribution to the
efforts of the international community to address the
challenges that the world faces today.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered later on behalf of the European Union.

Back in 1945, in signing the Charter of the United

Nations, the founding Member States were determined
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war
and to "establish conditions under which justice and
respect for the obligations arising from treaties and
other sources of international law could be maintained.
For those objectives, we established the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. As a founding Member
of the United Nations, Ukraine proudly has a stake
in that process, as its delegation chaired the drafting
of the Charter's Preamble and Chapter I - Purposes
and Principles - at the San Francisco Conference. In
today's world, those provisions are the prerequisites to
any other purposes of the United Nations.

Regrettably, we have also witnessed deviations from
those principles or their misinterpretation according to
convenience. Since the founding of the United Nations,
the basic norms of the Charter have been violated on
many occasions. Any encroachment on the Charter's
provisions, any arbitrary or selective interpretation of
its Articles or any actions that undermine its authority
or incite disregard for the letter and the spirit of its
principles represent a clear threat to international
peace, with far-reaching repercussions for the well-
being of all peoples.

The current developments caused by Russia's
illegal occupation of Crimea and its aggression in the
eastern Ukraine clearly serve to demonstrate that the
violation of fundamental principles of international law
by a permanent member of the Security Council is a
serious threat to peace and security in Europe and the
whole world. The same happened in Georgia in 2008.
It happened in Crimea in 2014. It is happening now
in eastern Ukraine. The neo-imperialistic ambitions
of the Russian Federation and its reckless militaristic
adventurism have created the worst security crisis
in Europe since the end of the Second World War. In
trying to justify its actions by misinterpretation of
the provisions of the Charter, Russia has on numerous
occasions, in the less than 25 years ofits membership in
the United Nations, demonstrated that it did not respect
its own obligations under international law and the
Charter. Furthermore, in abusing the right of the veto in
the Security Council, the Russian Federation neglects
its obligations, as a permanent Council member, to
maintain peace and security.

According to General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX), of 14 December 1974, the actions undertaken
by the Russian Federation in Crimea, as well as in the
east of Ukraine, fall squarely under the definition of an
act of aggression - a crime against international peace.
Under Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations, the
use of force against the territorial integrity of another
State is illegal; thus, no territorial acquisition can be
recognized as lawful or retrospectively legitimized.

Allow me to recall that the military invasion by
Russian troops began on 20 February 2014 by their
blocking and seizing Ukrainian civil and military
facilities, administrative buildings and infrastructure;
illegitimately imposing the pro-Russian Crimean
authorities; and holding the so-called referendum of
16 March 2014, at the barrel of a Russian gun. In a
documentary for Russian State-run television broadcast
a year later, on 15 March 2015, the Russian President
admitted that the plan to annex Crimea had been
launched weeks before the so-called referendum. It is
no surprise that the authorities in Moscow had never
intended to comply with General Assembly resolution
68/262, entitled "Territorial integrity of Ukraine",
which calls upon all States to desist from any attempts
to modify Ukraine's borders.

The aggression has continued in the Donbas
region of Ukraine. The aggressor has thousands of
troops, heavy weapons, tanks, artillery, multiple rocket
launchers, missiles and other military equipment not
only at our borders but also on our soil. At the same
time, Russia remains a sponsor of terrorism in the east
of Ukraine and continues to provide financial, material,
military and technical support to the separatists in
Ukraine, which are organized, controlled and funded
by the Russian Federation, including, in many cases,
under cover of so-called humanitarian convoys. As
a result, the almost-two-year-old Russian military
aggression against Ukraine has already resulted in
more than 9,000 civilians dead, at least 20,000 injured
and millions of forcibly displaced persons.

The aggressive war launched by Russia against
Ukraine constitutes a grave breach of jus cogens - the
peremptory norms of international law - and a flagrant
disregard for the international obligations and
commitments undertaken by Russia under the Charter
of the United Nations, the Helsinki Final Act and other
international treaties and documents. The actions of the
Russian Federation constitute yet further proof that in
practice there can be no isolated violation of a single
principle of the Charter, as all principles are inherently
connected and interdependent. Encroachment upon any
of them essentially entails a breach of the entire corpus
of the principles as a whole and of the many legal rules
deriving from those principles. My country considers
such actions as internationally wrongful acts violating
the erga omnes obligations of Russia and thus entailing
Russia's international responsibility not only vis-a-vis
Ukraine but also vis-a-vis the entire international
community. Not a single State remains unconcerned in
this situation, no matter how distant it might be from
Ukraine geographically.

Over the past two years, Ukraine has on several
occasions urged the Russian Federation to accept its
international legal responsibility and demanded the
termination of such wrongful acts. We proceed from
the fact that Article 33 of the Charter envisages an
obligation to settle any international disputes peacefully
and provides a toolkit to do so. We remain committed
to a peaceful resolution of this conflict. But striving to
achieve that and trying to re-establish lost trust does
not, however, mean that a breach of the United Nations
principles should be accepted. That would be an
erroneous lesson to be drawn from history and would
be fatal for European and world security.

In that context, Ukraine has brought Russia's
attention to the numerous facts of its aggression
and proposed to resolve any existing disputes at the
International Court of Justice or by ad hoc arbitration.
Ukraine has also brought to the attention of the Russian
Federation numerous cases of violations of international
humanitarian law and breaches of its obligations as
an occupying Power, as well as instances of human
rights violations attributable to it due to its effective
control over parts of Ukraine's territory. In response,
the Russian side has expressed general, unsubstantiated
denials of those facts and has refused to recognize the
existence of a dispute or its responsibility.

Not only that: just a few days ago, I read the Russian
Foreign Minister's statement claiming that the Russian
Federation allegedly did not violate its commitments
under the 1994 Budapest Memorandum on security
assurances in connection with Ukraine's accession
to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons. Let me stress that in that Memorandum,
which was duly circulated to all Member States
through ajoint letter also signed by Mr. Lavrov, Russia
undertook to respect the independence and sovereignty
and the existing borders of Ukraine and to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity of my country, as well as to affirm that none
of its weapons would ever be used against Ukraine.
Once again, I have become convinced that the Russian
side reads international treaties in a specific manner: as
with the Minsk agreements, Moscow read the Budapest
Memorandum very selectively. Unfortunately, Russia
has ignored all of our previous proposals to convene
consultations in accordance with paragraph 6 of the
Memorandum. For a signatory that is sure that it does
not violate the Memorandum, why is there a concern
about such consultations? Let me reiterate our call on
all signatories to hold consultations without delay.

Ukraine is alarmed about Russia's unprecedented
mounting militarization of occupied Crimea. To date,
Russia has deployed in Crimea more than 23,000
military personnel, hundreds of battle tanks, armoured
vehicles, combat aircraft and helicopters, dozens of
coastal missile systems and so on. A particular danger
is presented by the deployment in Crimea of potential
carriers of nuclear warheads, such as warships and
combat aircraft. Also worrisome is Russia's intention to
refurbish the infrastructure of some Soviet-era storage
facilities in Crimea for nuclear weapons.

The illegal occupation and subsequent militarization
of Crimea therefore threatens to have far-reaching
consequences for security not only in the Black Sea
region, but in all of South Europe, as well as in North
Africa and the Middle East. The ongoing events in
Syria are convincing proof of that. Such a disturbing
state of affairs needs to be urgently and appropriately
addressed by the international community.

Against the background of intense activities
undertaken by the Russian occupation authorities to
transform Crimea into a huge military base, we have
observed a significant deterioration of the human
rights situation there. International reports provide
voluminous factual information about large-scale
and systematic violations of human rights in Crimea,
including disappearances, killings, torture and ill-
treatment. Crimean Tatars and Ukrainians who openly
supported the territorial integrity of Ukraine remain in
a particularly vulnerable position.

In the last week alone, we witnessed a new wave
of repression and intimidation directed at Crimean
Tatars. Early in the morning of 11 and 12 February,
Russian security forces surrounded a number of
Villages across the peninsula and raided Crimean Tatar
homes, breaking windows and doors and confiscating
computers and other property. Some people were
detained. Russian security services opened a criminal
investigation against several Crimean Tatars, accusing
them of being involved in extremist activities. The
way it was done reminds us of the tragic days of the
1944 mass deportation of Crimean Tatars from their
homeland.

Sadly, all this is happening again today. On
Friday, I wrote to the President of the Security Council
to draw attention to those developments. We urge
the Russian Federation, as the occupying Power, to
immediately provide free and unconditional access to
the peninsula for an ongoing international presence
of the relevant mechanisms of the United Nations, the
Council of Europe and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, among other international
organizations.

Ukraine fully recognizes the key role the United
Nations plays in maintaining international peace and
security and its capacity to that end to take effective
measures to prevent and remove threats to peace. In
that regard, to ensure the effective implementation
of the Minsk agreements and resolution 2202 (2015),
proceeding from the need to involve additional
instruments in order to prevent further violations of
the Charter of the United Nations and guarantee lasting
peace and stability in certain areas of the Luhansk
and Donetsk regions of Ukraine, we continue to insist
that the deployment of a United Nations international
peacekeeping operation in the territory of Ukraine
could be an important step towards an effective solution
for the conflict unleashed by the Russian Federation
against my country.

The Charter has withstood dramatic changes in
international relations and proved its key place in today's
global architecture as the primary international legal
instrument for preserving international peace, with
far-reaching effects for the well-being of all peoples.
Adherence to the principles embodied in the Charter is
the best safeguard for the implementation of all other
international legal documents and, ultimately, for the
international rule of law. We trust that the General
Assembly, the Security Council and world leaders will
exert every effort and explore every opportunity to
restore respect for the United Nations Charter.

In conclusion, I would like to quote Aristotle: "It
is not enough to win a war; it is more important to
organize the peace." Today, seven decades after the end
of the Second World War and the adoption of the United
Nations Charter, we must not forget the Charter's
primary purpose - to maintain international peace and
security. Unless the Charter is respected, there will be
no peace or security in the world. Unless the Charter is
respected, chaos and violence will prevail. The Charter
must be respected. Order must be restored. Violations
of the Charter must not go unpunished.

