Ms. Mueller: On behalf of Mr. Stephen O'Brien,
the Emergency Relief Coordinator, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest humanitarian developments
in Syria. As you mentioned, I am speaking from the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
in Amman.

Earlier today, I had the opportunity to visit the
Azraq refugee camp, the second largest in Jordan after
the Zaatari camp. About 35,000 Syrian refugees are
living there, with many of them having been there for
several years. Most of them are women and children.
About a quarter of the refugees are originally from
Aleppo, and nearly 20 per cent are from Homs. My visit
left me with many impressions.

First, it made clear the level of the generosity and
hospitality shown by Jordan and other neighbouring
host countries, whose local authorities and communities
have welcomed the influx of Syrian refugees, despite
the pressures it has put on their own resources.
Secondly, I saw the tremendous work being done by
the humanitarian organizations whose programming
enables families not just to survive but to lead
dignified lives in the most difficult conditions. Most
of all, however, I was inspired by the incredible hope
and strength of the people I met, despite the terrible
circumstances that have been forced on them. Their
message was clear, and I would like to pass it on to the
Council today. What they want, more than anything, is
for the guns to fall silent and the conflict to end, and to
be able to go home when it is safe to do so.

The hope and strength in Azraq are replicated
across Syria - a remarkable fact considering that daily
life remains dangerous and desperate for millions of
people inside the country. While we have continued
to see a drop in the violence in some areas since the
4 May memorandum on de-escalation, particularly in
recent weeks in Dar'a governorate, the humanitarian
and protection situation remains extremely difficult for
civilians in many parts of the country. In the besieged
area of eastern Ghouta, in rural Damascus, and the
Jobar neighbourhood in the city of Damascus, military
operations have started again.

In early and mid-July, air strikes and shelling on
the towns of Ein Tarma and Hazzeh reportedly killed
and injured several people. A local market in the
besieged town of Kafr Batna was shelled on 16 July,
killing or injuring many civilians. On 19 July, mortar
shelling on the Harasta hospital in a north-eastern
suburb of Damascus reportedly injured one person
and damaged the medical facility in another reminder
that the scourge of attacks on civilian infrastructure
continues unabated.

Despite the announcement on 22 July ofa ceasefire
for eastern Ghouta, we have received reports of air
strikes on Irbin, Douma, Zamalka and Otaya towns in
the past three days that have killed or injured scores
of civilians. Urgent effort is needed to de-escalate
the situation, and we call on the parties to ensure the
protection of civilians and unimpeded humanitarian
access. In Idlib, infighting among non-State armed
groups and designated terrorist groups in several towns
over the past week has caused civilian casualties and
led to rising tensions. On 18 July, four people were
killed in a car-bomb attack in Armanaz town, and many
more incidents have been reported. Some humanitarian
partners have had to suspend activities as a result.

The Bab Al-Hawa crossing point on the Turkish
border - a lifeline for civilians in north-western
Syria - was reportedly closed owing to the fighting
and insecurity on the Syrian side of the border from
19 to 25 July, although humanitarian and commercial
shipments have since resumed. The situation in areas
of north-western Syria held by non-State armed groups
remains extremely worrying, particularly given the high
level of need among approximately 1 million displaced
people living in the area, including many from formally
besieged areas.

Operations countering Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) continue in Raqqa governorate.
Heavy fighting and air strikes continue to result in
civilian casualties and injuries. For example, reports
indicate that dozens of civilians were killed and
injured as a result of air strikes and shelling in July.
Large-scale displacement also continues to be recorded
with more than 30,000 people displaced since 1 July,
bringing the total to more than 200,000 since 1 April in
Raqqa governorate.

Significant protection concerns remain for
those displaced, particularly in terms of freedom
of movement outside of the camps in which they are
being hosted. Humanitarian conditions are also very
difficult for those who are displaced, particularly with
temperatures approaching 50°C. An estimated 20,000
to 50,000 people remain inside Raqqa city, which is
now encircled, and their situation is perilous. There
is no way for them to get out. Civilian movement out
of the city remains extremely difficult owing to the
presence of mines and other unexploded ordnance, as
well as shelling, sniper activities and air strikes. As
military operations continue, our concern is further
civilian casualties, especially since ISIL has allegedly
used civilians as human shields. The Emergency Relief
Coordinator noted last month that military actors must
do everything in their power to ensure that civilians
caught up in the fighting are protected. The United
Nations and its partners are responding to those who
have been displaced, and we are ready to provide
support in Raqqa city as soon as access and security
conditions allow.

The health situation, particularly the low
availability of trauma-care services, is a major concern
in view of the intense fighting and shifting front lines.
We continue to engage with relevant parties and actors
on the ground to ensure that medical care be made
available to those who need it, but a lot more needs to
be done.

The situation at the berm on the Syrian-Jordanian
border has also taken a worrying turn for the more than
50,000 Syrian civilians stranded there. On 18 July,
the explosion of an improvised explosive device in
Al-Rukban camp reportedly killed three children and
injured five others. Reports indicate that the Syrian
army is now surrounding the area on the Syrian side
following field battles between it and non-State armed
groups. Given the desperate security and humanitarian
situation, it is crucial that humanitarian programming
to the area be regular and uninterrupted. We are also
working hard with partners to identify a solution for the
people stranded in the berm area.

Let me now turn to the latest news concerning
humanitarian access to besieged and hard-to-reach
areas. Unfortunately, there is little positive news
to report. There have been no convoys to besieged
areas in July, although airdrops to Deir ez-Zor have
continued. In terms of convoys to hard-to-reach areas,
we have been down to one convoy per week for the
month of July, while reaching more than 120,000
people in Yalda, Babila, Beit Sahem in rural Damascus,
Al-Houle, Harbanifseh and Dar Kabira. Meanwhile,
other humanitarian partners also delivered convoys
from Damascus to hard-to-reach areas in July. That
means that, under the United Nations June-July plan,
we have thus far reached only more than a third of the
1 million people who were targeted.

The obstacles to convoys proceeding as planned are
predictable, including the lack of approvals, facilitation
letters from the Government of Syria and other
administrative delays, as well as insecurity and fighting.
At the same time, arbitrary restrictions imposed by
some non-State armed groups, listed terrorist groups
and self-designated local authorities also continue to
obstruct access in various ways, especially in Idlib
and the Eastern governorate of Syria. That means that,
despite reductions in violence, we have not been able to
noticeably increase our reach.

Despite the security and access challenges in
reaching besieged and hard-to-reach areas, as well as
the high threat posed to humanitarian workers, the
United Nations and its partners continue to implement
one of the largest humanitarian operations in the world
in Syria. Humanitarians continue to reach millions of
people on a monthly basis. The latest and only available
data as of May shows that humanitarians collectively
reached 8.5 million people in a single month, including
4.4 million women and girls and 4.1 million men and
boys with multisectoral assistance.

Of particular note is the beginning of the polio
vaccination campaign this week by the World Health
Organization, UNICEF and other health partners,
which is targeting 450,000 children in Deir ez-Zor and
Raqqa. Thus far, 27 polio cases have been confirmed.
I call on all parties to ensure the safety of and access
for the vaccination campaign teams. As members
are aware, the polio virus respects no borders or any
political, religious or security affiliations, and we must
contain it.

This month marks the third anniversary of the
adoption of resolution 2165 (2014). Since then, the
modality has been a success with United Nations cross-
border deliveries providing a lifeline for millions of
people in nine governorates. With more than 15,000
trucks monitored and confirmed by the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism during this period for the
integrity of their consignments without incident, the
importance of United Nations cross-border operations
is surely beyond question. As it remains a vital lifeline
to so many need, that modality to deliver aid must be
preserved during the coming months.

The conflict in Syria may be complex, but
ensuring that people are protected and supported is our
imperative as humanitarians and human beings. None
of us should stand silent while civilians suffer and
while fear tactics and the denial of food water, medical
supplies, and other forms of aid are used as methods of
war. What we and the Syrian people look to the Security
Council and to the international community for today
is that all parties uphold their basic obligations under
international humanitarian law and human rights law;
that civilians are protected; that attacks on civilian
infrastructure be stopped; that regular and unhindered
access to all modalities, including medical supplies, be
allowed; and that the horrific practice of siege end.

