Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait): I will deliver this
statement on behalf of the Syria humanitarian
co-penholders: Belgium, Germany and Kuwait.

At the outset, we would like to express our
appreciation to Assistant Secretary-General Ursula
Mueller for her comprehensive briefing on the
humanitarian situation in Syria. Our thanks also
go to Assistant Secretary-General for Middle East,
Asia and the Pacific Khaled Khiari and Mine Action
Service Director Agnes Marcaillou for their briefings.
We also reiterate our appreciation and support to the
humanitarian workers for their efforts to alleviate the
human suffering in Syria during these challenging times.

We have all been following the developments
in north-eastern Syria over the past two weeks. The
effects of the Turkish military operation are deeply
concerning. The operation is having a destabilizing
impact on the region and poses a risk to the fight against
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It has
led to the deterioration of an already dire humanitarian
situation. Since military operations began in the north-
east, there have been reports of civilian casualties and
more than 180,000 civilians, including 80,000 children,
have been displaced. Civilian infrastructure has also
been impacted. For many of those fleeing, this is not
the first time that they have been displaced. Many
have been traumatized by previous displacement and
by living under ISIL rule. We underscore that civilians
and civilian infrastructure must always be protected.
We echo the Secretary-General's statement that any
military operation must fully respect international
law, including the Charter of the United Nations and
international humanitarian law. We urge maximum
restraint and call on all parties to resolve their concerns
through peaceful and diplomatic means.

The north-west, specifically Idlib governorate, has
seen a decrease in airstrikes. Nevertheless, civilian
casualties continue and have seen an uptick in recent
days. We once again call for de-escalation and remind
all parties of their obligations to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals, in
accordance with international humanitarian law. We
stress that counter-terrorism operations do not absolve
parties of their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law.

Following the recent violence in the northern part
of Syria, we cannot but condemn the attacks that are
impacting civilians and civilian infrastructure. We
are also concerned by the threat posed to the civilian
population by unexploded ordnance, explosive
remnants of war and landmines. Any humanitarian mine
clearance activities must be based on an independent
needs assessment in the field. Humanitarian demining
should be aimed at avoiding the suffering of civilians.
We reaffirm the need for all parties to abide by the
principles of proportionality, precaution and distinction.
The violence must stop.

There has been an increase in humanitarian needs
in Syria as a result of military operations in the north-
west and north-east of the country in recent weeks
and months. We underscore the need for humanitarian
assistance to be delivered in a timely, safe, sustained
and unfettered manner to all those in need, and for
the United Nations and its humanitarian partners
to be allowed to continue to carry out their crucial
work in northern Syria. To that end, the cross-border
operations that were renewed under resolution 2449
(2018) have been a lifeline for millions of people in
Syria, specifically in the north-west of the country. The
cross-border modality contributes almost 40 per cent of
all humanitarian assistance in Syria. In his latest report
(S/2019/820), the Secretary-General writes with regard
to the cross-border operation:

"Without this operation, we would see increased
numbers of civilian deaths, greater prevalence of
disease and even greater suffering being inflicted
on a population who cannot be reached at this scale,
in such a timely and direct manner, through any
other means." (S/2019/820, para. 44)

As a co-penholder on the humanitarian situation in
Syria, we share the Secretary-General's assessment
that it is all the more critical to ensure that cross-border
operations continue through a further renewal of the
resolution on cross-border operations before the end of
the year.

The situation also remains worrisome in other parts
of Syria. There are still 68,000 residents in Al-Hol
camp, 90 per cent of whom are women and children.
Another staggering statistic is that 50 per cent of the
children in the camp are under the age of 12. We call for
continued and full humanitarian access to the camp and
specifically for protection measures to be addressed,
especially for women and children. In Rukban, we
welcome the recent joint United Nations-Syrian Arab
Red Crescent missions to deliver food and nutritional
items. We continue to call for a durable and lasting
solution there.

We are also concerned by the tensions and
security situation in the south-west, as outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. We underscore the need
for humanitarian assistance to be delivered throughout
Syria in a timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded manner
to all those in need and for humanitarian partners to
be allowed access. We stress the need for all parties
to respect international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians and civilian infrastructure
throughout Syria.

We cannot fail to underscore the importance of
accountability. The Syrian conflict has seen some
of the most egregious violations of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
That is why we support the International, Impartial and
Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation
and Prosecution of Those Responsible for the Most
Serious Crimes under International Law Committed
in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011. We
also welcome the start of work of the board of inquiry
established by the Secretary-General. It is important to
carry out a quick and thorough investigation of all of the
incidents that have taken place, in particular the attacks
on facilities communicated under the deconfliction
mechanism. With regard to the return of refugees, our
position remains unchanged. All returns must be safe,
voluntary, dignified and well-informed.

In conclusion, as we commemorate United Nations
Day today to mark the entry into force of the Charter
of the United Nations - a document that embodies the
hopes, dreams and aspirations of we the peoples - let
us not forget the hopes, dreams and aspirations of the
people of Syria, who have suffered for far too long
from this conflict. We hope that the Constitutional
Committee, the establishment of which was recently
agreed upon and the work of which will be launched
at the end of the month, will be the first step towards
realizing a comprehensive political process, in line
with the resolution 2254 (2015).

