Mr. Deng (South Sudan): As this is the first time
that I am addressing the Security Council during
your presidency, Madam, allow me to express my
congratulations to you and your delegation. I assure
you of my delegation's full support as you carry this
important mantle. I also take this opportunity to
acknowledge your predecessor's successful discharge
of her leadership.
The Government of South Sudan welcomes the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA) that has just
been adopted. I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate to the Security Council the appreciation of the
people of Abyei and the Government of South Sudan
for the continued support of the United Nations and the
wider international community to both the Sudan and
South Sudan in resolving their differences on the final
status of Abyei through peaceful means. It is, however,
evident, as reflected in the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/709), that there is, regrettably, a prolonged
impasse and that new and creative ideas must be sought
in order to generate the required outcome.

The Abyei Protocol of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement refers to Abyei as the area where
the nine Ngok Dinka chiefdoms settled prior to the
1905 annexation of the Area by northern Sudan. The
Permanent Court of Arbitration, with the acceptance of
both the Sudan and South Sudan, defined the Area, now
commonly referred to as "the box". The only thing that
remains to be settled is the self-determination of the
Ngok Dinka, on which the people expressed themselves
unequivocally in October 2013, in their community
referendum.

Although the Abyei community referendum was
well organized and efficiently and transparently
conducted, and resulted in a 99.8 per cent vote in favour
of joining South Sudan, that vote has unfortunately
not been recognized by the two Governments or the
international community. As you know, Madam, a high-
level team from Juba, comprised of the Chairman of
the Abyei Referendum High Committee and two senior
ambassadors, is now in New York - and, I believe,
sittingjust behind me - to advocate for the recognition
of the results of the Abyei community referendum.
While we hope that their efforts will bear fruits, we
realize that such recognition will not be forthcoming.

It should, however, be recalled that the African
Union (AU) Peace and Security Council, at its
405th meeting on 16 November 2013, reaffirmed its
communique of 26 October 2013, which, among other
things, reiterated its full acceptance of the proposal of
the African Union High-Level Implementation Panel
on Abyei and renewed its appeal to the United Nations
Security Council to urgently support the proposal as
the best way forward for the solution of Abyei. If the
results of the Abyei community referendum are not
recognized, at least the proposals of the Panel should
be pursued and implemented towards an internationally
conducted and recognized referendum. Failure to act on
these two grounds would create a tragic situation for
the people of Abyei.

We are most appreciative of the Secretary-General's
observation that

"the people of the Abyei communities remain
bereft of basic social services and vulnerable to
ethnic violence. The status quo cannot continue"
(5/2014/709, para. 31).

Along those lines, we strongly support the results of the
recently conducted strategic review of UNISFA, aimed
at developing "proposals for operational support in
particular as they pertain to the stabilization of Abyei"
(ibid., para. 28).

An important factor in the stabilization process
is intercommunal dialogue, which, as the Secretary-
General's report notes, hinges on a number of issues.
Foremost among those issues is the urgent need for the
two communities to "find closure to the issue of the
assassination ofthe NgokDinka Paramount Chief" (ibid., para. 34). A step in that direction should be the release
of the report of the AU Investigation Committee into
the assassination of the Chief, and holding accountable
those who are found to be responsible. There is also
need to address the dispute arising from cattle-rustling.
We acknowledhe the Secretary-General's "appeal to
the leaders of both countries to ensure that a formal
intercommunal conference begins as soon as possible"
(ibia'), provided that a conducive climate is created.

In that context, it must be noted that, in addition
to closure on the assassination of the Paramount Chief,
the issue of armed Sudan oil police in Diffra, which
is in violation of the 20 June 2011 Agreement and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, must be resolved.
The report of the Secretary-General states that
UNISFA also observed the presence of small numbers
of Sudan People's Liberation Army personnel in
southern Abyei, in contravention of the Agreement and
Security Council resolutions. One way of addressing
this tendency towards moral equivalency would be to
send an investigation committee to verify the facts on
the ground.

The Government of South Sudan welcomes the
decision of the Secretary-General to appoint a civilian
Head of Mission to aid in the pursuance of targeted
and effective humanitarian intervention to address the
dire needs of the Ngok Dinka and to facilitate their
recovery and cooperation with the Misseriya nomads.
Such peaceful interaction and cooperation between the
two communities would encourage Sudanese and South
Sudanese to find acceptable and creative solutions
on the resolution of the final status of Abyei. In this
connection, both countries will need the support of the
AU and the United Nations in addressing the security,
political, humanitarian and development challenges in
Abyei and for both the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya
nomads.

Finally, I would like to reiterate my Government's
profound appreciation for the support already being
provided by the international community, particularly
the Government of Ethiopia through its invaluable
contributions to UNISFA, a crucial force for the
security of the Ngok Dinka and other communities that
come to the area seasonally.

