Mr. Schaper (Netherlands): The Netherlands
fully aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of the European Union (EU) on behalf
of the EU, as well as with the statement delivered by
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends for children and armed conflict. I would like to
make a few additional remarks.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this open debate on children and armed
conflict and for the excellent work Mexico is doing in
this area. The Netherlands also appreciates the recent
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict (S/2010/l81) and welcomes the steps taken in
the implementation of resolution 1882 (2009), as well
as the expansion of the Secretary General's annexes to
include parties responsible for the killing and maiming
of children and for rape and other forms of sexual
violence committed against children.

We would also like to congratulate and thank
Ms. Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
and her Office for their valuable work, such as the
inclusion in the action plans of the two new triggers.
The formats for action plans are instrumental in the
process of implementation and contribute to reducing
the risks for children in armed conflict.

In commending the work done by the Security
Council and the Special Representative to alleviate the
suffering of children in armed conflict, we would also
like to encourage them to pay equal attention to all the
six identified grave violations committed against
children and to strengthen the monitoring of all of
them. In our view, increased capacity should be made
available for that purpose.

The Netherlands would like to emphasize the
importance of the engagement of the United Nations
with non-State actors in the implementation of the
Council's resolutions and the recommendations
contained in the Secretary General's report, including
in the negotiation of action plans. We call on all
relevant parties to allow for such engagement, with a
view to protecting the rights of children in armed
conflict.

As has been said before in the Council, abuse
really stops only when perpetrators have been brought
to justice. Anything short of that means a continuation
of the violation of victims' integrity. In most cases -
as the Netherlands also said in this debate last year -
the Security Council has, in our view, not done enough
to address accountability or to end impunity for
perpetrators of violations against children. That is
particularly true with regard to so-called persistent
violators. This year's report of the Secretary-General
lists no fewer than 16 parties that have been on the
annex for at least five years. That is unacceptable. We
welcome the expressed readiness of the Security
Council to step up its action and to adopt targeted
measures against persistent perpetrators. We also stress
the role of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in
the investigation and prosecution of such crimes that
fall within its jurisdiction. Where national systems of
justice fail, the situation should be referred to the ICC.

In conclusion, the Netherlands would like to
express its strong support for the campaign for the
universal ratification of the Optional Protocols to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child. In that regard,
the International Labour Organization Convention 182
concerning the Prohibition and Immediate Action for
the Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour
and the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children also deserve mention. The universal
ratification and effective implementation of all those
instruments lay the foundation for the safeguarding of
children's rights and their effective protection from
violence, abuse and exploitation, including during
armed conflict.

With the integrity of our children, the integrity of
the Organization and everything it stands for is at
stake. In children we see our future, and in their
suffering during armed conflict we see the dark side of
humankind. We all have an urgent obligation to do
whatever we can to protect children from armed
conflict. That is a political and moral imperative for all
of us.

