Mr. Seixas da Costa (Portugal): Let me begin by
expressing what an honour it is for all of us who are
concerned with the East Timor process to see you, Sir,
presiding over this meeting. This stresses the
importance that the Mauritius presidency of the
Security Council, whose performance we all praise,
attaches to this question.

I would be remiss if I also did not mention the
symbolism of the presence at the Council this morning
of the Prime Minister of Australia and the State
Minister of Ireland.

Portugal fully supports the statement that has
been delivered by Ambassador Inocencio Arias of
Spain on behalf of the Presidency of the European
Union. Since a lot of our views are contained in that
statement, I will focus my own on some issues of
particular relevance to my country.

Like others, I would like to start by thanking you,
Sir, for convening this meeting and giving the general
membership of the United Nations the opportunity to
participate in this debate. I also want to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, for taking time from his
very busy agenda in Dili to come to New York and
brief us on the progress achieved by the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
as well as on his views for the future of the United
Nations presence in East Timor. I also must express our
appreciation to the Senior Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation, Mr. Jose' Ramos-Horta, for sharing
with us the insights of the East Timorese leadership.

I would especially like to thank the Secretary-
General and his staff for the report we have before us.
In it the Secretary-General reaffirms his
recommendations for the United Nations peacekeeping
mission that will succeed UNTAET, as well as for the
measures being taken to achieve as seamless a
transition as possible from one to the other. The fact
that the framework defined several months ago and
amply discussed with the Timorese is now being
reaffirmed and reinforced clearly shows how well the
United Nations knows the situation on the ground and
how seriously it has engaged in the planning exercise.

Portugal fully supports the recommendation
contained in paragraph 104 of the Secretary-General's
report to extend the current UNTAET mandate until the
date of independence. As this historic day approaches,
I believe we need to look closely at what has been done
to date, as well as at the way ahead of us.

We have all many times congratulated UNTAET
for the progress it has achieved, together with the
Timorese and the rest of the international community,
in East Timor's security, political, economic and social
life. But I think we have grown used to looking at
UNTAET and East Timor as a success story and to take
that for granted. We sometimes loose sight of how
difficult and complex UNTAET'S task was and still is.

The initial UNTAET mandate, contained in
resolution 1272 (1999), was approved in October 1999.
Although the first United Nations officials moved to
Dili very soon after that, it was not until the first
trimester of 2000 that the mission was fully deployed.
This means that we are having this debate just about
two years after the very start of UNTAET. Two years is
really not much time to work literally from scratch on
establishing a security environment, building a
democratic government, improving human capacity,
rebuilding infrastructure and restarting the economy.

We all have very strong reasons to feel proud if
we consider that, only two years after the widespread
violence that followed the popular consultation, the
Timorese can reasonably expect to have not only their
long-fought-for independence, but also a functioning
administration, a democratic regime that respects
human rights, and prospects for economic
sustainability.

In just two years security has been re-established,
the training of local police and defence forces is under
way, 192,000 refugees have returned and been
successfully reintegrated in their communities, and the
health and education systems are working again. Many
roads, bridges and public buildings have been rebuilt,
and water and electricity are being provided to the
population. A Constitutional Assembly has been
elected and a Transitional Government subsequently
appointed, new legislation has been passed in all areas
of activity, and the courts and prisons are functioning.

I believe we should be asking ourselves how
many United Nations missions can claim such an
extensive record of achievements. How many of our
own countries can report similar developments in such
a short time and under such difficult conditions? East
Timor is four months into the process approving a
constitution and very close to concluding it. I do not
believe it would be feasible to accelerate this and other
processes without serious risk to their future
sustainability.

My Government strongly believes that all these
reasons amply justify the continued engagement of the
United Nations and the international community in
East Timor, especially after independence. The fact that
UNTAET and the Timorese have achieved so much is
all the more reason to continue supporting them, so
they can finish and strengthen the tasks that the
Security Council entrusted to them. Any other option
would be irresponsible and unacceptable. It would be
like punishing the good student because he has been
doing all his homework and is therefore getting better
results than his colleagues.

Section III of the Secretary-General's report
outlines in some detail the plans for the transition to
the post-independence United Nations mission in East
Timor. Portugal strongly supports the framework and
line of action proposed, as well as the timeline
envisaged for that process. We believe that an
integrated peacekeeping mission, comprising military,
police and civilian components, is the best approach to
post-independence support for East Timor. We feel
very strongly that a number of civilian support
positions should be included in that mission and
financed through assessed contributions in order to
ensure minimum stability to the new administration in
its early stage of independence.

I would like to highlight the recommendations of
the Secretary-General in the area of security. We noted
that despite the significant improvements there are still
some risks and that the planned downsizing of the
peacekeeping force is taking this into account. We also
noted that the Secretary-General linked the progressive
downsizing of the military and police components of
UNTAET to the progress in training and making
operational the East Timor Police Service and Defence
Forces. We very much support this approach by the
Secretary-General, which is based on the continued
analysis of the prevailing situation on the ground.
The Security Council as a whole, and its member
States individually, have been instrumental in the
progress of East Timor towards independence. By
handing down to UNTAET a very comprehensive
mandate, the Council did not make the mission's goal
any easier, but it certainly allowed it to develop an
integrated and wide-ranging approach to peace and
stability in the country. It allowed the United Nations
and the international community to develop its action
with due regard for the interlinked nature of the
requirements for stability. We all know that in today's
world there is hardly any separation between security,
political, social and economic problems. To address
one, we have to address all of them in a coordinated
manner. This is by no means an easy task, but it is the
only way to address conflict and post-conflict
situations if we are to reach sustainable solutions. This
is as valid for East Timor as it is everywhere.

In its presidential statement of 31 October 2001,
the Council endorsed the Secretary-General's
recommendations for the post-independence mission in
East Timor, including the need to ensure assessed
funding for a number of civilian positions. The Council
has thus made clear that it is willing to continue to
have a supportive and constructive role in East Timor's
independence and stability. It has also made it possible
for the Secretariat to have an early and very clear basis
on which to develop an exit strategy which takes into
account the United Nations capacities, the situation on
the ground and the wishes of all people of the country.

I believe that, for the first time in its
peacekeeping history, the United Nations is analysing
the impact of its withdrawal from a country and is
trying to define timely measures to counter and reduce
its negative effects. This means we are learning from
past mistakes and establishing good precedents for the
future.

Looking at the post-independence period in East
Timor, I must underline a number of areas that we
believe are crucial for the sustainability of democracy
and the rule of law. These are the training of the
Timorese police and military, the development of the
judiciary, and the establishment of a human rights
culture. In all these areas several steps have been taken,
both through UNTAET and through United Nations
agencies, non-governmental organizatons and bilateral
donors, but a lot remains to be done.

Without a strong and well-trained judiciary, the
basic premise of democracy - the separation of
powers - cannot become a reality and the people will
not be able to trust their governmental institutions.
Also, without a strong judiciary, there is not much
room for reconciliation and the healing of society.
Reconciliation and justice must go hand in hand. I
believe the Timorese have shown they are very tolerant
and willing to forgive. They want to leave the past
behind them and build a new future. But this is not
likely to last if there are no assurances that in that
future, crimes will not go unpunished.

Similarly, the police and military must absolutely
be perceived as professional forces, subject to civilian
rule, that exist to protect and help the citizens. As for
human rights, I do not need to point out how important
it is that they are not only formally included in the
legal basis of the State but also implemented in the
daily administration of the country.

Portugal believes that the post-independence
presence in East Timor must continue to have a strong
role in these areas. Building credible institutions will
be the best legacy that the United Nations, indeed all of
us, can leave in East Timor. And it is not an area where
we can afford to fail. I can assure you that Portugal has
done and will continue to do its utmost to support these
endeavours.

In the four months ahead of us, the role of the
Council will continue to be crucial. A number of
aspects, both substantive and procedural, will need to
be discussed and agreed on so that the Council can take
timely action to turn the planning exercise into a
reality. We are looking forward to further
recommendations from the Secretary-General on issues
such as the mechanisms of cooperation between the
United Nations and the Timorese authorities after
independence, especially in the area of security, and the
mechanisms that will trigger the post-independence
United Nations mission in the country. Portugal would
welcome an early discussion of these issues among
Council members and between Council members and
other interested countries.

The independence of East Timor will be a historic
moment not only for the Timorese; it will also be very
special for the United Nations. Some people have said
that East Timor is the child of the United Nations. I
would say rather that East Timor is the child of its own
very difficult struggle but that it would not be about to
stand on its own if it were not for the excellent
caretaker leading it in its first years.

The independence of East Timor is an important
date in a long process in which the East Timorese were
always the major players as the masters of their own
destiny. In the past, they were prepared to die in order
to prove that they were alive. In the future, I am sure
they will give us a lesson of responsibility in the
management of their new democratic State.

But let us not forget that the international
community cannot assume a neutral role in the process
of building their nation, because the international
community has implicitly recognized that for many
years it was guilty of the neutrality it assumed when
the Timorese were the innocent victims of the
injustices of history.

The United Nations was able to reconcile the
international community with the Timorese. The
Council, as one of the Organization's major organs, has
the duty to guarantee that the responsibility of the
United Nations is exercised until the adequate means to
run the country are put at disposal of the Timorese.
Through the Timorese case, the Council also has the
opportunity to reflect on the way the United Nations
operates in all its dimensions in its peacekeeping
missions. Not currently being a member of the Council,
I am sure that you will not disappoint those who trust
its sagesse.

