Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): We have every reason to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this formal meeting of
the Security Council devoted to the problem of protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations. We believe that the consideration of this
issue is timely and important.
In recent years, the international community has faced
the challenge of responding to humanitarian crises that have
increased both in number and in complexity. The root
causes of these situations are political instability, internal
strife, inter-ethnic tensions, human rights violations, foreign
intervention, poverty and natural disasters. As a result, the
problem of refugees, returnees and displaced persons has
acquired dangerous dimensions and has become a
significant factor of instability, conflict and confrontations.

The interrelation between refugee problems and peace
and security is perhaps nowhere more evident than in the
Great Lakes region of Africa. It is the conflict situation in
this part of the world that has put on the international
agenda the need to increase the effectiveness of
international humanitarian assistance to refugees and others
in conflict situations. In our opinion, the consideration and
elaboration of further measures to cope with this serious
problem is one of the objectives of today's deliberations.

Recent years have witnessed dramatic changes in the
conditions under which international humanitarian activity
is provided. It is increasingly difficult to ensure fully that
humanitarian assistance reaches the target groups, to create
a secure environment for its delivery and to guarantee its
fair distribution among those in need. In this connection, a
remaining important problem is to ensure the safety and
security of recipients of humanitarian assistance and of
those who provide it.

The extremely urgent character of these issues stems
from the fact that the very nature of conflicts has drastically
changed. The world's conflict zones, which in the past were
usually associated with military confrontation between
States, now routinely feature intra-State civil wars and
ethnic conflicts. Furthermore, parties to current intra-State
conflicts are hard to identify. They have no central
authority, often do not respect commitments and have little
or no regard for international humanitarian law. However,
they do have access to an endless and easily available
supply of deadly weapons.

Moreover, experience indicates that control over the
channelling, delivery and distribution of humanitarian
assistance is considered a military objective by the
warring parties.

It should also be noted that the humanitarian scene
has changed and broadened, having embraced not only
Governments and international organizations, but a host
of other actors, ranging from different non-governmental
organizations to various types of agencies. This has made
the process more complex and the challenge of
coordination more acute. Furthermore, the main donor
States have become fatigued by the burden of responding
to so many complex emergencies within a relatively short
period of time and Governments are increasingly
unwilling to commit personnel, equipment and money to
humanitarian activities.

As we see it, in these circumstances, the
international community is facing the necessity to ensure
the following: first, the protection of the supplies and
materials provided and their secure delivery and fair
distribution in such a way as to prevent situations in
which humanitarian assistance improves and strengthens
the positions of warring parties, including separatists;
secondly, the protection of personnel of the various
humanitarian organizations and agencies; thirdly, the
protection of refugees, displaced persons and others in
need.

Irrefutable is the fact that the primary responsibility
for the implementation of the aforementioned tasks lies
with the Governments of the countries concerned.
However, when refugees are in territory that is not
controlled by a Government, it is hard to hope for that
Government' s cooperation. In this context, we believe that
the international community, in particular the United
Nations and the organizations of its system, has an
important role to play.

We are of the View that, in especially complex
situations on the ground, the general guidance and
coordination of international humanitarian efforts should
be entrusted exclusively to the United Nations, because
only the United Nations has the necessary experience and
mechanisms for the successful implementation of the
humanitarian tasks. Moreover, there is no international
agency other than the United Nations that can deliver
humanitarian assistance to those in need in a truly neutral
and impartial manner.

 

Our delegation maintains that both the Department of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of Peace-keeping
Operations of the United Nations Secretariat could play a
significant role in this respect. These structures could, for
example, elaborate, on a case-by-case basis, clear plans for
the delivery, distribution and storage of humanitarian
assistance, as well as to protect the personnel involved in
this activity. It is necessary to consider establishing within
one of the Departments of the United Nations Secretariat a
unit responsible for the protection of
humanitarian-assistance contingency planning. In our
opinion, the time has come to prepare a comprehensive
code of conduct for humanitarian activity, which could
significantly strengthen the legal framework for such
activity.
Nowadays, peacekeeping operations can play an
important role in contributing to the creation of a secure
environment for the effective delivery of humanitarian
assistance. This very fact was reflected in one of the
conclusions of the recent report of the Special Committee
on Peace-keeping Operations. At the same time, in our
view, it is worth considering the question of the use, where
appropriate, of rapidly deployable forces, for example,
when a civilian population and humanitarian workers face
the danger of violence or threats to their lives.

The delegation of Ukraine believes that humanitarian
assistance cannot be considered as a substitute for political,
diplomatic and military action. That is why it is also
necessary to take measures aimed at the definitive
settlement of armed conflicts. Efforts to ensure the
conclusion of cease-fire agreements and solutions to the
refugee problem should be the integral elements of these
measures.

The neighbouring countries also have a significant role
to play in tackling the problem in question. In this context,
we would like to propose the elaboration of a set of
incentives which would encourage these States to pursue a
constructive policy as regards refugees, with a focus on
ensuring their security. The Security Council, in its turn,
should more actively develop a direct dialogue with
countries concerned under the Arria formula.

In our opinion, the Security Council should increase
its preventive capacity in the field of protection for
humanitarian assistance to refugees. This would involve,
first of all, the elaboration of relevant measures in order to
avoid threats to and the oppression of refugees and to
prevent any violation of the norms of international
humanitarian law by the parties to a conflict. It is also
necessary further to elaborate a clear and comprehensive
concept of humanitarian corridors and passages. We
believe that the Special Committee on Peace-keeping
Operations should study in depth the idea of deploying
multinational forces for humanitarian purposes under the
authority of the Security Council.

Another instrument of equal importance that creates
international legal frameworks for the protection, inter
alia, of persons deployed by a humanitarian non-
governmental organization or agency under an agreement
with the United Nations Secretary-General is the
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel, adopted at the forty-ninth session
of the General Assembly. I would like to draw members'
attention to this document, which, apart from setting forth
the rights and obligations of host countries, stipulates
measures for the prevention and prosecution of crimes
against United Nations and associated personnel. In our
opinion, the Security Council should resolutely urge all
Member States to become parties to this Convention so as
to ensure its status as a universally recognized legal
instrument as soon as possible.

It is only by strengthening existing mechanisms and
elaborating innovative approaches and ideas on the basis
of clear coordination between all members of the
international community, including the United Nations,
that we can achieve our main objective: to improve the
effectiveness of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations.

