Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): Mr. President,
let me at the outset express my sincere appreciation to
you for having convened this debate. I would also like
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui; Under-Secretary-
General Herve Ladsous; the Deputy Executive Director

of UNICEF, Ms. Yoka Brandt; and the Associate
Vice-President of Save the Children, Mr. Gregory
Ramm, for their informative briefings.

The Republic of Korea welcomes the report of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
(S/2013/245). While encouraged by the positive
developments referred to in the report, we remain
concerned at the fact that grave violations against
children continue to occur. We are also worried about
emerging challenges for child protection, including the
military use of schools and the detention of children by
security forces. The situation in Syria is particularly
worrisome. It is disturbing that, among the well over
93,000 people estimated to have been killed to date,
many thousands are children.

Against that backdrop, my delegation appreciates
the crucial role of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for children and armed conflict
in protecting children from the devastating effects of
conflicts. We commend the tremendous efforts made by
and the commitment of Ms. Leila Zerrougui since her
assumption of the post last year. As a staunch supporter
of her mandate, the Republic of Korea will continue to
cooperate closely with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.

I would like to underline the following key points.

First, ending impunity is the key to combating
violations and abuses against children, as well as
ensuring their non-recurrence. We fully acknowledge
that accountability for the most serious crimes against
children has been strengthened through the work
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) as well as
that of ad hoc and mixed tribunals. The verdict of
the ICC on Thomas Lubanga last year was indeed a
landmark decision. While welcoming that decision, my
delegation would like to encourage all States to extend
their full cooperation to the ICC to further enhance
accountability at the international level.

Ensuring accountability at the national level is
equally important. All States should continue their
efforts to strengthen national mechanisms, including
domestic criminal laws and executive and judicial
systems to investigate and prosecute those responsible.
We hope that all relevant United Nations entities will
pay greater attention to supporting States' efforts in
that regard.

Secondly, I would like to underline the significance
of concrete, time-bound action plans as key tools for

protecting children from current and future abuses. My
delegation welcomes the signing of action plans by the
Governments of Myanmar, Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo last year. We also welcome the
fact that all parties in Nepal and Sri Lanka have been
removed from the lists contained in the annexes to the
Secretary- General's report after the full implementation
of the action plan. We hope that all parties listed in the
Secretary-General's report will prepare and implement
action plans without further delay.

In that regard, my delegation believes that
engagement by the United Nations with non-State
armed groups is crucial. To that end, independent
and unhindered access of the United Nations must be
allowed, and contact between the United Nations and
non-State armed groups should be further facilitated.

Thirdly, the Security Council should put increasing
pressure on persistent perpetrators of grave violations
against children, including the adoption of targeted and
graduated measures against them. To that end, links
between the children and armed conflict agenda and the
sanctions regimes should be further strengthened. We
support the recommendation made by the Secretary-
General in his report to strengthen the provisions for
the protection of children in all relevant mandates of
United Nations peacekeeping, special political and
peacebuilding missions, including the deployment of
child-protection advisers.

Additionally, we would like to further encourage
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
to share specific information contained in the
Secretary-General's reports with the relevant sanctions
Committees, including through regular briefings.

Last but not least, ensuring the compliance ofparties
to armed conflict with international law should be the
starting point in preventing grave violations against
children. In that regard, I would like to encourage all
States to ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention
on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict, which is the key legal instrument in
that respect.

