Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): Equatorial Guinea welcomes the holding
of this meeting and reiterates its thanks to Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Major General Alexey Bakin and Mr. David
Lillie for the very useful information they have
provided us.

As has been described in detail, the situation in
Syria, particularly in the north-western part of the
country, is reaching alarming proportions. Over the
past two months, we have lost count of the number of
people, mostly women and children, who have been
killed in the current escalation of violence. There can
be no doubt that we are facing a genuine humanitarian
tragedy with clear regional repercussions. Against that
backdrop, it would make sense to ask ourselves if the
conflict might morph into a large-scale regional war or
if, on the contrary, the Syrian Government will succeed
in containing the jihadist threat and the rise of other
armed groups. Objectively speaking, it is impossible to
predict how the situation will play out.

No one wants to pay the bloody price of an open
war, including Syria's immediate neighbours. The
parties must therefore spare no effort to rein in the
increasing number of attacks against the population,
defenceless civilians, civilian infrastructure and
health-care centres.

The disastrous humanitarian situation is evident,
as can be seen in the camps for refugees and displaced
persons, including Al-Hol camp, where 73,000 people
live in appalling conditions, and Rukban camp, which,
because of the failure to deploy the third humanitarian
convoy, some 14,000 people have been compelled
to abandon owing to the horrendous humanitarian
conditions there. We must not underestimate the
seriousness of the situation in the two camps or
substantially downplay the real magnitude of the
humanitarian disaster they are currently facing.

Here we reiterate that in line with resolution
2449 (2018) and other relevant resolutions, cross-
border assistance must remain a key component of
humanitarian action, and the parties must not stint on
efforts to allow humanitarian aid to reach Idlib and
other areas of the country cut off by the fighting.

Given the alarming levels of need and vulnerability
with adverse humanitarian consequences in north-west
Syria, the Government of Equatorial Guinea commends
the work done by the humanitarian community, which,
despite the many security restrictions, is resolutely
committed to responding to the needs of the population
affected by delivering emergency humanitarian aid.

I conclude my statement by stressing that there
can be no military solution to the conflict in Syria.
Peace and stability in Syria require all the parties to
compromise and fulfil their obligations to promote an
inclusive and peaceful political process.

