Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Egyptian delegation for
initiating today's very important meeting. Russia firmly
supports the expansion and deepening of cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union and
subregional organizations.

We welcome the progressive development of the
partnership between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council on the basis
of Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, as
affirmed by the detailed discussions held between the
members of both Councils here in New York yesterday
on a wide range of issues related to the African continent.
At the basis of such partnerships is the recognition of
the primary responsibility of the Security Council for
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the complementarity of the efforts of the United
Nations and regional organizations, leveraging the
comparative advantages of each.

It is clear that regional and subregional organizations
in Africa know the situation there better than anyone
else and have conflict prevention and settlement
mechanisms that are better adjusted to local situations.
We therefore support the principle of African solutions
for African problems. We welcome the progress made
in the establishment of the African Peace and Security
Architecture, whose central roles are assigned to the
Peace and Security Council, the Continental Early
Warning System and the African Standby Force.

Despite the efforts of Africans and international
partners, Africa unfortunately remains vulnerable to
all sorts of crises. We have recently seen an increase
on the continent in the potential for conflict and new
serious challenges to peace and security, while the
number of displaced persons has reached a historic
high. In such conditions, it is increasingly urgent to
ensure constructive engagement between the United
Nations and the African Union to prevent and resolve
conflicts. In this context, we welcome the sharing of
efforts between the two organizations to stabilize the
situations in Darfur, Somalia, Mali and the Sahel as
a whole, Burundi, the Central African Republic and
South Sudan, and on the Sudanese track.

Promising cross-cutting areas for partnership
include the fight against international terrorism,
transnational organized crime, piracy, and the illicit
traffic in arms and drugs. The potential crisis response
of the AU is very useful and in need of international
support. In our view, the priority must now be given
to strengthening the African Standby Force. We must
also coordinate the efforts of international partners
in helping to build the African Union's peacekeeping
capacity, taking into account the positive experience
gained, inter alia, from the activities of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the African Union Mission in Somalia.

We believe that Chapter VIII of the Charter provides
a sound legal basis for the African Union peacekeeping
operations mandated by the Security Council and for
assistance in the establishment of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. We also believe it important
to be able to rely on a predictable, reliable and flexible
financing, including through the African Peace Fund.
At the same time, we consider it necessary to ensure
feedback, particularly in terms ofthe adequate periodic
accountability of the African partners to the Security
Council concerning the peacekeeping operations
authorized by the Council.

In principle, we believe that it is also important for
the General Assembly to conduct a thorough analysis of
the issue ofproviding additional logistical and financial
assistance to African Union peacekeeping operations
through the assessed contributions of Member States.
We firmly believe that the further strengthening of
the United Nations and the African Union partnership
will effectively allow us to prevent and settle conflicts
in Africa and can significantly enhance the global
anti-crisis potential.

Russia actively participates in the provision of
comprehensive assistance to African continent in the
framework of existing international instruments, and on
a bilateral basis. Our country also makes contributions
to international programmes, including through the
International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
the International Civil Defence Organization. At more
than $20 billion, we are a leader in writing off debts
of States in the region. The remaining debt obligations
are channelled towards helping the countries of the
continent through the debt-for-development scheme.
In that way, my country is tangibly contributing to
international efforts aimed at removing the economic
reasons for conflict in Africa.

