Ms. Landgren: First of all, Mr. President, let me
thank you and other members of the Council for your
kind words welcoming me to the Council and to United
Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN) and for your
appreciation for the work of my colleagues in UNMIN
and in the Department of Political Affairs on the report
(S/2009/221) before you. We have noted your
comments regarding the next Secretary-General's
report.

The concerns of the present moment are indeed
acute, and the Security Council's attention to and
support for the challenges of Nepal's democratic
transition is extremely important. Let me take as a
starting point the question of what can be done,
especially by UNMIN. UNMIN will act within the
scope of its mandate and, as the Council knows, that is
a limited mandate, but we will build on our contacts
and on our strong dialogue with all political parties and
the armies, as we have, I believe, what is
acknowledged as an impartial role in the peace process.

The immediate challenge will be the formation of
a Government and progress in the elected Legislature-
Parliament, without spoiling the process and inserting
unconscionable delays into the procedure. There will
be great temptations for that at this moment, and all
parties will need to exercise restraint and show respect
for the democratic process to which they have
committed.

There will be a need for a continuing technical
role in respect of integration and rehabilitation of
Maoist army personnel. UNMIN is working very
closely with the committees to provide them and the
Ministry of Peace and Reconstruction with the support
that they need and request. However, I want to
underline that the resolution of that issue is not
primarily a technical matter. It will be a difficult
political negotiation. Nonetheless, we will support the
committees, which are expected to present detailed and
realistic proposals, on the basis of which the political
discussions can take place.

The frustration among Maoist personnel is high at
this stage, their having been in cantonments now for
over two years, and it is essential that those discussions
move forward. In the current context, the Joint
Monitoring Coordination Committee (JMCC) becomes
a particularly important mechanism, as in that forum,
the Nepal Army and Maoist army come together under
the chairmanship of UNMIN. Through all the rough
patches of this peace process - and, as the Council
knows, this is not the first - the JMCC has continued
to meet and discuss; it has continued to bring together
the Nepal Army and the Maoist army for discussions in
a professional and civilized atmosphere. Now more
than ever, I would suggest, this becomes an important
dialogue forum for the armies.

With regard to the discharge of minors, I see a
risk that, at this moment, this could become a low
priority politically. UNMIN will continue with the
United Nations partners to help move this forward
without further delay.

The focus has been very much on security issues
centring on the Nepal Army and the Maoist army. It is
essential that the process be highly attentive to the
rights and interests of various other identity-based
groups. Clearly, the overriding national priority is the
drafting of the new constitution, and that requires not
only consensus at the level of the political parties, but
also a sense of ownership on the part of all groups -
the sense that they too have a place in the new Nepal,
without recourse to violence. We have seen several
incidents of violence and boycott over the past several
months. That means maintaining an ongoing and
inclusive dialogue with the traditionally marginalized
parties and groups.

As experts point out, Nepal is a country of
minorities. The largest group accounts for some 16 per
cent of the population, so unity is the only answer and
dialogue is the only satisfactory way to move forward.
UNMIN - given our mandate - is not directly
involved in that, but there is a need to continue to draw
attention to it, and we will do so.

I would like to mention that with the recent
turbulent events, the National Development Forum
which was scheduled for next week has been
postponed. That Forum, which was bringing together
high-level representation of multilateral and bilateral
donors, has been an integral part of developing Nepal's
new national development strategy. It is unfortunate
that the Forum had to be delayed and we hope that it
will come swiftly back on track.

In closing, I would like to again state my
appreciation for the Council's close attention to the
report and to the situation.

