Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to thank the
Secretary-General for preparing his report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2009/277). I
am also deeply grateful to Under-Secretary-General
John Holmes for his briefing.

Substantial progress has been made on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict since the first
debate of the Council on this subject 10 years ago. The
Council has since produced a number of well-
established normative frameworks, including one that
was laid out in resolution 1674 (2006). As a result,
awareness has been raised among Member States and
the Council has adopted a growing number of decisions
related to this issue to advance the cause in country-
specific deliberations.

We welcome the recently adopted practice of
convening a meeting of the Security Council Expert
Group on the Protection of Civilians to receive a
briefing from the Secretariat on up-to-date and detailed
information on the protection of civilians prior to
consultations on the mandates of specific peacekeeping
missions. All Council members should take full
advantage of these briefings.

What is most important now is to put those
established normative frameworks into practice.
Despite the progress to date, we have grave concerns
about ongoing civilian casualties all over the world, be
they civilians, journalists or humanitarian workers. We
cannot accept child soldiers, sexual violence or any of
the other violations of international human rights and
humanitarian law that take place somewhere in the
world every day. We have to redouble our efforts.
Today, I would like to highlight three points.

First of all, we should emphasize that it is States
that have the primary responsibility to enhance
compliance with international law and to protect
civilians. At the same time, we need to address the
serious impact that non-State groups are having. We
are appalled by the use of civilians as human shields
by, for instance, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam,
and deliberate attacks on civilians by the Lord's
Resistance Army. Non-State armed groups often
deliberately use civilians to attain their political and
military ends, and fighting inevitably produces civilian
casualties.

It is essential to ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law by non-State actors as
well. We believe that the protection of civilians should
be a priority in any conflict situation, be it a civil war
or an anti-terrorist operation. At the same time, we
recognize the legitimate right of sovereign Governments
to combat illegal armed groups and terrorist
organizations.

It is not always easy to attain the two objectives
at the same time: on one hand, to fight against a rebel
group or terrorist organization and, on the other, to
protect civilians and minimize casualties. But both
objectives must be pursued simultaneously to the
fullest extent. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, needs to discuss in
depth how to achieve both objectives and, particularly,
how to ensure humanitarian access and compliance
with international humanitarian law by non-State
armed groups. There are suggestions in the report of
the Secretary-General, and we can start from there.

The second issue is the mandate of peacekeeping
operations. Protecting civilians is an effective way to
contribute to social stability and prevent the recurrence
of a conflict. The Council has therefore mandated
many peacekeeping operations to protect civilians.

However, as the report makes clear, a substantial
gap exists between the high expectations placed on a
mission to carry out the mandate when the Security
Council takes a decision and the actual implementation
on the ground of those mandates. The Council needs to
address this discrepancy in all its aspects, including
mandate formation, mission planning, human and
financial resources, necessary equipment, standards of
operation and rules of engagement.

The Working Group of the Whole on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, under my
chairmanship, has committed to address these issues
through discussions with troop-contributing countries,
police-contributing countries, major financial contributing
countries and other major stakeholders. The Working
Group will make every effort to formulate concrete
measures that will facilitate improving operational
capacity to implement complex mandates. I urge
members to extend their full cooperation so that the
Group may complete its task on time.
The independent study on the protection of
civilians commissioned in the Secretariat by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations will also
attempt to address these issues, and we look forward to
its findings.

The third point is the human security perspective.
I would like to emphasize how important it is for the
protection of civilians that we work to empower
individuals and communities to prevent the recurrence
of a conflict. Empowerment is vitally important if
vulnerable people, such as refugees and internally
displaced persons, are to be able to stand on their feet
again and begin to rebuild their lives.

Empowerment is at the very core of human
security, which the Friends of Human Security, under
the co-chairsmanships of Mexico and Japan, have been
promoting. I am very grateful for the commitment of
Ambassador Heller on this. Appropriate assistance for
empowerment, such as income-generating activities,
education and health services, are key components in
protecting civilians and ensuring human security.

Through the Friends of Human Security, we will
continue to make every effort to operationalize this
approach in the activities of the United Nations. We
believe that doing so will provide added value so that
civilians are properly protected irrespective of their
legal status when they find themselves caught in the
midst of conflict.

In conclusion, Japan supports the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General. We
attach importance to the briefings of the Expert Group
and to applying the revised aide-memoire to review
mission standards. It is my conviction that we should
measure the progress in meeting our common
challenge not by the number of documents or analyses
that we prepare, but by the number of lives we can save
and the people we protect on the ground. The Security
Council is responsible for considering specific action
based on the information and recommendations
presented to us. The Council must monitor closely and
ensure the implementation of any decision it has taken.
To that end, we are ready to consult with other Member
States and the Secretariat.

