The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Poland.

At the outset, let me thank High Representative
Inzko for his briefing and state Poland's strong support
for his Office, which we see as the guarantor of stability
of the post-Dayton achievements. We take note of his
report (S/2018/416, annex), which was presented today
before the Security Council, and share many concerns
expressed therein.

Since the very beginning, Poland has been actively
engaged in bringing about peace to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In 1991, Tadeusz Mazowiccki, the first
non-communist Polish Prime Minister, was appointed
Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
territory ofthe former Yugoslavia. His reports on human
rights violations in the former Yugoslavia, containing,
inter alia, references to the Srebrenica massacre, played
a key role in the decision-making process regarding the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Today we remain
vitally interested in the integrity and prosperity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. In a volatile world, nothing
can be taken for granted, and today's achievements
can easily dissipate if insufficient attention is given to
creating conditions for a sustainable future.

In that context, let me convey Poland's belief that
staying on the path to European and Euro-Atlantic
integration remains the best hope for the citizens of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to enjoy quality oflife in a stable
framework of shared values. Those values, however,
need to be put in practice in a consistent manner, which
requires effort and commitment, as well as a sense of
responsibility, on the part of governing elites. In that
regard, we must note with concern worrisome trends
that are undermining the achievements of the past 25
years. Divisive and destructive rhetoric is still being
heard from leading political figures, and the authority
of the legal framework and judicial institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina continue to be openly flouted
in one part of the country in stark contravention of
international agreements.

Inclusivity, equality and participatory democracy
are at the core of European values. The rule of law
and its entrenchment are part of the conditions set
out in the European Union Western Balkans strategy.
Nevertheless, the decisions of both the European
Court of Human Rights and the Constitutional Court
of Bosnia and Herzegovina regarding the electoral
law remain unenforced after many years, while recent
developments regarding the Criminal Procedure Code
threaten to cripple the State in combating organized
crime and corruption. Inclusivity and equal opportunity
for all take on particular importance with regard to
young people and women. Their participation in public
life and a sense of common destiny are essential for
the integrity of the social fabric. Access to quality
education and equal opportunities in the labour market
and public life are the most reliable foundations for
building future prosperity.

Let me conclude by stating once again Poland's
interest in the European and Euro-Atlantic future for
Bosnia and Herzegovina and our commitment to assist
with our experience.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

