Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): Latvia welcomes the
initiative of Ukraine, during its presidency of the
Security Council for this month, to hold this important
debate, which brings the issue of the protection of
critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks to the
forefront of the international discourse. I thank all the
speakers for their valuable briefings.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union (EU).

The spread and intensity of global terrorism
is, without a doubt, one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security that we face today.
In the past year, in Europe alone, we have witnessed a
number of heinous acts of terror, some of which were
committed ruthlessly and purposefully against critical
infrastructure. The attacks on the airport and subway
station in Brussels last March illustrate all too painfully
that terrorists have spread and will continue to spread
fear and disarray by striking where they deem that their
attacks will have the most impact.

Attacks on transportation systems, as well as on
telecommunications networks, energy infrastructure
and water-supply systems, can often multiply the
perceived terrorist threat, causing a ripple effect of fear
that reaches far beyond those immediately affected by
the attack. Therefore, the prevention of such attacks
by creating adequate protection measures for critical
infrastructure is of paramount importance.

In support ofthePresident's callforthe consolidation
of international efforts to increase resilience against
terrorist threats, Latvia joined the sponsors of today's
resolution 2341 (2017) on the protection of critical
infrastructure from terrorist attacks.

In Latvia, the measures adopted for the protection
of critical infrastructure reflect the common approach
established by the European Union and employ the EU
tools designed for that very purpose. Our legislation is
closely attuned to the requirements set out by the EU
directive on European critical infrastructure, thereby
contributing to the unification of identification and
protection standards for critical infrastructure objects
on a regional, European scale.

We have established a cross-sectoral Government
commission tasked with the regular identification
and assessment of existing and potential critical
infrastructure objects in order to improve the safety
and security of all potentially critical infrastructure
objects. The security and protection requirements
for those objects are equally high for nationally,
municipally or privately owned structures. Moreover,
all structures deemed to be national or European critical
infrastructure objects in Latvia have a designated
point of contact so as to facilitate the exchange of
information with national security institutions. In order
to strengthen public-private partnerships and build
capacity with regard to the security and protection of
critical infrastructure objects, the responsible internal
security institutions hold regular training seminars and
on-site workshops for both private and public entities
tasked with ensuring oversight and the security of
critical infrastructure objects.

In the increasingly globalized and interconnected
world, the digitalization and integration of critical
infrastructure with the help of information and
communication technologies add a new sense of urgency
for the need for comprehensive and internationally
coordinated protection efforts. In our view, that is
the area where the United Nations can play a key role
by providing the best platform for the exchange of
knowledge, experiences and best practices among the
Member States.

