Mr. Christian (Ghana): We thank the delegation
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland for organizing this important debate. Ghana
welcomes the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/579) and thanks Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos for her statement this morning. We also
acknowledge the Security Council's long-standing
commitment to addressing this issue.

Since the Security Council's adoption of
resolution 1265 (1999) and other relevant resolutions,
the protection of civilians has remained a major issue in
the Council's work. While we note the progress made,
it needs to be said that events on the ground show that
more attention has to be paid, especially as regards the
full implementation of the resolutions adopted to
protect civilians caught in conflict situations.

Resolution 46/182 adopted by the General
Assembly in 1991 places the responsibility for the
protection of civilians, first and foremost, with their
respective States, which are also expected to facilitate
the work of responding organizations in times of
conflict. However, it is not unusual to find that the
State whose responsibility it is to protect its own
populations is the perpetrator of the crimes against
civilians. It is thus imperative for the Council to
address impunity and ensure compliance with
international humanitarian law and improve access for
and safety of humanitarian personnel.

Ghana continues to advocate the concept of the
responsibility to protect recognized and adopted by
world leaders in the 2005 World Summit Outcome
Document (resolution 60/1), which was a call to action
that emphasized the need for preventive measures and
for the delivery of international assistance to States in
order to enhance their capacity to fulfil their primary
responsibility to protect their own populations against
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
ethnic cleansing.

In that regard, on 24 September 2010, Ghana
co-sponsored a ministerial meeting on the
responsibility to protect under the theme "Fulfilling the
responsibility to protect: strengthening our capacities
to prevent and halt mass atrocities". What emerged was
the clear commitment of participating Member States
to prevent and halt atrocious crimes and the need for
intervention by the international community. We
therefore welcome ongoing discussions within the
General Assembly with a view to clarifying and
forging consensus on the scope and modalities for the
practical application of the responsibility to protect.

We also note with appreciation the Council's
commitment to the special protection needs of women
and children in armed conflict. In 2008, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1820 (2008), which
for the first time identified as an impediment to
international peace and security the use or commission
of sexual violence as a tactic of war in order to
deliberately target civilians or as a part of a widespread
or systematic attack against civilian populations. The
Council's intention to consider targeted sanctions and
other measures against parties in situations of armed
conflict who commit rape or other forms of sexual
violence against women and girls was very much
welcomed. Regrettably, the Council has yet to
designate sanctions for any perpetrators of violence
against women, in spite of widespread reports that
much abuse has taken place.

Ghana, which has remained among the top 10
contributing countries in peacekeeping and has also
fulfilled its obligations with respect to the ratification
of the Additional Protocols to the Geneva Conventions,
is particularly concerned about the reported
involvement in that regard of peacekeeping and
humanitarian personnel deployed by the United
Nations to prevent, recognize and respond to sexual
violence and other forms of violence against civilians.
We urge the Security Council to take a firm stance in
ensuring that such perpetrators are appropriately
brought to justice.

Ghana remains committed to regional initiatives
to deal with the issue of protecting civilians in armed
conflict. The African Union Convention for the
Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, adopted in October 2009 to promote
and strengthen regional and national measures to
prevent or mitigate, prohibit and eliminate root causes
of internal displacement, is a good case in point.
Among other things, member States undertook to
prevent violations of international humanitarian law
against displaced persons. The African Union's
continued presence in Somalia is therefore partly in
recognition of that mandate, which requires the
continued and increased support of the international
community.

In conclusion, Ghana wishes to encourage greater
participation by the international community in the
work of regional organizations in order to strengthen
the capacity of such bodies to enhance their protection
of civilians and ability to intervene in conflicts. We
also stress the need to prosecute and punish
perpetrators as a deterrent to crimes committed with
impunity.

