Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to sincerely thank and
commend Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for the clear and informative briefing she just delivered
on the recent developments in Libya, specifically
in Benghazi.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea expresses its
unequivocal condemnation of the car bomb attack
carried out today in Benghazi, which led to the deaths
of three United Nations staff members. We convey our
deepest condolences to the United Nations, the entire
team of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) and the respective families. We urge there
to be a thorough investigation to shed light on the
circumstances and for those responsible to be brought
to justice. We pay tribute to the three United Nations
staff members who lost their lives for the noble cause
of restoring peace and stability to the Libyan people.

We express our support to Mr. Ghassan Salame,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of UNSMIL, as well as his entire team. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea is profoundly dismayed
by the recent events, which is why we support the call
by Mr. Salame' for the Eid Al-Adha truce to be observed.
Today's attack is part of the series of other attacks that
includes the one against the migrant detention centre in
Tajoura, in which 59 migrants died.

We are convinced that there is no military solution
to the situation in Libya. The only avenue forward
is direct, frank and inclusive dialogue, which is
Libyan-led and supported by the United Nations, in
coordination with the African Union. Similarly, we
would like to underscore the need to uphold international
humanitarian law and international human rights law in
order to ensure the safety and security of civilians.

We strongly appeal for a definitive end to the
hostilities in Libya and for the arms embargo imposed
by the Security Council to be respected. We are also
worried that third-party agendas and interests seem to
be affecting the conflict, rather than the United Nations
and the interests of the Libyans themselves. As long as
that continues, serious doubts will be cast on the image
of this supreme institution of the United Nations.

We believe that we are sending the wrong message
to the world, specifically to those who are enduring
those barbaric attacks, the Libyans themselves, as well
as migrants and refugees stranded in that brotherly
country, who are victims of human smuggling networks
and targets of attacks in the conflict. We would like to
believe that there is still time to put this crisis on the
right path, where there is no place for external third
parties to play their damaging and negative role. We
have to be absolutely clear that what we are ultimately
talking about is innocent human lives, above all the
most vulnerable.

To conclude, we would like to reiterate our
unwavering solidarity with the Libyan people and
encourage the international community to pool its
efforts with a view to finding a peaceful solution to put
an end to the conflict. We extend our warm wishes to
the Muslim community as it celebrates Eid Al-Adha.

