Mr. Cohen (United States of America): Let me
thank Special Envoy Pedersen and Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock for their briefings. As Secretary of
State Pompeo stated in this Chamber last week (see S/PV.8600), we appreciate the opportunity to use the
Security Council to confront the complex challenges of
the Middle East. There are few places with challenges
today greater than those in Syria.

In the recently published report on the situation in
Idlib, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reconfirmed that, despite the denials of
Al-Assad and his supporters, the greater Idlib area
has around 3 million Syrians, roughly 20 per cent of
the country's remaining population. More than half
the civilians there are children. The report notes that
hundreds of civilians have been killed or injured due
to air strikes and shelling since May, and more than
400,000 people are estimated to have fled their homes
to escape from violence. The overwhelming majority of
those displaced are moving to densely populated areas
close to the Turkish border in northern Idlib governorate,
where humanitarian assistance is overstretched.

Attacks by the Al-Assad regime, Russia and their
allies in north-west Syria continue and have increased
in recent weeks. The number of civilians killed, injured
or displaced from their homes continues to rise. The
Al-Assad regime and its allies are causing devastating
harm to civilian infrastructure, including to schools
and medical and water facilities. As Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock emphatically stated moments ago,
there can be no justification for that. We saw this tragic
story unfold yet again when a targeted air strike in the
Ma'arat Hurmah neighbourhood in southern Idlib took
the lives of two humanitarian workers, a paramedic
and an ambulance driver. Even more barbaric, a White
Helmet volunteer who rushed to save their lives was
himself killed in an infamous double-tap air strike.

Meanwhile, the past week has seen escalating
violence and the regime's capture of Khan Shaykhun,
the same town that was Victim to a sarin attack by the
regime in April 2017 that killed nearly 100 people. The
United States supports calls for a resolution to address
the situation in Idlib.

These attacks make it impossible to believe that the
regime and Russia are being honest when they say that
they are not pursuing a military solution to this conflict.
We object to the offensive launched by the Al-Assad
regime and its allies under the false pretence of counter-
terrorism operations. We know what counter-terrorism
operations look like and, although we agree that there
is a terrorist problem in Idlib, what we are witnessing is
not counter-terrorism but, rather, an excuse to continue
a violent military campaign against those who refuse
to accept the Al-Assad regime as it is. Therefore, we
call upon the United Nations to move swiftly with the
board of inquiry responsible for investigating attacks
on medical facilities in north-west Syria.

The dire the situation in Syria is not limited to
Idlib. Throughout the country, more than 6 million
internally displaced persons have yet to return to their
homes because of continued Violence. Millions more
live in constant fear for their safety and security, while
also lacking basic necessities and a way to provide for
themselves and their families. The United States calls
on all members of the Council, as well as our regional
partners, to ensure that the United Nations has the
ability to freely implement cross-border aid deliveries
through all agreed border crossings in accordance
with resolution 2449 (2018). There is no substitute for
cross-border operations, and it is particularly important
now that we are seeing a deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Idlib.

We continue to call for full humanitarian access
to Rukban and the immediate delivery of critically
needed aid, as well as the ability for displaced persons
to depart in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner
to the location of their choosing if they wish to do so.
We do not support forced relocations. Further, it is
important that the Syrian regime permit regular access
for humanitarian agencies to reach all displaced people
in need, including those in Rukban.

Repeated failures by the Astana guarantors to
maintain a ceasefire between the Al-Assad regime
and opposition groups, such as the one two weeks
ago, demonstrated that the format is incapable of truly
preventing violence or making substantive gains towards
a political solution and other mandates of resolution
2254 (2015), including the release of detainees.

The United States strongly supports the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria to
establish the constitutional committee, which should be
led and launched by the United Nations as an integral
part ofresolution 2254 (2015). The inability ofthe Astana
guarantors to deliver on the constitutional committee
for the past two years shows that the regime and Russia
are content to use this format to slow political progress.
We call on the members of the Astana group to halt
their futile attempt to seize ownership of the political
process and instead put their full support behind the
Office of the Special Envoy.

On 7 August, the United States and our Turkish
counterparts committed to establishing a combined
joint operations centre and implementing this security
mechanism in north-eastern Syria. We believe that
this mechanism will be a viable way to secure and
stabilize the border and ensure continuity in the efforts
of the Global Coalition. The United States stands
with Turkey in calling for the preservation of the 2018
Sochi agreement, as agreed by Turkey and Russia
last September.

We call upon all members of the Council to help
ensure that efforts to establish a true de-escalation zone
take hold, accompanied by a ceasefire across all Syria,
in particular in Idlib and northern Hamah. Progress on
a political track is unrealistic unless those conditions
are met. Of course, no path forward is possible without
the cooperation of the Al-Assad regime and Russia. We
call on both to end their Violence in Syria and join the
international community in a process that will result in
the final stabilization of the country.

We also reiterate the call made by the United States
and other Council members during our recent meeting
on detainees for the Al-Assad regime to immediately
release innocent civilians held in regime prisons and to
grant impartial and independent international entities
access to detention centres in order to begin building
mutual trust and the basis for reconciliation that is
needed for a lasting peace.

Until then, we will continue to apply pressure
through all appropriate means to isolate this murderous
and corrupt regime and its allies.

