Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me
to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your very able
stewardship of the Council this month and thank you
for convening this important meeting. My delegation
also wishes to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy, the UNICEF Executive Director,
Ms. Veneman, and the representative of the Watchlist
on Children and Armed Conflict for their statements
and their important work on behalf of children
everywhere.

In addition, my delegation commends the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflicts,
under the able stewardship of France, for its work on
the promotion and protection of children affected by
armed conflict.

At the outset, allow me a personal note. When I
presented my credentials to Secretary-General Kofi
Annan just over five years ago, on 6 January 2003, I
said to him that I was doing so on behalf of a nation, a
people and a child. When I said the word "child", I saw
him tense, and then I said that the nation was the State
of Israel, which I love very much, the people are the
Jewish people, who I am very proud to represent, and
the child was my four-year-old grandchild, Ron, who at
the time was attending a kindergarten in Tel Aviv.
Every time I went to pick him up from the

kindergarten, my heart broke at the sight of the armed
guard standing outside those innocent kids'
kindergarten to protect them from terror. I told the
Secretary-General that Israel was the only democracy
in the world where nurseries, kindergartens and schools
are protected by armed guards, and I voiced my hope
and prayer that by the end of my tenure here, no child
in the world would have to be guarded by armed
guards. Unfortunately, today, more than five years
later, my grandson is nine years old and attending a
school in Israel that is still guarded by armed guards.

Over the past two decades, more than 2 million
children have been killed in conflicts, with another
6 million maimed or permanently injured. More than a
quarter of a million youths have been exploited as child
soldiers, and, needless to say, most are recruited at
such a young age that they are robbed of their
schooling and youth. Thousands of girls have been
subject to sexual exploitation, prostitution, rape -
which is even used as a weapon of war - and sexual
and gender-based violence.

Accordingly, Israel assigns great importance to
the protection of children, particularly from violence
and armed conflict. Israel has been a signatory to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child since 1991 and
to its Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children
in Armed Conflict. Last year, Israel was pleased to
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Coomaraswamy, for a visit and to
cooperate with and support her as she sought to better
understand the impact of conflict on all the children of
our region.

In that regard, my delegation takes note of the
report of the Secretary-General on children and armed
conflict, (S/2007/757) and wishes to briefly highlight
and expand on some of the issues it references.

Armed conflict levies a heavy toll on all civilian
populations, and no effort must be spared to ensure the
protection of civilians, particularly children, whose
inherent vulnerabilities make them dependent on others
for safety. The spread of terrorism around the globe
means that civilians today are especially and
increasingly placed in danger, from both indiscriminate
and targeted terrorist attacks.

There can be no doubt that terrorism comes at
civilians' expense. Even worse, children have often
become the object of such terrorist interest for
purposes of recruitment, incitement to violence, human
shielding and even targeted attacks. While terrorism is
a global concern, the situation in our region provides a
stark snapshot of some of the most daunting challenges
the international community faces in the protection of
children.

Extremist ideology is the handmaiden of youth
violence. Young people are extremely impressionable,
susceptible to brainwashing and indoctrination by
icons of popularity. Often enough, official textbooks
used in schools teach children hatred and incite them to
violence. Indeed, indoctrination is just as dangerous as
the acts of violence and terrorism themselves, as they
pervert the value and worth of education, poison the
social bloodstream and create an infrastructure for
continued terrorism and extremism.

As one example, a recent episode of the Hamas
television show "Tomorrow's Pioneers" featured a
malevolent rabbit that eats Jews. Numerous other
television programmes, all viewed by thousands upon
thousands of Palestinian children, are known to praise
jihad and violence and indoctrinate that young
viewership.

Palestinian terrorists use similar tactics to
actively recruit children to carry out terrorist
operations. Then there are the cases of parents, mothers
and fathers, who strap suicide belts on their own
children and send them off to carry out terrorist attacks
and those who dance on the rooftops celebrating the
carnage they caused by firing Qassam rockets and
injuring Israeli children. Those grotesque images shake
us all to the very core, but they are also a very real
aspect of the way that children are threatened and
harmed by Palestinian terrorism.

Moreover, the use of civilian areas to carry out
acts of terrorism is being seen with alarming frequency.
On 29 October 2007, Hamas terrorists in the Gaza Strip
fired mortars from the yard of a United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) elementary school in Beit Hanoun.
That cynical abuse of the school and violation of a
United Nations installation for terrorist purposes was
rightfully condemned by the Secretary-General.
Regrettably, the incident is absent from the
aforementioned report.

Similarly, while the report provides statistical data
on the number of Israeli children physically injured by
Qassam rockets, the report fails to reflect on the long-
term damage, such as psychological conditions and
stress disorders that are the direct consequence of the
rocket barrages fired by Palestinian terrorists.

That indiscriminate rocket firing poses a
particular danger to children. A case in point is the city
of Sderot, where up to 94 per cent of children suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder, including sleep and
concentration problems and even bed-wetting. The
psychological effects are no less damaging than
physical wounds and should not be casually dismissed.
Indeed, the frequency of rocket attacks has increased
alarmingly in recent months, where, on average, one
rocket is fired at Israel every three hours.

The rockets, sadly, inflict devastating physical
suffering as well. Over the past weekend, two brothers
were seriously wounded when a Qassam rocket
slammed into their hometown of Sderot, On Sunday
evening, doctors were forced to amputate part of the
left leg of one of the boys, eight-year-old Osher Tuito.
In Hebrew, by the way, "Osher" means joy and
happiness. His 19-year-old brother Rami was also
badly injured from the terrorist attack. Osher, who
dreamed of becoming a soccer player, does not yet
know that he has lost one of his legs.

Israelis were reminded of the never-ending and
inescapable pain of Palestinian terrorism when the
Tuito family received a letter yesterday from the Cohen
family, whose children, Tehila and Yisrael, ages seven
and eight, also had their legs amputated after being
severely injured in a terrorist attack a few years ago. In
their letter, the Cohen children wrote to the Tuitos:

"What can we say to you as Osher lies in
the hospital bed without knowing what the future
holds? It is heartbreaking. Such a small child.
And the biggest question is - will he ever be
able to ride a bike again or kick a soccer ball?
You deserve the security of living in your own
home and your own town, living with the other
citizens who live there".

That is a touching statement of courage and solidarity
in the face of terrorism, but it is also a harrowing
reminder of how Palestinian terrorism continues to
destroy and shatter innocent lives.

Surely, there is no monopoly on suffering. All
children - Palestinian and Israeli - suffer from and
are victims of this Palestinian terror. Terrorism is a
gross threat to the ability of our children to live in
peace and safety in the region. Hence, terrorism, in all
its varieties and forms, is always unacceptable and can
never be justified - because it is the children who

ultimately suffer, each and every one of them. The
child victims of terrorism, both Israeli and Palestinian,
are real. Each one has a name and a family; each one
has his or her own dreams and aspirations. And each
victim has now had those dreams and hopes shattered
by the cruelty and inhumanity of terrorism.

Lastly, my delegation wishes to place on record
its concern regarding some of the methodologies
utilized in compiling the report. Specifically, our
concerns relate to sections where ambiguities in the
report may allow for misinterpretation. Moreover, the
tendency to rely on unsubstantiated reports, third-party
testimony and hearsay harms the report's credibility
and effectiveness. We stress that accurate reporting is
in the interest of regional peace and security and that
all efforts should be made to utilize credible
testimonials and evidence. My delegation is engaged in
active dialogue and cooperation with the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, and we hope to see these
concerns reflected in future reports.

As Israel engages with the moderate Palestinian
Authority leadership and works shoulder to shoulder to
achieve peace and security for all citizens of our
region, we are aware of the impact that conflict has had
on our children. It is in this interest, therefore, that
Israel hopes to prepare its children for peace, to
maintain a commitment to dialogue and moderation
and to eradicate extremism, racism and hate. Only
upon those foundations will we truly be able to build a
better world today for our children and grandchildren
of tomorrow.

