Mr. Djedje (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank Mr. Abou Moussa for
his briefing and to congratulate Minister Bassole on his
excellent summary of the situation in Cote d'Ivoire. I
also thank Mr. Jean-Marie Bockel, Secretary of State
for Cooperation and Francophony of France, for his
presence. I appreciate the statements made by members
of the Security Council, which were also encouraging.
Finally, I welcome the appointment of Ambassador
Choi as the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Cote d'Ivoire.

We are meeting once again for another debate on
the situation in C6te d'Ivoire, to consider the
fourteenth progress report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to Security Council resolution 1765 (2007).

I will make a few comments on the report of the
Secretary-General before coming to the United Nations
management of the Ouagadougou Agreement.

Allow me, Mr. President, to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his fourteenth report on the
United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
(S/2007/593). This report shows pretty well that the
political climate has generally improved since the
signature of the Ouagadougou Agreement and adoption
of resolution 1765 (2007). However, it contains a few
statements that call for some comments on my part.

With specific regard to section VI, dealing with
human rights, paragraph 40 refers to reports received
by UNOCI concerning children being trafficked for
economic and sexual exploitation in the south of the
country, and cases of torture and mistreatment by the
members of the Forces nouvelles and by Dozo
traditional hunters in the north. Similarly, paragraph 61
of the report states that continuing human rights abuses
are extremely disturbing and that the leadership of the
Forces nouvelles and the command of the defence and
security forces of C6te d'Ivoire have an obligation to
address those problems and to ensure discipline among
their personnel.

The report of the Secretary-General is a reference
document, and comments contained therein must be
supported by specific facts that can be verified by all.
The staff of our Organization must work on the basis of
facts and not allegations that are circulated here and
there. I, too, regularly receive reports of corruption on
the part of some UNOCI officials, especially from the
Human Rights Office, aiming at having them include
some assertions in their reports in an attempt to tarnish
the image of the Government. Nevertheless, I have
never included such information in an official
document, as I do not have any evidence. It would be
risky for me to do so.

Therefore, my delegation solemnly requests
UNOCI staff to be more strict when drafting their
reports, as these reports involve the reputation of a
State and of an entire people who are ready to correct
their weaknesses, as long as they are based on facts
that can be verified by all.

The second item in my statement is about
sanctions. The Ouagadougou political Agreement,
which was ratified by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union,
requested in its in article 6.4 that the United Nations
Security Council immediately lift the individual
sanctions imposed on actors in the Ivorian crisis. In
article 6.1.2 of the same Agreement, the signatories
request an immediate special authorization to import
the light weapons necessary to maintain public order
and security.

Almost eight months after the Ouagadougou
Agreement was signed, none of the measures expected
of the United Nations in support of its implementation
has been taken. On the contrary, an outdated draft
resolution for the extension of sanctions for another
year is being circulated.

Those who were fighting each other yesterday are
best friends today. Two days ago, on Saturday,
20 October, Prime Minister Guillaume Soro was
invited to meet with Charles Ble Goude in President
Laurent Gbagbo's native region. The war in C6te
d'Ivoire is over. If sanctions were intended to ensure
reconciliation and the end of war, why should they be
maintained today? Is there is another objective that the
United Nations wants to reach by maintaining the
sanctions when the context of 2007 is totally different
from that of 2004, when resolution 1572 (2004) was
adopted? How can one continue, in October 2007, the
content and the tone of resolution 1643 (2005), adopted
in December 2005?

In spite of the competence and goodwill of our
friends at the French delegation, who initiate draft
resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire, my delegation proposes,
following the example of Chairperson Alpha Oumar
Konare, an innovative interpretation of Chapter VIII of
the Charter of the United Nations, taking into account
the regional dimension. Peace in Cote d'Ivoire was
brought about by the sons and daughters of C6te
d'Ivoire and was facilitated by a head of State of the
West African subregion, with the support of Africa.
The Security Council has three African members. Why
not let them initiate draft resolutions on Cote d'Ivoire?
One should remember that, in 2004, it was the African
Union that came up with the idea of imposing
sanctions against C6te d'Ivoire. Today, ECOWAS and
the same African Union are requesting that sanctions
be lifted. Why is France so intent on hounding Cote
d'Ivoire and some of its political actors? Is it to punish
them? If that were the case, it would be contrary to the
letter and spirit of the Charter.
To conclude, I would like to recall the remarks of
Chairperson Konare, who on 25 September in this
same Chamber said (see S/PV.5749) that our partners
must let Africans run their own business and that
financing is important, but it does not justify unbridled
intervention or conduct.

