Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I
too would like to thank Mr. Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, for his
introduction of the eighth report on the activities of his
Office with respect to the Darfur conflict. We take note
of the report.

It is now a truism to say that the situation in the
Sudan continues to be of great concern, given the very
large number of victims both among civilians and
among personnel of peacekeeping operations. We
reaffirm that deliberate attacks against civilian
populations and peacekeeping forces are unacceptable,
irrespective of who carries them out. Faced with so
complex and tragic conflict as that of Darfur, the
international community must therefore demonstrate
ingenuity and courage in order to bring about a
comprehensive political solution as quickly as possible.
We therefore welcome the numerous international
initiatives of the United Nations, the African Union and
several States, including Qatar, to help the people of
the Sudan to survive their difficult ordeal. We thank in
particular the joint United Nations-African Union
Mediator for his ongoing efforts to that end. We also
pay tribute to the women and men of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), who work every day in particularly trying
conditions at the side of the people of the Sudan. For
their part, the Sudanese parties have also made major
commitments to finding a solution to the conflict.
However, their efforts remain clearly insufficient, and
they must be urged to be bolder and more engaged.

Faithful to the principles of justice and the rule of
law, Burkina Faso wishes to reaffirm, as the African
Union has already done, its dedication to fighting
impunity and to promoting equal justice for all in the
Sudan, and in Darfur in particular, without which no
political solution to the crisis can endure. That is the
only way to ensure that justice is done on behalf of the
thousands of victims of the war.

Burkina Faso believes that the search for a
political solution and the administration of justice are
not at all contradictory so long as the integrity of each
process is fully maintained. That is why, as a State

party to the Rome Statute, my country reaffirms yet
again its full support for the activities of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and believes that
those activities must be undertaken with the greatest
possible caution and in the context of a purely judicial
approach, with the sole objective of revealing the truth,
prosecuting the guilty and protecting the interests of
the victims in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).

There is a particular need to avoid any action that
could weaken the population's trust in the international
community and thereby polarize the positions of
parties, which could undermine all ongoing efforts and
scuttle the political process, including the deployment
of UNAMID, which we believe is not what the
international community seeks to achieve. There is thus
a need to assess opportunities in a dispassionate and
objective manner and to take measures to ensure that
equitable justice is served, while maintaining peace in
Darfur, the Sudan and the region.

Follow-up and the success of the political process
are to a great extent in the hands of the United Nations
and the African Union, which, in support of that
process, have decided together to deploy in Darfur the
largest peacekeeping mission in history. We therefore
invite the Sudanese Government to take all necessary
steps to cooperate in the prosecution of persons
recognized as being guilty of war crimes and crimes
against humanity and, in general, to cooperate in
combating impunity.

The Security Council, which has referred the case
of Darfur to the ICC, must continue to closely follow
developments in the prosecution and to pursue its
consideration of the issue. It cannot reject any potential
solution or spare any effort. It must be ready to listen
to all, including the victims, the Court and, above all,
its African Union partner. The African Union has
always reaffirmed - in particular in its communique
of 21 July - its conviction that "in order to achieve
long-lasting peace and reconciliation in Darfur, it is
imperative to bring to justice the perpetrators of
gross human rights violations in that region"
(S/2008/48], annex, para. 10). It is not advocating
impunity in Darfur, but rather insisting on the need to
preserve the integrity of all political and judicial
processes and to ensure that the will for justice does
not entail the taking of decisions that could jeopardize
the political process.

