It is the duty and responsibility of the Council to address any situation that threatens international peace and security. The League of Arab States firmly believes that the possible move by the Israeli Government to annex parts of the occupied Palestinian territory would constitute, if implemented, a serious threat to regional stability, with broader ramifications for international security. Since 1993, the Palestinians have wisely chosen the path of peace and coexistence. They signed interim agreements with Israel in the hope that this would pave the way for the establishment of an independent Palestinian State on the 4 June 1967 lines, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Yet for three decades real peace and the creation of an independent Palestinian State have remained elusive. Israeli settlement activities have expanded, and the logic of perpetual occupation and domination has become entrenched. Negotiations stumbled, were suspended numerous times and have led nowhere. Despair is dominating the Palestinian mood. Despite these setbacks, the two-State solution remains the only paradigm accepted by both parties and endorsed by the international community. The ambitious Arab Peace Initiative was launched in 2002, adopting the same parameters as a means to achieve regional peace and normalization with Israel. If implemented, Israeli annexation plans will not only be detrimental to the chances of peace today but destroy any prospects for peace in the future. Palestinians will completely lose faith in a negotiated settlement. I am afraid that Arabs, too, will lose interest in regional peace. A new dark reality will set in vis-a-vis this conflict and in the region at large. Israelis wrongly believe that the status quo is sustainable. It is not. If the two- State solution is removed from the table, a one-State reality will take its place. This is going to create a reality and dynamics that are completely different. What is also at stake here is the effectiveness of the Council. I hope that it recognizes the urgency of the matter and the gravity of the Israeli policies. It is incumbent upon the Council to exert its influence on Israel so that the country refrains from any unilateral measures that will further inflame tensions and endanger stability and peace in the Middle East. We should be united in our condemnation and rejection of this provocation, which is uncalled for, and Israel must be made to recognize that its nefarious, self-centred plans will remain inadmissible and will never gain any international acceptance.
