Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): First, I thank you, Madam President, for
convening today's meeting, which was initiated by
the delegation of the Russian Federation. 1 also thank
the Under-Secretary-General for his briefing and
express our particular gratitude to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, a country that has
undertaken the leadership role in the investigation of
the tragic incident that took place in Ukraine on 17 July.

It seems to me that in the Minister's statement, his
words of gratitude to the local citizens were particularly
important. On 17 July, they found themselves without
warning involved in a tragic situation. We recall that
over the following days, there was much criticism of the
local citizens and rebels; later, it came to light that they
had in fact carried out very useful work, as recognized
on 6 August by the Prime Minister of the Netherlands.

On 21 July, the Council adopted resolution 2166
(2014) in support of a full, thorough and independent
international investigation into the crash of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7 in Ukraine that resulted in the
deaths of298 people. The scale ofthe disaster, its political
implications and consequences, and the resolution's
provisions regarding the role of the United Nations
and the Security Council in political arrangements
for the investigation indicate that the Council must
continue to monitor the issue. Resolution 2166 (2014)
sets out the modalities for conducting a comprehensive,
thorough and independent international investigation.
The document stipulates United Nations participation,
which is particularly important to ensuring a genuine,
impartial, international process and the necessary
degree of transparency in the organization of the
investigation.

We believe that the Council has an important role to
play in resolving a number of thorny issues set forth in
the resolution, without which an investigation in south-
eastern Ukraine cannot be conducted. These include
halting all military activities of all sides in the area of
the crash site, halting all activities that could threaten
the integrity of the crash site, providing swift and
safe access by international staff to the crash site, and
supporting the role of the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO) to ensure that the relevant
investigation is guided by the principles of international
civil aviation and ICAO rules and standards.

In resolution 2166 (2014), the Security Council
requested the Secretary-General to recommend
possible ways that the United Nations could assist
the investigation and report to the Council as events
unfolded. It is unfortunate that to date we have seen
no sign of the recommendations or any attempt by
the Secretariat to demonstrate any initiative aimed at
assisting the international investigation. We consider it
important that the Secretary-General conduct a review
and assessment of the state of affairs regarding the
aforementioned issues and report on them to the Council,
including with respect to the drafting and adoption of
additional measures to assist the investigation. It it may
be necessary to consider establishing a post of Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the matter
and authorizing a relevant mission, in cooperation
with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), to be sent to the crash site.

Of particular relevance to United Nations
participation is the current state of affairs of the
investigation. The preliminary report of the Dutch
Safety Board is minimally informative and contains no
convincing information about the crash circumstances.
There is no reference at all to resolution 2166 (2014). The
promised transparency is lacking. The investigation, it
seems, has been entrusted to a small group of countries.
There have been delays and deferrals of the process.
The data on the dispatchers' voice recorders were
transferred only in late August. Many questions have
arisen regarding compliance with ICAO standards. The
report contains no information on the work carried out
by the Ukrainian military, on the voice recordings of the
armed forces with the dispatchers, or on the deployment
of the Ukrainian anti-aircraft system on the day of
the catastrophe, and it is totally silent concerning the
possible presence of fighter jets in the vicinity of the
flight path of Flight MH-17.

We are also concerned about a certain indifference
conveyed in the report regarding the issue of lack of
access to the crash site. Yet it is a priority issue involving
relevant tasks - indeed, urgent tasks. The debris could
be of key importance in establishing the circumstances
surrounding the crash of Flight MH-17; unfortunately,
much important expertise on that and other aspects has
not been forthcoming. After the pause on 6 August in
the work of the international experts at the crash site,
no journalists or OSCE observers have visited the site.
It is not clear what is stopping the team from going to
Donetsk now, given the ceasefire.

We are not questioning the sovereignty of the State
where the event occurred - Ukraine - to arrange the
investigation of the crash that took place in its air space
and to address the issue of confidentiality regarding
the investigation. However, pursuant to resolution
2166 (2014), the arrangement should ensure the
authentically international nature of the organization
of and participation in the investigation. Experts are
needed from various countries to participate in the
group of international experts - including Russian
nationals and representatives of the Interstate Aviation
Committee - to work together as a unified team with
fair and equal access to all materials necessary to carry
out the investigation.

We must shed light on the truth regarding the
incident that took place in Ukrainian air space on
17 July; it is therefore imperative to shed light not
only on the root causes and the perpetrators, but also
on the political circumstances that led to the disaster
itself. The tragedy has been manipulated by a number
of countries to exacerbate international tensions.
Immediately following the incident, even before
receiving any reliable information, public statements
were made, in which full blame was attributed to the
militants. Our country was held responsibility for the
perpetration of serious international violations. Let us
not forget that those actions were the grounds for the
cycle of sanctions against Russia. We believe that to be
an act of information warfare, blatant interference into
the investigation of the accident and a political attempt
to predetermine the results of the investigation.

The Russian Federation was the first and, in fact,
only country to immediately and openly provide all
available and impartial information related to the crash.
The Russian Defence Ministry and the Federal Air
Transport Agency not only released information but
also presented a list of questions that must be answered
for an objective picture of what happened. Many of
those issues were put to the Ukrainian side.

Unfortunately, most of those questions, including
the most important, have not been answered objectively.
We are convinced that an unbiased and impartial
investigation will be needed to clarify all those
concerns. On many occasions, we heard from a number
of States that they allegedly had verified information
about what happened, including satellite images of the
area where the 17 July crash occurred. We call on them
to disclose that information.

In conclusion, I would like to underscore that Russia
continues to insist on the holding of a transparent and
objective international investigation in full compliance
with all requirements and standards of the International
Civil Aviation Organization in order to establish the
truth. We believe that that goal can be achieved only
with United Nations assistance and involvement in the
investigation, in line with resolution 2166 (2014). The
preliminary report on the causes of the crash does not
address our concerns but, in fact, gives rise to new
questions that the Russian side is ready to discuss with
its foreign partners in a constructive way.

The list of questions is something that we intend to
send to the commission of inquiry and to the Secretary-
General. We will distribute it as an official Security
Council document.

