The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Somalia in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Mohamed
(Somalia) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in Arabic): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern over the continued violence inside
Somalia, in particular the recent intensified
fighting between the Union of Islamic Courts and
the Transitional Federal Institutions.

"The Security Council calls upon all parties
to draw back from conflict, recommit to dialogue,
immediately implement resolution 1725 (2006)
and refrain from any actions that could provoke
or perpetuate violence and violations of human
rights, contribute to unnecessary tension and
mistrust, endanger the ceasefire and political
process or further damage the humanitarian
situation.

"The Security Council reaffirms its respect
for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and unity of Somalia.

"The Security Council reaffirms its
commitment to a comprehensive and lasting
settlement of the situation in Somalia through the
Transitional Federal Charter, stressing the
importance of broad-based and representative
institutions and of an inclusive political process,
as envisaged in the Transitional Federal Charter.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
Transitional Federal Charter and Institutions offer
the only route to achieving peace and stability in
Somalia, and emphasizes the need for continued
credible dialogue between the Transitional
Federal Institutions and the Union of Islamic
Courts. The Council therefore urges the
Transitional Federal Institutions and the Union of
Islamic Courts to fulfil commitments they have
made, resume without delay peace talks on the
basis of the agreements reached in Khartoum,
adhere to agreements reached in their dialogue
and establish a stable security situation inside
Somalia. The Security Council welcomes all
regional and international efforts to promote and
encourage political dialogue between the
Transitional Federal Institutions and the Union of
Islamic Courts, and expresses its full support for
these initiatives."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol SfPRST/2006/59.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.
06-67934

