The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

We appreciate the important briefings by
Ms. Wickramanayake and Mr. Simpson, and by
Ms. Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Ekomo-Soignet,
representatives of civil society. We welcome the large
number of countries participating in today's open
debate of the Council, and we would particularly
like to thank the civil-society organizations for their
support and contributions to the preparation of this
debate. We would also like to thank the United Nations
Population Fund and the Secretariat's Office for Peace
Consolidation and Support.

We also want to express our recognition and support
for the work of the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth,
and to highlight the Secretary-General's commitment
to empowering young people and their participation in
decision-making that affects their future.

The current generation of young people is the
largest in history. Overall, most of the people affected
in the various armed conflicts occurring around the
world are young. At the same time, young people can
make important contributions in favour of peace and
security. Peru would like to emphasize the role that
young people are called on to play in conflict prevention
and resolution, justice and reconciliation. Young people
are crucial to building an inclusive vision of the future
and achieving sustainable peace. We therefore welcome
the progress study on youth and peace and security
(see S/2018/86) provided for in resolution 2250 (2015),
sponsored by Jordan. It gathers the voices of thousands
of young people from all regions of the world, and
their message is clear. They want to stop being seen
as a problem and to be recognized as stakeholders in
peace processes.

Peru believes firmly that this is the right approach
to effectively implementing and promoting this issue
on the Council's agenda. It is essential if we are to take
advantage of and maximize the potential, commitment
and resilience of young people in preventing and coping
with conflicts. To that end, it is important to create
inclusive and safe spaces that allow young people to
participate and contribute to peacebuilding and peace
consolidation processes in their national communities.
We welcome the efforts that are being made in that
regard and encourage their continuation.

This issue is clearly linked to the implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Among other things, the Sustainable Development
Goals oblige us to create decent employment for
our young people; guarantee equal opportunities
through access to health and education; and promote
peaceful societies with inclusive institutions. We are
also committed to promoting the human rights of all
young people, safeguarding their diversity and fighting
discrimination. That means rejecting stereotypes
that stigmatize them as persons prone to violence, as
well as recognizing and promoting their capacities
for participation and leadership in public life. The
participation of youth delegates in various United
Nations forums and processes is undoubtedly a good
practice insofar as it establishes bridges between
Governments and youth organizations around agendas
that contribute to with the maintenance of international
peace and security.

We must also combat the stereotypes that
perpetuate discrimination and Violence against women;
we must invest in peacebuilding efforts linked to young
people and promote positive, nonviolent and equitable
masculine identities. We believe that promoting dialogue
between Governments and youth-led organizations is
important to the effective implementation of resolution
2250 (2015).

Peru also considers that the Council should
continue to promote this important topic and provide
periodic follow-up, particularly in the areas of conflict
resolution and sustainable peacebuilding. In that
regard, together with Sweden, we will present a draft
resolution that we hope will have the support of all
Council members. As the progress study on youth and
peace and security indicates, the time has come to
take a radical turn that recognizes young people as the
missing element in peace.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

As I mentioned, we have a long list of speakers, so
I would like to ask speakers to limit their statements
to four minutes. For the same reason, the meeting will
continue through the lunch hour.

I now give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Belgium.

