Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I too would like
to thank very much Presidents Robinson and Byron
and Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow for their very
helpful briefings. I thank them and all their colleagues
for the work of the Tribunals and for their reports on

the completion strategies of the Tribunals (see S/2010/270 and S/2010/259).

The United Kingdom welcomes the efforts made
by both Tribunals to implement those completion
strategies. However, we are concerned by the further
delays reported in their latest reports. In some cases,
delays of more than 12 months are now being forecast
in comparison with the projections of some six months
ago. We acknowledge that sometimes unforeseen
events beyond the control of the Tribunals may throw a
trial off schedule. But going forward, it is vital that
both Tribunals do everything possible to minimize
further delays, in particular by focusing their resources
on their core functions, that is the completion of trials
and appeals. In that context, we welcome the
reconvening of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) Working Group on
Speeding Up Trials and we look forward to seeing its
results.

We note the concerns of both Presidents about the
impact of staffing issues on the completion strategies
and the difficulties of retaining experienced staff as the
Tribunals near the end of their work. We recognize that
losing experienced staff can have an adverse impact on
the completion of trials, and we agree that it is
important that the Tribunals remain adequately staffed
to enable them to complete their work expeditiously.
Resource issues are not, of course, a matter for the
Security Council. Nevertheless, we take this
opportunity to encourage the Secretariat to look
favourably on the Tribunals' requests for flexibility in
the issuing of staff contracts, in line with the current
trial schedules, as provided for General Assembly
resolution 63/256, in order to help ease their staff
retention problems. The Security Council should also
assist the Tribunals by granting the appropriate
extensions to judicial mandates, in line with the
commitment made in resolutions 1900 (2009) and 1901
(2009).

Completion of the Tribunals' work depends to a
great extent on their receiving full cooperation from
States, in particular in relation to the provision of
documents and to tracing fugitives. The Tribunals'
work will not be complete until all remaining fugitives
are brought to justice. The United Kingdom welcomes
Prosecutor Brammertz's assessment of Serbia's
cooperation with the ICTY. This report shows Serbia's
continued commitment to cooperating with the ICTY.
The discovery of the Mladic diaries earlier this year
was an important development with implications for
several ongoing trials. However, we would urge the
Serbian authorities to keep up the momentum in the
search for the two remaining fugitives, Ratko Mladic
and Goran Hadzie.

The United Kingdom also welcomes Prosecutor
Brammertz's assessment that Croatia's cooperation is
generally responsive to the needs of his Office and that
there have been improvements in the level of
cooperation since his last report. But we continue to
urge Croatia to make every effort to satisfy the
Prosecutor in relation to the missing documents
relating to Operation Storm, in particular by following
up key investigative avenues to establish what has
happened to those missing documents.

The United Kingdom regrets that there has been
no progress in the search for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) fugitive Felicien Kabuga.
We note President Byron's decision to refer the issue of
Kenya's cooperation to the Security Council, which
should now carefully consider its response. The United
Kingdom repeats its call on Kenya to supply all
information it holds on the current whereabouts of
Kabuga, and expresses its own willingness to provide
all the support it can to bring Kabuga and other
fugitives from the ICTR to justice.

As the Tribunals near completion, the Security
Council must take necessary measures to ensure that a
mechanism is in place to deal with the residual issues
of the Tribunals after they close their doors. We thank
the Tribunals for their preparations for transition to the
residual phase, and express appreciation also for the
ICTY's report on the establishment of information
centres in the former Yugoslavia.
We are grateful to Ambassador Mayr-Harting for
his report on progress in the Security Council Working
Group on Tribunals in drafting a resolution to establish
a residual mechanism for the Tribunals. We thank
Austria for its leadership on this issue. Discussions on
this topic have made considerable progress in recent
months. The United Kingdom hopes that this Council
will be ready to adopt a resolution by the end of this
year.

