Mr. Al Omoush (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to commend your initiative, Mr. President, to convene this meeting on the theme "Maintenance of international peace and security: Upholding the United Nations Charter", which coincides with the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. I would also like to congratulate Viet Nam on joining the Council for the period 2020-2021. I wish you, Sir, all the best at the helm of the Council this month. We look forward to working with you and with the incoming members of the Council: Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Tunisia. I would like to thank the Secretary-General and all the other briefers for their valuable statements. Commitment to the Charter of the United Nations and to the rules of international law has always been the mainstay of our foreign policy. Jordan has always been committed to respecting international and bilateral treaties and conventions, while implementing all international resolutions. We have rejected double standards and selective approaches, especially when it comes to resolutions on the Palestinian question, based on our belief in the role of the United Nations as the authoritative standard for international relations and the diplomatic settlement of disputes and for the establishment of international law. Jordan, which joined the United Nations in 1955, fully believes that this international Organization cannot succeed in carrying out its responsibilities unless it is committed to implementing its resolutions and related operations in compliance with the values of justice and international law. The international community, at all levels, must implement all the commitments resulting from those resolutions. In its foreign policy, Jordan is also committed to upholding international norms and the diplomatic principles governing bilateral and multilateral relations, while maintaining the principle of non-interference in the internal affairs of others. We are committed to moderation and believe that regional and international disputes can only be resolved through peaceful means, diplomacy and dialogue, while refraining from resorting to force or the threat of using it. The United Nations and responsible countries renounce the escalation of violence in order to spare the world further wars and human suffering as a result of military confrontation. In the context of the rapid pace of change in international political and strategic relations, the recent international crises, especially those in the Middle East, have shown the importance of the principles and purposes on which the United Nations was founded and its central role in establishing and maintaining international peace and security. They have also demonstrated the need to increase the effectiveness of the Organization by providing it with all the necessary resources and mechanisms to empower it and to address the root causes of its deficiencies. My country therefore supports the wide-ranging reform programme launched by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres to enhance the effectiveness and transparency of the Organization and its capacities to counter crises. In that regard, the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan presided in 2019 over the Conference on the Establishment of a Middle East Zone Free of Nuclear Weapons and Other Weapons of Mass Destruction, pursuant to General Assembly decision 73/546, which called on the Secretary-General to convene annual sessions of this Conference. Jordan's leadership has garnered the support of the countries of the region and other countries concerned as it demonstrates Jordan's full commitment to supporting the initiatives of the Secretary-General based on our belief in achieving regional and international peace and security. Our region urgently needs to build trust, strengthen cooperation and achieve peace rather than suffer conflicts so that our people can live in peace and security in order to realize the future they want. The significant changes, challenges and priorities of the international community, as well as addressing them, are adequate proof of the need for the Organization to adapt, develop and improve so that it can carry out its work in an effective and tangible manner, especially to deal with transnational challenges, particularly terrorism, violent extremism, xenophobia, climate change, migration and refugee issues. The nature of such challenges requires comprehensive international action to address the root causes through a deeper understanding of the interconnected socioeconomic and existential dimensions of those phenomena, the solutions to which must be equally comprehensive and far-reaching. That also applies to international peace and security. The international community must do its utmost to uphold justice and ensure the implementation of international resolutions by providing the necessary political environment founded on respect for human rights and tolerance, as well as creating opportunities for inclusive development and finding fundamental solutions to unemployment and social imbalance. That would contribute directly to building stability, trust and universal justice that would exclude no one. Throughout the world we must uphold the values that are the foundation for our harmony and mutual coexistence. In line with our commitment to the Charter, the promotion of peace, the protection of humanity and the alleviation of the impact of wars and conflicts on vulnerable groups worldwide, Jordan has participated for decades in United Nations peacekeeping operations across the world. In fact, we have contributed more than 100,000 Jordanians to peacekeeping operations that help to protect civilians in difficult and complex situations. The Kingdom will continue to support the United Nations approach and efforts for peacebuilding and peacekeeping at all levels. Given the important role of young people in building and maintaining peace and security, during its membership of the Security Council for the period from 2014 to 2015 Jordan proposed the historic resolution 2250 (2015), on youth, peace and security, to help integrate young people as an essential partner and to promote their positive role and representation in decision-making in order to empower them and enable them to achieve sustainable peace and counter extremism. That initiative by His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al-Hussein Bin Abdullah helped to introduce a new phase of United Nations engagement on youth, mobilizing the necessary international support to give young people the attention that they deserve while ensuring a better future for them and protecting them from the negative effects of conflict and from being recruited by evil, violent and extremist forces. We also stress the important role of women in establishing security and stability in their communities as well as their fundamental role in spreading the principles of harmony, tolerance and peace. In order to ensure the effectiveness of the Organization and its Charter in the twenty-first century, we must prioritize young people in the international community. During the general debate of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly, His Majesty King Abdullah II Ibn Al-Hussein emphasized that "[t]lolerance, compassion and the equality of all human beings are the values that make global harmony and collective action possible. Those are the values that permeate the Charter of the United Nations - to live together in peace as good neighbours, to honour the rights and equality of all and to combine our efforts and unite our strengths, not only in order to maintain peace and security but also to improve human life through justice, prosperity and greater hope for humankind. "Those are the moral obligations that the United Nations founders set forth. Now they are our responsibility. We must not fail." (4/74/PV.3, pp. 39-40)
