Mr. Rahman (Bangladesh): We thank the Peruvian
presidency of the Security Council for organizing
today's open debate. The voices of the young women
from three different continents expressed the concerns
and aspirations of their peers from across the world,
including from the occupied Palestinian territories and
Rakhine state.

Bangladesh welcomed the adoption of resolution
2250 (2015) and eventually joined an informal group,
Champions for Youth, in support of the youth, peace
and security agenda. We consider the progress study
(see S/2018/86) to be an important contribution
to our discourse on a multidimensional agenda.
The recommendations contained therein provide a
comprehensive framework for promoting youth's
potential role as the connective tissue in building and
sustaining peace. It is crucial that young people all
over the world be given an opportunity to realize their
potential, building on the foundations set forth in the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Bangladesh is a fairly young country, with a large
population of young people. Our nation is projected
to harness the demographic dividend until 2035. We
see our young men and women blazing their trails
and leaving their footprints in almost all spheres of
life. They often challenge the status quo and then help
to chart a way forward through vibrant engagements
and consultations. In so doing, they carry forward the
proud legacy of youth leadership and participation
through our nation's anti-colonial, independence and
democratic struggles.

In recognition of our youth's seminal role in
national peace and development, our Honourable Prime
Minister Sheikh Hasina has presented the vision of an
inclusive, knowledge-driven economy under the slogan
"A Digital Bangladesh". The vision aims to turn our
young men and women into true agents of change by
creating an enabling policy environment for them.

The updated national youth development policy
adopted by our Government last year exemplifies our
efforts to ascertain that no young person is left behind
on our national development pathway. The policy
upholds the provisions in our Constitution that ensure
the rights, justice and equity for all young people,
irrespective of gender, religion, caste, ethnicity or
physical and mental abilities. Our Government remains
committed to implementing an inclusive education
policy that fosters critical thinking and a culture of
peace among our young people and provides them with
skill sets so that they can avail themselves of gainful
employment opportunities at home and abroad.

Some of the key challenges faced by our youth
are not necessarily unique to our context. Young men
and women remain vulnerable to violent extremist
narratives that can lead them astray, along the path of
radicalization and terrorism. A considerable number
of young people continue to fall prey to the motives
and trade of organized criminal networks involved in
trafficking om humans, drugs and arms. Traditional
gender norms and practices disproportionately impact
the potential of young women in particular.

Investment in youth makes eminent sense from all
points of View. The case for financing youth-centric and
youth-led initiatives is relevant not only for national
authorities, but also for international development
partners. The United Nations Peacebuilding Fund has
demonstrated some useful precedents and results in
that regard; it would be advisable for others to follow
its lead.

Finally, I have personally seen, again and again,
how young people among our troops and police continue
to make a difference in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. With the right environment and tools, young
people can indeed prove to be a force to reckon with for
conflict prevention and sustaining peace.

