Mrs. Holguin (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the President for convening this
debate on children affected by armed conflicts. We are
aware of the importance that France has attached to
this issue and, as a country affected by this cruel
problem, we are grateful to it. Moreover, we would like
to thank the Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for her work
and her statement today, and also Ms. Ann Veneman,
Executive Director of United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF).

We commend the Council on the implementation
of resolution 1612 (2005), which has begun to yield its
first results. Colombia, as an affected country,
reaffirms its willingness to cooperate and welcomes the

monitoring mechanism when it falls due for countries
in annex II, once the exercise concerning countries on
the Council's agenda in annex I is completed,
accompanied by the independent review stipulated in
the resolution.

Circumstances such as the current conflict in the
Middle East, where hundreds of children are affected
by armed conflict, indicate the need for an even wider
approach to the issue. We trust that the Secretary-
General's Special Representative will act accordingly.
As a complement to the Council's work, we believe
that the work of the Office of the Special
Representative at this new stage must go beyond
formulations of the problem. We believe that it must,
working jointly with States and relevant entities within
the United Nations system, focus on preventing such
situations and finding lasting and specific solutions to
each one. In this regard, we would ask the Council to
ensure that, in addition to documenting the situation on
the ground, monitoring will present strategies for long-
term solutions to address the recruiting of minors by
terrorists and illegal armed groups.

In studying this set of problems, what is clear is
the need to create national strategies for the
development and protection of vulnerable children
threatened by the actions of illegal armed groups that
operate in various countries and regions of the world,
strategies to be designed by countries themselves with
the support of the United Nations system.

Though the Security Council has studied the issue
and alerted us to the urgent need for solutions, these
will be found in the short-, medium- and long-term
through support for national programmes - or their
establishment when they do not exist - that seek to
permanently rescue children recruited by illegal armed
groups. Likewise, as stated by many Council members
this morning, social and education programmes
focusing on vulnerable children must be strengthened
and must be a priority.

In this context, Colombia has 2,600 children
demobilized from illegal armed groups in the last four
years. For rehabilitation, we have counted on the
support of UNICEF and the International Organization
for Migration. The emotional and physical
rehabilitation of children affected by armed conflicts is
a priority for us, as are prevention programmes. Both
tracks lead to the strengthening of education and
employment systems that promote an atmosphere of

opportunity for children, both to prevent their
recruitment and to foster their social and economic
integration into the communities and societies to which
they belong.

In this task, we believe the United Nations
Development Programme and UNICEF have a key role
to play and must consolidate their country programmes
and proposals to find lasting and sustainable solutions
that will guarantee and protect a harmonious and
productive life for these children. In this respect, it is
important to study UNICEF's successful experiences as
examples for implementation in affected countries.

The challenges of prevention, reinsertion,
reintegration and rehabilitation are complex, and there
are no simple or single formulas. Solutions must be
designed on a case-by-case basis, keeping in mind the
particular conditions of the situation. Dialogue and
cooperation are, without a doubt, the best tools at the
disposal of the United Nations to work in countries
where there are children recruited by illegal armed
groups.

For prevention and rehabilitation policies to be
successful, a great financial effort is required by
affected countries, as well as the support of the
international community through cooperation and
technical assistance, since this situation arises in
developing countries with economic and financial
limitations.

While we thank the Council for its interest and its
monitoring of this issue, we believe that the United
Nation's social and economic development system
must work together on this matter both within the
system and with affected countries to find lasting
solutions that benefit children affected by illegal armed
groups.

