The Secretary-General: I welcome this debate,
convened by Kazakhstan, as a sign of enhanced
cooperation among Member States in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. I also welcome the Security Council's
continued support for Afghanistan, as demonstrated
by its recent mission to the country. The entire
international community has a stake in peace, stability
and development in Afghanistan, and the countries of
Central Asia have a particularly important role to play.

Sustainable development is a fundamental end
in itself, enabling people, communities and societies
to flourish and fulfil their potential. But sustainable
and inclusive development is also an important factor
in preventing and ending conflict and in sustaining
peace Only by addressing the root causes of crisis,
including inequality, exclusion and discrimination, will
we build peaceful societies resilient to terrorism and
violent extremism.

The United Nations development system is
engaged in supporting Governments throughout the
region to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to invest in sustainable economic
growth, including greater opportunities for young
people, women and girls. Education, vocational training
and jobs must be an absolute priority in national and
regional development cooperation.

Central Asia has made significant progress
on sustainable development in recent decades. In
Tajikistan, for example, the poverty rate has been
halved, from 81 per cent in 2003 to 31 per cent in
2015. But countries in the region can never achieve
their full potential alone. All are landlocked, and many
developed over decades as economically interdependent
parts of a larger whole. Growth, increased employment
opportunities and prosperity depend upon accelerated
economic cooperation and integration. The common
geography and history of Central Asian countries
and Afghanistan and their strong cultural ties create
enormous potential for mutually beneficial joint
projects, trade and exchange.

Despite the centuries during which the Silk Road
was one of the most important trading routes in the
world, trade among Central Asian countries has fallen
to low levels since they achieved independence nearly
30 years ago. Opportunities for intraregional trade
are significant, and even modest improvements can
result in substantial gains for all the people of the
region. I am heartened by recent signs of change for the
better. During my visit to Afghanistan, Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan
last June, I was encouraged to see new bilateral and
regional connections and better regional dynamics.

First, new efforts are taking place to better manage
the water resources that are fundamental to economic
development in that region. Those resources are coming
under unprecedented strain. As I witnessed during my
visit, almost 30 per cent of Tajikistan's spectacular
glaciers have melted over the past 10 years alone. The
Aral Sea serves as aterrible warning ofthe consequences
of mismanagement. We must use those ecological
disasters as examples to spur greater cooperation and
action. Central Asian Governments have recently begun
to intensify cooperation on water resources through
bilateral water commissions and agreements. Those
developments hold important lessons for Afghanistan,
where water-dependent farming and agriculture make
up nearly half the economy. The United Nations is
promoting mediation and dialogue through the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for
Central Asia. The Centre is ready to help modernize the
regional legal framework on managing transboundary
water resources, and is including Afghanistan in its
efforts to build capacity in water diplomacy. Finding
joint approaches to managing shared water resources,
including mechanisms to resolve disputes, builds
confidence in bilateral and multilateral relationships.
That can lead, in turn, to greater investment and
prosperity for the benefit of all.

Secondly, I was encouraged to see positive
developments in energy cooperation, which is
fundamental to promoting development and security.
Several cross-border initiatives are now being planned,
or are under way, including the Central Asia-South
Asia power project, a natural gas pipeline running
from Turkmenistan through Afghanistan to Pakistan
and India, and a new power transmission line running
from Uzbekistan to Afghanistan. The United Nations
family stands ready to support those initiatives and
others that can bring greater investment and prosperity
to the region.

Thirdly, increased trade is a prerequisite for
growth, sustainable development and building
resilience to external economic shocks. The personal
contacts resulting from trade can also help dismantle
informal barriers and increase trust. We should build
upon civil society initiatives in that area to bring
communities together across borders, including
women's groups that mediate local tensions and develop
joint infrastructure projects.
In that context, Iwould like to highlight Kazakhstan's
ambitious programme for Afghan students. More than
500 students from Afghanistan graduated from Kazakh
universities and technical schools in recent years, and
nearly 500 others are in the process of completing
their studies. Kazakhstan has committed $50 million
to supporting that initiative. Uzbekistan is on the same
track. Central Asian countries bordering Afghanistan
are now improving cross-border infrastructure, while
Uzbekistan launched direct flights between Tashkent
and Kabul last year. Several railway and power-line
projects are creating physical connections between
Afghanistan and its northern neighbours, including the
Lapis Lazuli railway, which connects Turkmenistan
with Afghanistan. Such projects have enormous
potential to spur economic transformation.

Security challenges continue to define much of
the discussion surrounding Afghanistan and Central
Asia. The Afghan Government's fight against violent
extremism, terrorism and transnational organized
crime has implications for the entire region and for
the world. Responding to such threats cannot be
the responsibility of the Afghan Government alone.
Effective counter-terrorism depends upon regional
and multilateral cooperation based firmly on human
rights. The five countries of Central Asia have now
completed the second phase of the joint plan of action
for implementing the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy, adopted in 2011. I was honoured to
host the high-level dialogue on the strategy during my
visit last June.

The regional plan brings Central Asian countries
together to share best practices and lessons learned,
thereby reflecting the five countries' joint commitment
to addressing and defeating terrorism with the support
of the United Nations. Regional cooperation offers
opportunities to address common concerns, including
countering terrorist financing, improving border
security, fostering dialogue with religious institutions
and leaders, and countering human trafficking and
drug smuggling. The upcoming meeting of the Kabul
Process for Peace and Security Cooperation will be an
opportunity for the Afghan Government to set out its
vision for a more structured peace and security process
coordinated with the wider region, including regional
efforts to fight terrorism and violent extremism. The
United Nations stands ready to support those efforts.

With greater regional collaboration and investment,
Central Asia and Afghanistan have the potential to
become symbols of dialogue, peace and the promotion
of contacts among cultures, religions and civilizations.
The United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan are cooperating
closely and continue to seek out new ways to deepen
their support. The entire United Nations family stands
ready to assist in promoting greater cooperation and
integration among the countries of Central Asia and
Afghanistan towards achieving the goals of peace,
sustainable development, stability and security.

