Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I welcome the presence of
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs Pascoe
and thank him for his briefing.

At the outset, allow me to convey to the Chinese
people, through the Permanent Mission of China, the
sympathy of the Lebanese people in connection with
this morning's tragic earthquake.

There has never been greater international
consensus on the parameters of Arab-Israeli peace. Yet,
Israel is more than ever intentionally taking unilateral
illegal actions aimed at predetermining the outcome of
negotiations, changing the reality on the ground and
rendering the two-State solution almost impossible.
The Israeli Government persistently disrupts the peace
efforts of the American Administration, including by
expanding settlements, in particular in East Jerusalem.
That is in addition to the ongoing settlement activity in
the West Bank under the pretext of so-called natural
growth, despite the Government's claims that it would
stop settlement activities there for 10 months.

On 3 March, Arab States reiterated their support
for American peace efforts. United States Middle East
Envoy Senator George Mitchell has announced an
agreement on proximity talks. Yet, on 9 March, during
a visit to bid for peace by American Vice President Joe
Biden, Israeli authorities adopted a plan to add 1,600
settlement units in East Jerusalem. Words of
condemnation came from all the over the world,
including from the Secretary-General, the American
Administration, the Quartet and many others. However,
the Israeli Government cracked down on peaceful
Palestinian civilian demonstrations in the West Bank
and allowed criminal behaviour by its settlers, which
resulted in the deaths of four Palestinians. Moreover,
on 21 March, the Israeli Prime Minister declared that
"settlement activity in Jerusalem will not stop" and
than it was "like building in Tel Aviv".

Even as the American President was receiving
Mr. Netanyahu in Washington, DC. on 23 March to
discuss ways to move the peace process forward,
Israeli authorities confirmed another illegal East
Jerusalem project for 20 residential units in the
Shepherd Hotel compound in a neighbourhood
populated mostly by Palestinians. The Israeli
newspaper Haaretz was told by Israeli planning
officials on 11 March that some 50,000 new settlement
housing units in Jerusalem neighbourhoods outside the
Green Line were at various stages of development and
approval. The officials added that Jerusalem's
construction plans for the coming decades were
expected to focus on East Jerusalem, and that plans for
some 20,000 apartments were already at advanced
stages of implementation.

Israeli designs target not only occupied
Palestinian land in the West Bank, but also Palestinians
themselves. In a bid to open the door to what could be
a new wave of ethnic cleansing of Palestinians from
their homelands, a new Israeli military order came into
force this week. Under that new order, tens of
thousands of Palestinians deemed "infiltrators" will
automatically become criminal offenders liable to
expulsion. Palestinians most likely to be targeted under
the new rules are those whose identification cards bear
home addresses in the Gaza Strip. But the term
"infiltrator" could also apply to Palestinian residents of
Jerusalem. What is most ironic is that the infiltrator
category could also apply to previously displaced or
refugee Palestinians who have been able to return to
their own towns and villages in the West Bank.

Allow me also to draw the Council's attention to
the suffering of children as a result of Israeli practices.
The Israeli human rights group B'Tselem told the
Associated Press on 9 March that Israeli police were
improperly arresting Palestinian boys during night-time
raids in Jerusalem. In affidavits to B'Tselem, six boys
aged between 12 and 14 described arrest raids
involving around a dozen heavily armed military
police, who surrounded their homes, handcuffed them
and led them to cells, where they were slapped, kicked
and told by interrogators to confess if they wanted to
go home. One of the boys, 12-year-old Ahmad, said in
an affidavit, "I was made to kneel and face the wall,
and every time I moved, a man slapped me across the
neck".

Let us also not forget the plight of the more than
10,000 Palestinians in Israeli prisons and detention
centres, most of whom are civilians. In our continuing
efforts to put names to the faces of some of those not-
to-be-forgotten Palestinians in order to recall their
suffering and perhaps help to put an end to their
captivity, I would today like to mention the name of
Nafez Haraz, a 54-year-old Palestinian from Gaza who
has been in captivity for 24 years and who has been
prevented from seeing some of his children for the past
five years. In that regard, I would like to recall that
thousands of those prisoners carried out a hunger strike
on 7 April to protest the bad treatment they receive
from the occupying authorities. Similar hunger strikes
are planned for the seventeenth and twenty-seventh of
this month.

In Gaza, we are into the second 1,000 days of the
Israeli blockade. In late February, the Foreign Minister
of Ireland - the first such European Union official to
visit Gaza in more than a year - described the
blockade as a "medieval siege" and concluded that

"the tragedy of Gaza is that it is fast in danger of
becoming a tolerated humanitarian crisis, a
situation that most right-thinking people
recognize as utterly unacceptable in this day".

The Israeli blockade is illegal and immoral. Its
disastrous effects on civilians in Gaza are
reprehensible. The blockade must end now, as must the
indiscriminate Israeli aerial bombing of Gaza, which
continues to cause death and destruction.

We believe that the Security Council should
closely monitor developments pertaining to the report
of the Fact-Finding Mission into the deadly war on
Gaza that Israel launched at the end of 2008
(A/HRC/ 12/48), which is also known as the Goldstone
report. In particular, we hope it will do so, because we
trust that no Council member would ever tolerate
impunity. In that regard, we welcome the 25 March
decision by the Human Rights Council that called for
independent and credible investigations into the serious
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law reported by the Fact-Finding Mission and
for the establishment of a committee of independent
experts to monitor the independence, effectiveness and
genuineness of the investigations and their conformity
with international standards.

We believe that any future negotiations, under
whatever format, must concentrate on final status
issues - specifically on borders, including in
Jerusalem - in short, specified timeframes, and not
just focus on confidence-building measures. We further
believe that a just, comprehensive and lasting solution
to the Middle East conflict should be based on
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid
terms of reference, the principle of land for peace, and
the Arab Peace Initiative. In this regard, we welcome
the affirmation by the Secretary-General and that of the
Quartet on 19 March that peace talks should lead in
two years to the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State - that is, by March 2012.

We also reaffirm that all measures and actions
taken by Israel to alter the legal and demographic
status of the territories it has occupied since 1967,
including the Syrian Golan, are null and void and have
no legal effect whatsoever, as per numerous resolutions
adopted by this Council.

As for the situation in Lebanon, we reaffirm our
commitment to resolution 1701 (2006) in its entirety
and renew our pledge to work closely with the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon.

