Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): At the outset, allow
me to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
debate on issues related to illicit cross-border
trafficking and the movement of goods, funds and
individuals. We also thank the Secretary-General for
his statement earlier today. We align ourselves with the
letter dated 24 April 2012, contained in document
S/2012/257, from the Chair of the Coordinating Bureau
of the Non-Aligned Movement, addressed to the
President of the Council.

South Africa remains deeply concerned about the
challenges and threats posed by the illicit cross-border
trade in conventional arms, the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery, transnational organized crime, the movement
of terrorists and their funds, drug trafficking, and
trafficking in conflict materials, minerals and persons.
The illicit cross-border movement of goods, funds and
materials has the potential to create regional instability.

We have seen recent instability in West Africa
and the Sahel brought about by the challenges posed by
weak structural border-management controls and

exacerbated by the crisis in Libya. The region has
become awash with illicit weapons and other illicit
goods, which has threatened the peace and security of
several States in the region, including Mali and
Guinea-Bissau. Such illicit trafficking and movements
could constitute challenges to international peace and
security and go to the very heart of each State's
territorial integrity and sovereign responsibility to
enact the necessary relevant legislation and related
Government regulations and administrative measures
and to set up or constantly improve implementation
structures and systems. In that context, South Africa
wishes to highlight the centrality of the principles of
the sovereign equality of States, territorial integrity and
non-interference in the internal affairs of Member
States.

Those principles are key to addressing the
challenges posed by the illicit cross-border trafficking
and movement of goods, funds and individuals, as that
involves the maintenance of effective national border
controls and the effective management by each
individual State of its financial architecture.

However, not all States can address those issues
without assistance from cooperating partners and the
relevant organizations. There are many States that
could benefit from assistance and cooperation in
building their capacities to address those challenges
and threats, and, in doing so, all States are entitled to
seek and receive the relevant cooperation and
assistance, on voluntary basis, upon their request and
subject to whichever bilateral terms or arrangements
they may agree to.

South Africa believes that a report containing an
assessment of how the United Nations can play a better
role in such cooperation and assistance efforts may
contribute to the ability of States to deal with those
challenges. Such a report submitted by the Secretary-
General should take a holistic and integral approach
and have a system-wide focus. My delegation believes
that such an assessment could help improve the
assistance efforts made by the United Nations and play
an important role in assisting all States in setting up
and implementing effective border controls, export
controls and financial management systems and
processes that could address those challenges.

South Africa believes, however, that in the
implementation of assistance efforts, State sovereignty
and the mandates of the relevant organs of the United
Nations should be respected. Based on such an
assessment, different organs of the United Nations
could take up matters raised in such a report in line
with their relevant mandates. In addition, my
delegation is of the view that the Security Council,
which has primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security, as set out in
Article 24 of the Charter, may then take up issues that
are relevant and fall within its mandate.

In conclusion, let me say that we are pleased to
note that there is wide interest in this debate from the
broader membership of the United Nations. This is
testimony to the importance attached to this issue by
all States Members of the Organization.

South Africa urges the Secretary-General, in
preparing the report that is envisaged in the
presidential statement that we intend to adopt, to take
into account all views expressed by Member States.

