Mrs. ngu (Nigeria): My delegation thanks you,
Mr. President, for convening this meeting on the
annual report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(S/2011/41). I would like to add my voice to those of
my colleagues who have extended their appreciation to
Ambassador Peter Wittig for his briefing and especially
for his remarkable contribution in his former role as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). I also
want to thank Ambassador Gasana, the current Chair,
for his insights. We want to assure him of our
unalloyed support in his new responsibilities.
Over the past year, we have been afforded
numerous opportunities to better understand how the
work of the Security Council interfaces with
peacebuilding goals. This Council has been enriched
by its acknowledgement of how, in achieving security
ends, we can contribute to the fulfilment of long-term
development through peacebuilding activities. The
recent Council debates on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict and women's
participation in peacebuilding, institution-building and
the interdependence of security and development have
all been excellent opportunities for the Council to
develop a keener appreciation of the part that we play
in the peacebuilding agenda. Indeed, all of these
debates have attested to the value of peacebuilding as a
tool for preventive diplomacy.

The review of international civilian capacities
and the five-year review of the peacebuilding
architecture dovetail neatly with the conclusions in the
annual report of the PBC. What Nigeria takes from
these three work streams is the overarching and critical
importance of cooperation. It is clear from the work of
all the configurations of the Commission that their
goals cannot be achieved in isolation without the
participation of other key actors, including national
Governments, regional organizations, international
financial institutions, other United Nations agencies,
bodies and funds, and civil society.

Liberia is proving to be an excellent case for
cooperation and innovation. With the adoption of the
statement of mutual commitment, the Government of
Liberia is firmly in the driving seat in terms of
identifying priorities and ensuring that service delivery
is demand-driven. Such cooperative efforts, which
emphasize national ownership, attest to the
commitment of the Liberia configuration and to the
vision of the Commission itself.

The cooperation of regional organizations
remains an essential element of the peacebuilding
toolkit, and one that we must encourage in this
Council. We welcome, for example, the partnership of
the African Union (AU), among others, in closing the
funding gap for Burundi's 2010 elections. In addition,
we believe that the March 2010 meeting on partnership
for peacebuilding, which was attended by
representatives of the World Bank, the International
Monetary Fund, the European Union, the AU and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference, was an
important forum for exploring and advocating for
stronger, more enduring partnerships to build and
sustain peace in fragile or conflict-sensitive societies.

If we are able to identify more effective ways of
mobilizing resources for Africa's peacebuilding
initiatives, and to identify the appropriate
peacebuilding priorities, countries emerging from
conflict will no doubt be better served by the United
Nations system. In this vein, Nigeria fully supports the
annual joint meeting of the PBC and the AU Peace and
Security Council, which follows the annual
consultative meeting of members of the Security
Council and the AU Peace and Security Council. We
believe that these meetings can help to bridge the gaps
inherent in addressing the nexus between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding and, indeed, the broader relationship
between security and development in Africa.

The Working Group on Lessons Learned has
rightly drawn from national experiences to highlight
the centrality of development aspects of peacebuilding.
Reducing youth unemployment, developing income-
generating activities, debt relief, skills training and
promoting women's employment and economic
empowerment are essential strategies for laying a solid
economic foundation for peace and stability. It is with
this in mind that Nigeria approved 0.7 million units of
account in debt relief under the Nigeria Trust Fund for
Burundi and Togo.

Despite the significant gains in peacebuilding in
this reporting period, many challenges evidently
remain in nations such as Guinea-Bissau - as
Ambassador Viotti will attest - and the Central
African Republic. In Guinea-Bissau, we look forward
to the outcome of the planned joint mission of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the United Nations and the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries. We truly believe that
Guinea-Bissau can and will overcome its security
sector reform challenges so that the country can benefit
from the gains achieved by the PBC, ECOWAS and
other actors in pursuit of democratic governance.
We accept that there are serious challenges to be
addressed in the Central African Republic in the era
following the drawdown of the United Nations Mission
in the Central African Republic and Chad. Specifically,
the configuration must prioritize its support to the
Government's efforts in disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration and in institutional capacity-building.
While these challenges are no doubt daunting, we
stress that they can be overcome through concerted and
collective action. We firmly believe that the PBC is
best placed to bring together the efforts of all
stakeholders in order to devise appropriate strategies to
assist post-conflict countries.

The PBC, as we have all acknowledged, has
already shown us its effectiveness in harnessing the
strengths of multiple development and security actors.
The PBC can marshal and has marshalled the resources,
the know-how and the political will of the international
community in a way that anchors the Security Council's
quest for lasting peace. We therefore lend our full
support and commitment to its efforts and trust that we
will soon maximize the PBC's potential and, ultimately,
fulfil the basic objectives for which it was established.

