Mr. Zouev (spoke in French): First of all, I convey
our most sincere condolences to the Ivorian delegation
and to the Security Council on the tragic death of His
Excellency Mr. Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue, Permanent
Representative of Cote d'Ivoire to the United Nations. I
think that I can speak on behalf of all ofus in saying that
we have lost a distinguished diplomat and an invaluable
partner and colleague.

(Spoke in English)

Today marks a historic milestone for Liberia, a
founding Member of the United Nations. For almost
25 years, the situation in Liberia was so concerning
that it was constantly present on the Council's agenda,
but the country has turned an important corner. On
30 March, our peacekeeping operation - the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) - concluded
after successfully achieving the mandate for which it
was deployed by the Council almost 15 years ago.

It would be no exaggeration to characterize the
Liberia of2003 as a country in ruins, with a traumatized
population and a predatory State. We may never know
the full human cost of the more than 14 years of
successive, brutal civil war, but we know that far too
many citizens suffered from human rights violations,
far too many families were displaced, and far too many
citizens were victims of sexual violence. I myself
witnessed the extent of the destruction - but also the
opportunity for renewal - when I visited Monrovia
in early 2004, while working on the delicate matter
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants.

It is important to remember the past - the untold
suffering wrought on the people of Liberia, the
destabilization that the country's conflict brought to
the entire region - in order to fully appreciate the long
path to peace that Liberia has travelled since the Council
adopted resolution 1509 (2003), authorizing the United
Nations to take over peacekeeping responsibilities
previously assumed by the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS).

The Council has before it the Secretary-General's
final report on UNMIL dated 13 April (8/2018/344).
As the report reflects major developments in Liberia
through the conclusion of UNMIL's mandate, I would
like to highlight just a few recent issues.

By-elections originally scheduled to be held in
May to fill senatorial seats vacated by the President
and Vice-President have been deferred due to a lack of
agreement between the National Elections Commission
and the Government regarding the budget for those
elections, which will be held in two of Liberia's
most populous counties. National institutions have
demonstrated on numerous occasions their ability to
plan, organize and secure sensitive political events
such as elections. However, at least for some time, the
Government and its partners will continue to face the
challenge of ensuring that national institutions receive
the financial and other investments needed to sustain
their continued development.

President Weah continues to consolidate his
Government and is progressing in his efforts to
pursue a pro-poor vision for the country. Among the
specific deliverables promised is the development of
Liberia's road network. The Government has signed a
memorandum of understanding with a foreign private
firm to obtain a loan of $536 million to develop a
road along Liberia's border with the Atlantic Ocean.
Some have raised concerns about the agreement,
given that the terms and conditions have yet to be
fully disclosed, and could have long-term social and
economic repercussions, as has been the case with
many concession agreements.

Meanwhile, last week the Government launched its
road map for achieving its pro-poor national development
agenda. This approach seeks to situate the poor at the
centre of public governance, including by seeking their
input, so as to ensure that economic growth arising
from development initiatives will benefit the most
vulnerable. Going forward, it will remain essential that
all partners remain closely engaged in efforts to finalize
and implement the national development agenda, which
will align with the Sustainable Development Goals.

Although it is a signatory to the Declaration of Table
Mountain on press freedom, over the past week the
Government has had to reiterate its full commitment to
freedom of speech, as some in the media had expressed
apprehension. The United Nations will continue efforts
aimed at building mutual confidence between the media
and Government.

The conclusion of UNMIL's mandate on
30 March, as determined by resolution 2333 (2016),
was a remarkable demonstration of confidence that
the country is moving steadfastly along the path of
sustained peace. Now, with the people and Government
of Liberia, lies the important work of continuing to
build a nation - a unified, reconciled nation with an
accountable Government committed to addressing
corruption Within its ranks; a nation where all citizens
share the benefits of Liberia's abundant natural and
human resources; and a nation fully responsible for
its own destiny, with institutions and a Government
providing basic guarantees of security, protection and
services to all its citizens.

Although UNMIL has completed its mandate, and
will soon complete its liquidation, the United Nations
remains in the country to support the people and the
Government of Liberia.

(spoke in Spanish)

I thank the Government of Peru for supporting
important themes for the maintenance of peace as part
of its duties as President of the Security Council this
month. The legacy of UNMIL demonstrates the value
of the maintenance of multidimensional peace and the
capacity of the United Nations to support a country
from conflict to peace. Working with the Government
of Liberia and its people, UNMIL was able to prevent
the recurrence of armed conflict through post-conflict
peacebuilding and progress towards lasting peace and
sustainable development.

(spoke in English)

I wish to conclude by expressing our appreciation for
the essential role played by the Council in restoring and
consolidating peace to Liberia, including through the
deployment of UNMIL; appreciation for the personnel
of UNMIL - civilian and uniformed, women and
men - who served with professionalism, dedication
and a deep commitment to achieving its mandate; and
appreciation for the countries that contributed troops
and police to UNMIL. I remember with appreciation
the service and sacrifice of the 202 United Nations
peacekeepers who lost their lives in pursuit of peace
in Liberia. I would like to express our appreciation for
the United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
whose role in Liberia has been and will remain
essential, and for the partners - bilateral, regional
and international - whose contributions helped the
United Nations to conclude the peacekeeping chapter in
Liberia, and whose continued support for Liberia will
help to cement our positive legacy.

(spoke in Russian)

I also Wish to express our appreciation for UNMIL's
leadership. I would like to take a moment to recognize
the presence in the Chamber of Mr. Farid Zarif, the
last UNMIL Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. His focus on preventive diplomacy was
key in steering the mission through its final but still
critically important phase of mandate implementation.
The presence today of Mr. Zarif and other former
UNMIL personnel in their capacity as private citizens
is a testament to the significance of our collective
achievement that this session serves to underscore.

(spoke in English)

Lastly, I wish to convey our profound appreciation
and admiration for the people of Liberia, whose
resilience was a decisive factor in turning the page
on crisis and conflict, and whose determination will
ensure that the hard-won peace is sustained. The United
Nations will continue to accompany the people and the
Government of Liberia in building a nation that remains
at peace with itself and with its neighbours, free from
the scourge of war, with the hard-won stability enduring
for all of Liberia's future generations.

