Mr. Mushota (Zambia): On behalf of my delegation
and of other delegations from the southern African region,
let me extend to you, Sir, our congratulations on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of February. It is particularly gratifying to see
you, a son of southern Africa, presiding over the
Council's deliberations on Angola. We wish you well.

My delegation is most grateful to you, Sir, and to
the other members of the Council for giving me the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting, which
has been convened to consider the establishment of a
third United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III).
Since I am addressing this body following the
historic signing on 20 November 1994 of the Lusaka
Protocol on Angola, allow me to convey my
Government's gratitude to the Secretary-General, to the
Security Council and to the United Nations as a whole for
all the efforts that culminated in the signing of the
Angolan peace agreement.

In the same vein, permit me to congratulate
Maitre Alioune Blondin Beye, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Angola, who presided over the
Lusaka talks with patience, total commitment and
steadfastness. Our commendations go also to the troika of
official observers from Portugal, the Russian Federation
and the United States of America for their tireless efforts
in ensuring that the Lusaka talks succeeded.

 

Above all, I wish to pay a deserved tribute to the
Government of the Republic of Angola and to UNITA for
the mature and statesmanlike manner in which they
conducted themselves during the Lusaka talks and for their
determination to reach a peace agreement.

The Lusaka Protocol was a product of painstaking
efforts by the principal parties to the Angolan conflict and
by a concerned international community. Indeed, it testifies
to the total commitment of the United Nations in general
and the Security Council in particular to the peace process
in Angola.

Since the signing of the Lusaka Protocol, there have
been some positive developments, particularly in the
military and political areas. For example, the meetings of
Chiefs of Staff - on 10 January 1995 at the village of
Chipipa in Huambo Province and on 2 and 3 February 1995
in Waku-Kungo - were an important development towards
the implementation of the peace agreement.

In the humanitarian area too there has been
appreciable improvement. We note with appreciation the
launching by the United Nations of a $213-million inter-
agency appeal fund for Angola to cover humanitarian
activities for 1995.

Equally important has been the series of meetings of
the Joint Commission. The arrival in December last year of
a significant number of the expected 500 observers was a
welcome move on the part of the United Nations, the more
so as it took place within one month of the signing of the
Lusaka Protocol.

The people of Angola, like all the rest of us in the
southern African subregion, are acutely aware that the onus
of establishing lasting peace in that country rests first and
foremost upon the people of Angola themselves, for peace
cannot be imposed from outside Angola. Nevertheless, the
international community has a responsibility to assist the
people of Angola in achieving that lasting peace. As is well
known, peace is indivisible and a key to development
efforts. It is for this reason that the United Nations has
invested heavily in the peace process in that country, for
which those of us from that part of the world are most
grateful to the world body. The Lusaka Protocol is living
testimony to the commitment of the international
community.

In a number of its resolutions, the Security Council is
on record as having committed itself to the implementation
of the peace agreement on Angola. The time has come
therefore to establish UNAVEM. III in order to give effect
to that commitment by this body. Indeed, the credibility
of the United Nations and, in particular, that of the
Security Council is at stake. Therefore, nothing should
therefore be allowed to stand in the way of or, indeed,
frustrate the immediate implementation of the agreement,
as stipulated in the Lusaka Protocol.

The Angolan situation should not be treated any
differently from other peace-keeping operations in which
the United Nations has been involved. Yes, peace is an
expensive commodity to achieve or maintain. In View of
its crucial importance, though, it is my delegation's
contention that no price is too high to pay for peace. My
Government is convinced that the United Nations will live
up to its expectations in this regard.

Angola is a country that is potentially rich in natural
resources. Unfortunately, the long, fratricidal war has
taken a heavy toll on its ability to exploit those resources
to the full. The country will come out of its quagmire
only if peace is guaranteed.

An era of peace and tranquillity has dawned in
southern Africa. A new South Africa has been born, to
the joy and jubilation of all the people of the subregion.
Mozambique has emerged from a costly civil war into
full-fledged democracy. Let me take this opportunity to
congratulate the people of Mozambique, under the able
leadership of His Excellency President Chissano, for their
momentous achievement. There cannot, therefore, be any
credible reason why Angola should be an exception to
this new era of peace and stability in our subregion. The
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol is in our view
critical in that it will have the effect of healing a wound
in our subregion that would otherwise fester and promote
reconciliation amongst the people of Angola.

Southern Africa is poised for a period of sustained
development with the establishment of peace in Angola.
Peace for Angola means peace for all of us in the
subregion and, indeed, the African continent as a whole.

It is for this reason that we are looking forward to
assistance from the international community in general
and the Security Council in particular for the people of
Angola in regaining lasting peace through the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol on Angola without
any equivocation or procrastination. My Government is
confident that the Council will rise to the occasion by
delivering the goods to the Angolan people and

 

humankind as a whole through the immediate deployment
of peace-keeping forces in Angola.

