The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representatives of Algeria, Argentina, Australia,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Botswana, Brazil,
Canada, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Germany,
Guatemala, India, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Mexico, Morocco,
the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Panama, Peru, the Philippines, Poland, the Republic of
Korea, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Turkey and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Emmanuel
Roux, Special Representative of INTERPOL to the
United Nations; Mr. Gregory Koblentz, Associate
Professor and Director of the Biodefence Graduate
Programme of George Mason University; and
Mr. Kim Won-500, Under-Secretary-General and High
Representative for Disarmament Affairs.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following to
participate in this meeting: His Excellency Mr. Ioannis
Vrailas, Charge d'affaires ad interim of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations; His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Fathalla, Permanent Observer
for the League of Arab States to the United Nations;
and His Excellency Mr. Gonzalo Koncke, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of American States to the
United Nations.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/7l2, which contains the text of
a letter dated 15 August 2016 from the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting a
concept note on the item under consideration.

I wish to warmly the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki Moon, and give him the floor.

