Ms. Simonyan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the Chinese presidency
for convening today's open debate and providing the
concept paper (S/2018/982, annex).

The theme of today's meeting is indeed central
to addressing the global problems and challenges
that require multilateral action. Restoring humanity,
sustaining peace and respecting human dignity
are important priorities that can be achieved only
through concerted efforts and a coordinated response.
Systematic violations of human rights, denials of past
crimes and impunity, the use of force or economic
coercion and a lack of international protection are
among the main factors fuelling risks and instability.
Tendencies to radicalism and exclusion, as well as a rise
in intolerance and hate speech, have been increasingly
permeating the international agenda, distorting the
global discourse and fostering political and social
divides. The conspicuous decline in the international
commitment to multilateralism and respect for human
rights is particularly troubling at a time when we need
more international cooperation and greater capacities
for them.

The Secretary-General's recent report on the work
of the Organization (A/73/1) demonstrated the need
for a stronger commitment to multilateralism as an
effective instrument for addressing the multitude of
global challenges and disturbing realities facing us.
The report is a stark reminder that those challenges
cannot be addressed by individual States in isolation.
Multilateralism is not only an end in itself but is also
essential to achieving our shared objectives of peace
and prosperity. Collectively, we should do more to
help mitigate crisis situations where basic human
rights, including human beings' right to life, are being
increasingly challenged. That requires reinforcing our
emphasis on the capacity of multilateral institutions to
deliver adequate responses.

We support the Secretary-General's efforts to
prioritize prevention in the ongoing reform of the United
Nations system. Armenia is obliged and determined
to contribute to that concept, with a focus on early
action in order to prevent grave violations. Our track
record is well known. The United Nations resolutions
that Armenia has introduced are aimed at formulating
strategies for the prevention of genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The adoption of General
Assembly resolution 69/323, designating 9 December
as the International Day of Commemoration and
Dignity of the Victims of the Crime of Genocide
and of the Prevention of This Crime, was a powerful
manifestation of responsible multilateralism with a
substantive outcome achieved by consensus. This year
we are marking the seventieth anniversaries of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, in yet another milestone reaffirming
our collective determination to fight impunity and
prevent any recurrence of human suffering.

Upholding human rights remains a global
imperative that is as relevant as ever. Armenia has
presented its candidacy to the Human Rights Council
in order to recommit to resolute multilateral efforts
in the promotion of human rights and dignity. The
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms
has been at the centre of the fundamental democratic
transformation in Armenia manifested in our peaceful
velvet revolution. The domestic changes that took place
in Armenia in May demonstrated our commitment
to decisively embracing policies aimed at promoting
inclusion, equal rights and opportunities, development
and peace at the national, regional and international
levels.

In addressing multilateralism's current challenges,
it is important to highlight the centrality of strong
collaboration with regional settings, platforms and
formats and of working to avoid any duplication of
effort. Well-established and internationally mandated
formats within regional organizations have the potential
and capacity to address complex challenges, especially
in situations of conflict. The Charter of the United
Nations prescribes the effective utilization of regional
arrangements as a pathway to the peaceful settlement
of disputes. Armenia welcomes the unwavering and
continued support of the United Nations system and
the Secretary-General for the mediation efforts aimed
at negotiating a peaceful settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict, led by the Minsk Group of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
co-chaired by France, the Russian Federation and the
United States. The ability ofthe international community
to remain consistent in supporting agreements reached
within the mandated formats and helping reinforce a
mediated solution is critically important to upholding
the vision and practice of responsible multilateralism
and shared peace.

Multilateral institutions offer platforms where
member States, regional organizations and civil
society can discuss and agree or disagree on solutions
to global problems that no nation acting alone can
resolve. Multilateralism provides important avenues for
conducting discussions and identifying and broadening
areas of potential agreement. Working together is not
optional. It is the only way forward, and patient yet
resolute engagement in addressing mutual concerns
and disagreements therefore remains an important
objective to which we are fully committed.

