Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, Equatorial Guinea would
like to join other speakers in emphatically condemning
the criminal attacks carried out in Burkina Faso, which
claimed the lives of 29 innocent people. We express our
sympathy and support to the people of Burkina Faso.

We would like to commend Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix,
Under-Secretary-General for Peace Operations, for
his broad and insightful briefing, which once again
shed light on details of current developments within
peacekeeping operations, following the changes
introduced by the Secretary-General to improve
their integrity, structural innovations, equipment and
human capabilities in order to quickly, efficiently and
effectively address new challenges.

We also congratulate the presidency of the Russian
Federation for having included this important item on the
agenda, which is an opportunity for all of us to discuss
and analyse the current development of peacekeeping
operations after the Secretary-General's reforms.

As we well know, peacekeeping operations are one
of the Organization's most effective tools for ensuring,
preserving and consolidating peace in the world. They
often represent the last and only hope for millions of
people who face daily threats to their security and basic
rights. To that end, the need for peacekeeping troops and
police to have the best possible training and equipment
and the highest standards of personal conduct becomes
evident in the light of that lofty responsibility. That is
particularly true today, when peacekeeping missions
have to face asymmetric attacks from armed groups and
terrorists. That is why my Government considers this
meeting to be very timely and important in monitoring
the progress of peacekeeping operations and identifying
the difficulties in ensuring that peacekeeping operations
live up to their ideals and meet the needs of our time.

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative strengthens
peacekeeping, thanks to the promotion of collective
action by peacekeeping agents, including all Member
States, the Security Council, the General Assembly,
financial contributors, troop- and police-contributing
countries, recipient countries, intergovernmental,
regional and subregional organizations, civil society
and the Secretary-General.

In that context, Equatorial Guinea appreciates all
the changes and actions undertaken by the Secretary-
General, as well as the achievements made in improving
the balance ofthe capacities ofpeacekeeping operations.
They are seen as a successful transformation, with
considerable progress in reaching political solutions
to conflicts and in increasing the political impact
of peacekeeping.

We are aware that the implementation of all the
actions proposed by the Secretary-General's reforms
is not an easy task. There are many difficulties at all
levels, and we wish to encourage him to continue with
this arduous task.

We urge the other members to act in line with
their sense of responsibility in supporting the
improvement of partnerships for peacekeeping. They
should do so specifically with the African Union so as
to strengthen and implement its policies, procedures
and capacities, while improving the predictability,
sustainability and flexibility of funding for African
Union-led peacekeeping operations that are authorized
by and under the authority of the Security Council in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations.

In closing, Equatorial Guinea is steadfast in
its commitment to continue supporting all peace
initiatives, including in prevention, sustaining peace
and peacebuilding and peacekeeping at all levels:
bilateral, multilateral, subregional, regional and
within the United Nations, in accordance with its
founding Charter. At the same time, we wish to pay
a well-deserved tribute to the brave men and women
who every day work hard in peacekeeping missions to
ensure international peace and security, protecting and
saving the lives of others.

