Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): At the outset, I
wish to congratulate Germany and you, Mr. President,
upon your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of July. I also wish to express
my appreciation to you, Sir, and the other members of
the Council for this opportunity to address the Council
under the agenda item on the maintenance of
international peace and security and the impact of
climate change.

The Philippines aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Egypt,
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and by the
Permanent Representative of Argentina, on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.

It is beyond dispute that climate change has
adversely affected and continues to impact our
environment and our lives. It not only alters the

 

harmony of nature but destroys its works. We are now
experiencing its harmful effects and consequences. We
fear that this is just a prelude to a much greater and
irreversible catastrophe.

The Philippines, like many developing island
States, is highly vulnerable to the adverse impact of
climate change. The increasing frequency and severity
of floods, droughts and typhoons are already stretching
to the limit our Government's capacity and resources to
aid the victims of natural calamities.

Global warming has also affected the yield of
staple crops, such as rice and corn. Even marine
resources have felt the scourge of this phenomenon.
The fish kill in some provinces in the Philippines
continues to mount, endangering the livelihood of
thousands of fisherfolk. Indeed, the slew of
environmental devastation and economic loss brought
about by climate change shows no sign of alleviating.

Sea-level rise is another threat to the integrity of
the Philippine archipelago. We therefore share the
grave concern of small island developing States about
the short- and long-term consequences of Climate
change and the havoc it will bring if nothing is done to
mitigate these pernicious consequences.

My delegation believes that addressing the issue
of climate change falls primarily within the
competence of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), but also
tangentially within those of the General Assembly and
other forums such as the Rio+20 Conference, to be
held next year. The Security Council may of course
play a role on this issue, in the sense that armed
conflicts could potentially break out due to competition
for food and scarce resources, not to mention the
disappearance of island States as the ocean slowly
swallows them. This crisis is not just hypothetical; it is
real, and a certain recipe for chaos and instability 4 a
real threat to peace and security. Yet no discussion
within the Security Council on climate change can be
held without acknowledging the state of play in other
forums, especially within the UNFCCC process.

The principles and discussions regarding the
issue of climate change must be interrelated and
complementary. Before we reach the ultimate crisis
level when nation States drown, all efforts to prevent
this from happening through adaptation and mitigation
must be exhausted. Part of this appreciation should also
consider commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol

 

and the need to negotiate a second commitment period,
mutually agreed to by all stakeholders.

It is ironic that small islands and developing
States, particularly those in tropical areas like the
Philippines, are the least responsible for this global
problem and yet they face and bear the most adverse
consequences. Climate change, in particular global
warming, will continue unless significant gains are
achieved in the campaign to immediately reduce
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. The predicament
of these countries is compounded by their inability to
access resources to enable them to adapt to climate
change.

We all know the problem very well, and we are
all part of the solution. While of course this is
accepted, some members here are more responsible
than others in addressing the root causes of the
problem. Scientific studies and findings provide the
bases for and the courses of action that we must all
take. We should not wait for a major catastrophic event
to happen. We cannot afford to be lax and indifferent.
The future of our children and of generations to come
is at stake. All of us must therefore be directly involved
in the fulfilment of our intergenerational obligation and
responsibility to protect the environment and save the
planet from anthropogenic shortcomings that could
lead us all to problems of international peace and
security.

