Mr. Bishnoi (India): At the outset let me thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA).

We thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jan Kubis, and Ambassador
Tanin for their briefings. We would also like to thank
the Secretary-General for his quarterly report on the
situation in Afghanistan (S/2014/420).

I would like to begin by paying tribute to the people
of Afghanistan, who have endured endless violence but
emerged triumphant every time. The conduct of the
first and second rounds of the presidential elections,
despite the threat of terrorist violence and intimidation
of elders of the community, is a testimony to the great
courage and democratic conviction of all the people of
Afghanistan, regardless of their age or ethnicity.

There is no better testament than these recent
elections to the fact that Afghanistan belongs to all
Afghans, not to any one group or ethnicity. There
is a fundamental understanding among the Afghan
leadership that while it may take a simple arithmetical
majority to win an election, it takes national consensus
and inclusiveness to build a strong democratic and
prosperous country. We congratulate President Karzai
on his leadership and statesmanship in ensuring the
accomplishment of this first political transition. His is
a special political legacy that will always be recognized
by the people of Afghanistan and the region.

We also congratulate all the presidential candidates
who participated in both the first and second rounds,
under extremely difficult security conditions. Their
act of participation in this democratic process and
rallying voters in large numbers, despite the trying
circumstances, may have done more for democracy
in Afghanistan than any other measure. The two
candidates who fought the second round also have the
onerous responsibility, along with the representatives of
other Afghan institutions, of ensuring that the process
is completed. The political transition that will take
place on 2 August will mark a significant milestone in
Afghanistan's history, and we will never forget the great
sacrifice and suffering the brave people of Afghanistan
have undergone to reach it.

The attack of 23 May on the Indian Consulate in
Herat was a grim reminder that terrorism, not ethnicity
or tribal differences, is the greatest threat to peace and
stability in Afghanistan and to the Afghan people's
chances of attaining a path to self-sustained economic
growth and prosperity. The discussion in the Secretary-
General's report of the security situation in Afghanistan
is a sobering reminder of the extent of this danger. We
were distressed to learn that incidents in the south,
south-east, and east of the country alone accounted for
3,917 of the total number ofincidents in the short period
between 1 March and 31 May.

The Secretary-General notes that there has also
been an increase in incidents where a variety of
Al-Qaida affiliates, including the Pakistan-based
Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, Lashkar-e-Tayyiba and the
Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, have been regularly
making attacks on Afghan security forces alongside
actions by elements of the former Taliban regime. The
only way to defeat this scourge is through wholehearted
support from the international community aimed at
developing a prosperous, independent and sovereign
Afghanistan capable of defending itself.

Though the international community's focus
has been on the security and political transitions
in Afghanistan, we must not allow our attention to
be diverted from the equally important issue of the
country's economic development. In that context,
UNAMA and the United Nations agencies whose
activities it is supposed to coordinate have a significant
role to play. UNAMA has the important job of supporting
Afghan political institutions, but it must also work to
harness the unique capabilities of the United Nations
and its development agencies to expand humanitarian
assistance and development services to the most remote
villages in Afghanistan.

India's commitment to assisting the people and
Government of Afghanistan as they build a peaceful,
pluralistic, democratic and prosperous country will
remain unwavering. In conclusion, we would like to
once again congratulate the people of Afghanistan
on their enthusiastic participation in the elections.
We want to express our full support for the political,
social and economic transition taking place there.
Afghanistan is standing at the threshold of a historic
transition, and we would like to convey our best wishes
to its people. At this critical juncture, we would like
to assure Afghanistan of the steadfast support of the
Government and people of India.

