Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): Mr. President, I wish to
thank you for your invitation to participate in this
discussion and to express my gratitude to all other
members of the Council for their concurrence with that
invitation.

At the outset, I would like to read the statement
issued by the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine on
24 March 1999, since it expresses the position of my
Government with regard to the subject currently under
consideration by the Security Council in a most
comprehensive and condensed manner. That statement
reads as follows:
 

"It is with deep concern that Ukraine has
received the news about the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) air strikes against the targets on
the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

"Adhering to the norms and principles enshrined
in the United Nations Charter, Ukraine considers as
inadmissible the use of military force against a
sovereign State without the authorization of the United
Nations Security Council - the only body entrusted
to take such decisions in order to maintain
international peace and security.

"At the same time, Belgrade's refusal to sign the
agreements elaborated through the mediation of the
Contact Group resulted in the breakdown of the
negotiating process. Therefore, the provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998) and 1199
(1998) have not been fully implemented, and that led
to the use of force.

"Ukraine urges the parties to the conflict, as well
as the international community, to urgently exert
additional efforts in order to stop the further escalation
of the conflict. It is necessary to return as soon as
possible to a peaceful political settlement on the basis
of the preservation of the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
the granting of a wide autonomy to Kosovo.

"Ukraine reaffirms its readiness to contribute to
the efforts aimed at restoring peace and ensuring
stability and respect for human rights, including the
rights of national minorities, on the territory of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia."

That was the statement of the Ministry for Foreign
Affairs of Ukraine of 24 March. Even though it was issued
as far back as two days ago, all of its provisions remain
topical with regard to the current crisis in the centre of
Europe. My country has good grounds to be seriously
concerned about this crisis, because it is fraught with the
danger of unpredictable consequences. We are ready to do
everything possible in order to avert such consequences.

That is why Ukraine has already become actively
involved in the efforts to stop the crisis and to achieve a
peaceful solution of the Kosovo problem. I would like to
inform this body, which we still believe bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security, about the current visit to Belgrade by the Foreign
Minister of Ukraine, Mr. Tarasyuk, which is under way as
we speak. This peacemaking mission, undertaken by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine, is further proof of the
sincere aspiration of my country to contribute
constructively to the cause of finding a solution to the
conflict and to the restoration of peace and stability in the
entire Balkan region.

In the course of negotiations with the leadership of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the Ukrainian
Foreign Minister will put forward a number of concrete
proposals which could lead to the suspension of NATO
air strikes against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the
resumption of the negotiating process between the parties
to the conflict in Kosovo, the return of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe Verification
Mission, the settlement of the refugee problem, the
preservation of the territorial integrity of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the granting of wide
autonomy to Kosovo.

One of the specific proposals to be made by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine is to reconsider the question
of the guarantees to secure the political settlement in
Kosovo through the deployment there of a multinational
peacekeeping force with a composition acceptable to all
parties. As soon as I receive information about the results
of negotiations in Belgrade, I will immediately make
them known to the members of the Security Council.

In the meantime, I would like to emphasize that the
sine qua non of any peaceful solution must be full
implementation by both the authorities of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the leaders of the Kosovo
Albanian community of all the relevant provisions of
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998)
and 1203 (1998), first of all with regard to the
maintenance of an effective ceasefire and withdrawal of
Serbian security forces involved in the repressive actions
against the population in Kosovo.

I do not want to comment on the results of the vote
that has just been taken. I just want to say, on a personal
note, that the discussion we have heard reminded me very
much of the grim times of the cold war. I sincerely
believe that it is not the wish of anyone in this room that
those grim times come back.

