Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
First of all I welcome the presence in the Council this
morning of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Nigeria
and the other individuals convoked to this meeting.
Equally, I would like to commend you, Madam, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of July and to praise
the initiative of convening this open debate on the
important theme of conflict prevention.

Is it necessary to reaffirm the importance of
preventive diplomacy in conflict resolution, especially
in Africa, where crises and their extent seriously
threaten international peace and security? We can point
to the lively deliberations and the numerous relevant
recommendations on the subject, in particular in the
Secretary-General's report, "An Agenda for Peace"
(S/24111), the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) and
reports of the Secretary-General on conflict prevention
and resolution in Africa, mediation and dispute
resolution.

All that underscores the importance and priority
that the United Nations, in particular the Security

Council, should attach, in coordination with regional
and subregional organizations, to activities for the
prevention and peaceful settlement of disputes. The
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations are compelled to pursue and strengthen
their prevention efforts, as they serve not only to
restrict the magnitude of crises, but above all
contribute to avoiding staggering expenditures in
peacekeeping operations, whose outcome remains
uncertain.

In this regard, we welcome the positive actions
by regional and subregional African organizations such
as the African Union (AU), the Economic Community
of West African States and the Southern African
Development Community in implementing their
internal conflict prevention mechanisms. But we must
find the best possible channel to establish a strategic
relationship among the United Nations and the such
organizations in order to ensure the success of conflict
prevention and resolution actions, all while drawing on
local capacities.

We believe that the best way to meet that goal
lies in strengthening the mediation and conflict
prevention capacities of regional and subregional
organizations, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter. Establishing relations that are more
strategic and share a common vision fits in the
framework not only of conflict prevention and
resolution but with peacekeeping and long-term
reconstruction activities. We believe that is crucial. In
this regard, the establishment of the African Union-
United Nations Joint Mediation Support Team is
encouraging.

I would like to take this opportunity to recall that
in its presidential statement of September 2008
(S/PRST/2008/36), issued following the high-level
meeting on mediation and settlement of disputes, the
Security Council underlined the importance of engaging
the potential and the existing capacities and capabilities
of regional and subregional organizations in mediation
efforts and welcomed the promotion of regional
approaches to the pacific settlement of disputes.

In particular, we encourage the United Nations to
continue to support the African Union's 10-year
capacity-building programme, in particular in the field
of mediation and conflict resolution, as well as in
electoral affairs. In the same vein, we welcome and
encourage the support provided by the Peacebuilding
Commission for prevention actions, which have
undoubtedly contributed to peacebuilding and to
preventing a resurgence of violence in post-conflict
countries or the emergence of new conflicts.

In the framework of optimizing diplomatic and
preventive channels, I wish touch on a few points that
we believe are of prime importance. They include
raising the awareness of and involving national actors,
in particular civil society, in the design and launching
of prevention activities, and using existing capacities
and resources at regional and subregional levels for
preventive actions, including with regard to negotiation,
mediation and good offices. Strategic relations need to
be strengthened and a common strategic vision
developed between the United Nations and the African
Union, chiefly between the United Nations Security
Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council, in order to better coordinate their actions in
the field of conflict prevention and resolution.

Partnerships between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations, in particular
the African Union, must be pursued and strengthened
in order to provide necessary support to the initiatives
and measures taken by regional and subregional
organizations in the field of conflict prevention and
resolution. That was recommended by the Security
Council's Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa following the
interactive seminar held in 2007 on the topic of "An
effective global conflict prevention strategy in Africa:
the role of the Security Council".

There is a need to sustain and coordinate the
beneficial actions of United Nations entities - such as
UNESCO, the Peacebuilding Commission, the United
Nations Development Programme and the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research
(UNITAR)-that play an active role in preventive
diplomacy. We must draw on the lessons learned from
strategic partnerships and the arrangements that the
United Nations has developed with certain institutions,
in particular the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund in the context of the Peacebuilding
Commission, to promote activities for conflict
prevention and resolution.

For its part, Burkina Faso will continue to
contribute, in particular in the context of ECOWAS and
the African Union, to the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, as we are convinced that peace and stability
are the bedrock for true sustainable development.

As I indicated earlier, activities for prevention
and peaceful settlement of disputes are a collective
responsibility and represent one of the pillars of the
collective security system. Thus the full range of those
involved, including national actors, subregional and
regional organizations and the United Nations, must
combine their efforts to optimize diplomatic and
preventive channels and, above all, to transition from a
culture of reaction to a culture of prevention of crisis.

Given the increased complexity of conflicts and
the growth of needs, a great deal is to be gained by
prioritizing prevention activities with peacekeeping
activities. Therefore we express the hope that the
United Nations, working together with subregional and
regional organizations, will maintain and strengthen
the diplomatic and preventive channels to preserve
peace and stability worldwide and particularly in
Africa.

