In organizing today's meeting, we proceeded from the assumption that ensuring stability, security and peace in the Persian Gulf region was an important and urgent task for the international community as a whole. The difficult situation in that area is having a destabilizing effect on international relations. We therefore believe that the Security Council, which is responsible for maintaining the international peace and security, should maintain its focus on this issue. Today we propose the possibility of trying together, without trying to settle accounts or resorting to accusations or pathetic rhetoric, to think "from scratch" to avoid fresh shocks in order to move the situation back from the brink. Everyone remembers the atmosphere earlier this year when many feared the potential outbreak of a large-scale war in the Gulf. We managed to avoid a worst- case scenario, but we see no grounds for complacency. The situation remains unstable. Dangerous and unpredictable scenarios can unfold at any time, especially considering the existence of differences and conflicts of a religious nature. We have no doubt that everyone wants the Gulf region to be peaceful and predictable. We continue to see that attempts at unilateral actions can lead only to an impasse. Blackmail and dictatorship, and the demonization of and accusations against only one party are wrong and dangerous. We must stop recriminations and suspicions and say no to sanctions, pressure, ultimatums and provocative actions, no matter which side they come from. We firmly believe that this can be done even amid today's continuing tensions. We need a creative philosophy. Collective confidence-building efforts based on respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of States, in strict accordance with international law and the Charter of the United Nations, must be the key to improving the situation in the Gulf region. The 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), aimed at resolving the issue of the Iranian nuclear programme, to which the Russian Federation remains fully committed, remains an important element in preventing the escalation of the situation in the Gulf region, as mentioned by the speaker before me. The JCPOA was a major political and diplomatic milestone that made it possible to avert the threat of an armed conflict and strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Like all responsible parties to the agreement, Russia remains fully committed to this agreement and is convinced that the positive results of the difficult but rewarding collegial efforts made must be preserved and defended. In that regard, the President of the Russian Federation, V.V. Putin, proposed an initiative to hold an online meeting of Heads of State, with the participation of the permanent members of the Security Council, as well as Germany and Iran. The goal is to outline steps aimed at averting any further escalation and establishing a reliable collective security system in the Persian Gulf. We thank those who have expressed support for that initiative. The Russian concept of collective security in the Persian Gulf area, which we put forward in the 1990s and updated in 2019, is aimed at creating a reliable structure for regional security. We advocate the implementation of a constructive, unifying agenda and the creation of mechanisms for a collective response to the numerous challenges and threats, with the participation of the coastal countries of the Persian Gulf and including Iran and its Arab neighbours. We also propose involving the five permanent members of the Security Council, the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation as well as other influential and interested parties in practical steps to implement those ideas. The path to the final goal will definitely be long and will not be easy, and the countries of the region must travel it themselves. Non-regional players must help them to enable them to start moving towards one another, gradually and patiently eliminating the historical layers of mutual grievances and contradictions. That requires ongoing, engaged discussions and delicate approaches. We are ready to provide all possible assistance and talk with all our partners. There is no doubt that the considerable mediation potential of the United Nations, including within the framework of the good-offices missions of the Secretary-General, could also be useful here. We would recall once again that in its resolution 598 (1987), the Security Council instructed the Secretary-General to work together with parties from the region on measures to strengthen security and stability there. It is important to take stock of what has been done and what remains to be done to fulfil that direct instruction. Our concept is not the ultimate truth but represents food for thought that we hope will be useful. A fundamental prerequisite for moving in the direction in which we all need to go is strict adherence to the principle of the indivisibility of security. That implies that the security problems of one country cannot be solved at the expense of or to the detriment of any other State. I propose that we consider today's meeting as an invitation to overcome the differences that have built up by opening a respectful dialogue based on taking into account the concerns of all parties without exception and based on international law. I am confident that by acting together, openly and impartially, pooling our political will and creative potential, we can help the Gulf States overcome this difficult historical period and create an effective regional security system, or, as a first step, to at least agree upon the basic principles.
