Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I wish to congratulate the delegation of Brazil
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I also thank Brazil for
organizing this important open debate on the
interlinkage between security and development.

Security and development are two sides of the
same coin. Conflicts, wars and security threats can
easily erase economic opportunities and prospects for
growth. Decades of economic achievement can quickly
vanish when insecurity and instability move in. At the
same time, development is the solid base of peace and
security. There is a common belief that if poverty is not
uprooted and economic prosperity provided, the world
will become susceptible to conflict and insecurity.
Sustainable economic development and peace are
therefore inextricably interlinked. It is disappointing to
note, however, that development per se has remained
aloof from the top priorities of the United Nations.

Most of the time, the relevant deliberations have
been tainted by rhetoric, hot-air promises on aid and
tough conditions for transfer of know-how and
technology. It is therefore unsurprising that 1 billion
people of the world still live with hunger and poverty
and that, consequently, the world is not a safer or more
secure place than it was in prior decades.

The root causes of many conflicts in recent
history have been nothing but extreme poverty,
exclusion and marginalization, foreign interventions
and military excursions and occupation. Unfortunately,
in addressing the maintenance of international peace
and security, the Council has in many instances failed
to take these causes into account. This is not because
the Council has been unaware of these grounds; rather,
the political considerations of some powerful members
have always been the main driving force in preventing
the Council from taking meaningful action to uproot
the causes of insecurity and thus pave the way for the
promotion of sustainable development and economic
prosperity.

Even these powerful members have not felt
obliged to respond to or be accountable to the greater
international community, as represented by the General
Assembly, for the impacts of their performance. The
saddening reality is that, due to the influence exercised
by these members, decisions made by the Council have
contributed to prolonging, if not exacerbating conflicts,
with severe impacts on the economic development and
well-being of the concerned populations and overall
global economic development and progress. Perhaps it
is time for those responsible for such situations to
recognize the need to improve accountability and
transparency in their conduct. Particularly, they should
bear the responsibility of their actions and positions on
development at both the national and international
levels. Their currently unchecked rights should be
commensurate with balanced responsibilities.
As a matter of fact, resort by the Council to the
provisions of Chapter VII, in particular the imposition
of economic sanctions in the interests of the economic
and political purposes of some big Powers, has always
hindered economic opportunities and the basic human
rights of ordinary people in the affected countries.
There is ample evidence that sanctions first and
foremost put the economic growth and prosperity of
people in peril, as well as their rights to food,
medication, clean water, education, decent job and
shelter. Briefly, their right to development is being
targeted unjustifiably by the wholly antagonistic will of
the hegemonic Powers, as reflected in some of the
Council's resolutions. Indeed, the main feature of
sanctions turns out to be a tool to impose the
hegemonic intentions of some big Powers on other
nations and populations, under the pretext of spurring
international peace and security. Therefore, economic
sanctions, whosoever imposes them and under any
pretext or disguise whatsoever, remain illegitimate,
futile and misguidedly punitive.

The Council's adoption of a new and constructive
approach to the issue of development will very much
depend on a reform of its structure and modus operandi
in order to balance to the rights and responsibilities of
its permanent members.

I would like to add in conclusion that there are, of
course, valuable lessons that need to be learned from
the causes of conflict in order to promote durable peace
and sustainable development. However, there is no
straightjacket formula. The causes of conflict and
underdevelopment in the Middle East, for instance,
may not necessarily share features with those in Africa.
Thus, the measures to be taken to prevent conflict and
advance on the road to development should accord
with the peculiarities and specificities of each and
every situation.

