Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
As this is our first statement since we became a
non-permanent member of the Security Council, we
would like to thank the presidency of Kazakhstan for
its work in January.

As this is the fifth time that we return to the
Security Council, I would like to begin by remembering
Ambassador Javier Perez de Cuellar, who represented
Peru in this organ in 1973 and 1974. At that time, he
pointed out that the Peruvian delegation would utilize its
experience at the United Nations and fulfil its mandate
by carefully and intensely considering the problems
facing the Organization with a view to contributing
thoughtfully and dispassionately to resolving them. He
said that he intended to follow in the spirit and the letter
of the Charter of the United Nations. Peru reaffirms
Ambassador De Cuellar's remarks.

Peru welcomes the briefing by Assistant Secretary-
General Taye-Brook Zerihoun and thanks him for the
information he provided on the situation in the Islamic
Republic of Iran. In that connection, we regret the loss
of human life, we note that the freedom of expression
and association are inalienable rights, and we stress
that the Iranian authorities have the responsibility to
protect all people and guarantee the peaceful exercise
of their fundamental rights and freedoms. In the context
of international peace and security, we wish to take this
opportunity to share three points.

First, we believe that the Security Council, the
organ with primary responsibility in the maintenance
of international peace and security, should always
have the ability to contribute to conflict prevention, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
situation in Iran, a country of particular importance for
Middle East stability, could certainly escalate. Similar
situations in recent times in other countries in the
region have had serious consequences.

Secondly, Peru is convinced that in order to
be credible, coherent and effective, the Council's
action should reflect the unanimous commitment
of its members, based on a rigorous, objective and
dispassionate analysis of the facts. The Council showed
that unity and rigour when it addressed the Iranian
nuclear issue. Its consistent action, including the
imposition of sanctions, was key to reaching the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. My country believes
that the implementation of that agreement, as endorsed
and monitored by the Council, is today essential to the
preservation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime.
That is reflected in its inclusion as a specific item on
the agenda. Peru prioritizes the preservation of the
non-proliferation regime and highlights the need for
the Council to remain united when considering issues
relating to Iran. In that regard, we note the importance
of strengthening multilateralism, cooperation and
international law in order to address the serious
challenges faced by the international community.

Thirdly, we note that the situation in Iran also
reflects the need to tackle the root causes of long-
standing regional conflicts, which demonstrate the
link between international peace and security and
human rights and development. That would require,
among other things, full respect for international law
and for fundamental rights and freedoms, as well
as the promotion of confidence-building measures,
dialogue and negotiation. It would also require the
participation of women and young people in relevant
national processes, disarmament and investment in
sustainable development, the prevention of natural
disasters, urgent attention to humanitarian crises, and,
of course, political support and the cooperation of the
international community.

