Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
Humanitarian agencies cannot get into Aleppo. They
are encountering enormous difficulties in getting into
many parts of Syria and, quite simply, cannot do their
work. That is the clear conclusion that I have drawn
today from the briefings by Special Envoy Staffan de
Mistura, Under-Secretary-General Stephen O'Brien
and Mr. Geert Cappelaere. That is why I would also
like to thank the United Kingdom and France for
calling for today's urgent meeting. Unfortunately, what
we have to note in the meeting is a double failure for
the Security Council - first, because it has not been
able to bring peace and security to Syria, and, secondly,
because it has shown itself to be incapable of enforcing
international humanitarian law.

The figures are enlightening. The food ran out on
14 November, and we now have 100,000 children in a
situation that is beyond desperate. And, simply, that is
Syria's future, because it will have to be rebuilt, and it
is those children of today who will represent the Syria
of tomorrow. All of us, especially the members of the
Council, know that Spain, along with New Zealand and
Egypt, has been working on the humanitarian issue
in Syria, a job for which we take full responsibility
and that we are trying to carry out in complete
transparency. What we are working on is a plan for
achieving a rapprochement of Council members'
positions on the issue. It is not a review, it is an exercise
in rapprochement. We hope that it will still be possible
to reach an agreement.

I would like to conclude by recalling something
that might seem obvious but that I believe is
fundamental * the total validity of the basic elements
of resolution 2254 (2015) and resolution 2268 (2016),
on Syria. Once again, these are still valid: access for
humanitarian aid, the cessation of hostilities, the
separation of opposition groups from terrorists and
a renewal of the political dialogue. They are the only
viable alternatives for ending the war in Syria.

