Mr. Prendergast: In recent years, Security Council
sanctions imposed under Article 41 of the United Nations
Charter have become a primary tool of peace
enforcement. In a small number of cases, comprehensive
sanctions have involved far-reaching trade and other
economic measures. In others, sanctions have taken the
form of arms and/or air embargoes, targeted travel bans
or financial sanctions. However, difficulties in the
implementation of sanctions regimes, especially those
including economic sanctions, have raised doubts as to
their effectiveness. Apart from the fact that measures are
not always applied with the necessary determination, their
often negative effects on civilian populations and on
neighbouring and other affected third States, have made
it imperative to consider improvements in their design.
The Secretary-General has encouraged steps to make
sanctions a less blunt and more effective instrument and
has supported efforts to design better targeted measures.

If properly targeted, Security Council sanctions have
the potential to play a major role in inducing compliance
with resolutions of the Council. They may also be
considered an instrument of prevention in those cases
where they constitute a barrier to the spread of conflicts.
They can restrict the inflow of weaponry and ammunition,
as well as access to the hard currency necessary to fund
continued fighting, and they can restrain the mobility of
targeted individuals and decision-making elites.

Seeking to make its own contribution to the concept
of "smart" sanctions, the Secretariat has undertaken a
review of lessons to be learned from recent sanctions
regimes. This review confirms the need to take steps to

 

protect, in humanitarian terms, the most vulnerable
segments of populations from the effects of sanctions, while
at the same time sharpening the targeting of sanctions so as
to enhance their impact.

The review also illustrates that the effectiveness of
sanctions regimes can be improved if they are endowed
with a credible monitoring arm, possibly in cooperation
with regional or subregional organizations. Moreover, there
is a need for the Secretariat to be equipped with the
necessary resources and specialized expertise if it is to
administer the sanctions regimes effectively. The Security
Council and its sanctions committees should be in a
position to have available to them, when required, a
comprehensive impact assessment of any given sanctions
regime. This would make it possible to undertake necessary
adjustments to the measures imposed in order to maximize
their political impact and to minimize their collateral
effects.

As regards the need to minimize the negative effects
of sanctions, the Council may wish to consider including
provision for humanitarian exemptions in relevant
resolutions. The establishment of an appropriate mechanism
able to provide the Council with periodic evaluations of the
effectiveness of sanctions as well as their humanitarian,
socio-economic and political impact may also be considered
useful. The issue of the impact of sanctions on third States
should be looked at in keeping with Article 50 of the
Charter.

The Secretariat has provided substantive support to
efforts by Member States to move in the direction of
targeted or so-called "smart" santions. In addition to a
range of other activities, it cooperated with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the
European Union in convening the Copenhagen Round
Table, which took stock of lessons learned from the now-
terminated sanctions regime in the case of the former
Yugoslavia. The report of the Round Table, including its
recommendations, was made available to members of the
Security Council in document S/ 1996/776.

A number of conclusions and recommendations can be
drawn from the lessons learned by the Secretariat.

First, the Security Council could facilitate the
administration and implementation of sanctions regimes by
developing greater clarity and uniformity of language and
technical terminology in its resolutions. When financial
sanctions are imposed, for example, the relevant resolutions
could employ technical terms that conform to standard
definitions in the global financial sector. Specific
suggestions for such terms were developed as part of the
Interlaken process organized by the Swiss Government in
cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat.
Greater specificity of terms is equally important with
regard to arms embargoes. To prevent loopholes that can
be exploited by arms traffickers, it would be helpful if
Security Council resolutions could specifically prohibit
particular types of military equipment, military assistance
programmes and military contract services. A registry of
dual use technical products and services should be
published for each arms embargo case. The registry could
be derived from existing databases that have been
developed as part of the Wassenaar Arrangement
controlling proliferation of conventional arms.

Along with greater precision in technical terms, it
would be helpful if Security Council resolutions could
also specify criteria for the lifting or suspension of
sanctions. By clearly spelling out in all cases the steps
required for compliance, the Council would improve the
prospects for inducing compliance and encouraging
negotiations for the settlement of a dispute.

May I also say that whenever the Security Council
imposes sanctions and establishes new sanctions
committees, it would be helpful if the necessary resources
should be made available. Forgive me for stressing this
point, but without the necessary resources it will not be
possible to implement and administer such regimes
effectively. Budgetary allocations should include provision
for securing the technical expertise necessary to conduct
investigations or assessment missions and to support the
monitoring and enforcement efforts of regional and
sub-regional organizations.

Greater transparency and improved interaction with
national authorities could further enhance the work of the
sanctions committees. The committees have developed
cooperative monitoring and enforcement arrangements
with relevant regional organizations, such as the OSCE,
the European Union and the Economic Committee of
West African States (ECOWAS). Such arrangements
should be considered with other bodies, when appropriate,
with a view to improving the effectiveness of sanctions.

Developing more effective Security Council
sanctions policies does require specialized staff to support
the sanctions committees. This may seem a statement of
the obvious. But I would nevertheless like to place on
record that greater technical expertise and enhanced

 

analytical capacity would enable the Secretariat to manage
a credible monitoring system, in cooperation with Member
States and regional organizations, and periodically to assess
the impact of the sanctions measures.
In our View, special attention should, be given to
better and more reliable data collection and specific forms
of expertise on international finance, arms transfers and
commodities such as oil or diamonds. The investigation of
sanctions compliance could be aided by the creation of
permanent databases and registries on past sanctions
Violations. It could also be facilitated by direct relations
with international financial institutions and regional banking
agencies, competent regional inter-governmental and
non-governmental organizations and also research centres.

May I now turn to the role of Member States. It is
important to recall that national authorities bear the
responsibility for enforcing sanctions measures imposed by
the Security Council. However, Member States do often
require advice and assistance in carrying out this
responsibility. With the necessary resources, such advice
and assistance could be provided, upon request, by the
United Nations and by competent regional organizations.
The Security Council would encourage State compliance by
devoting greater attention to mitigating the negative effects
of sanctions on civilian populations and third States.
Providing support and inducements for neighbouring States
would greatly enhance the potential effectiveness of
sanctions.

The Security Council may also wish to consider taking
steps to assist Member States, upon request, in developing
greater legal authority and administrative capacity for
implementing sanctions. Model language that could enable
interested Member States to make the necessary
adjustments in their domestic laws and regulations to permit
compliance with Security Council sanctions was developed
as part of the Interlaken process.

The need for greater capacity within States is
especially acute with regard to the enforcement of Security
Council arms embargoes. The Secretary-General's reports
of 1998 and 1999 on the situation in Africa, as well as
Security Council resolution 1196 (1998), urged Member
States to enact legislation making violations of United
Nations arms embargoes a criminal offence. This would be
an essential tool for rendering arms embargoes effective.

That the Security Council has recently taken steps to
address some of the needs of civilian populations in
targeted countries is to be welcomed. The Council is now
more inclined towards adopting "smart" sanctions which
impose coercive measures on specific decision-making
groups while avoiding direct impact on the vulnerable.
There is also a widespread recognition of the need to
minimize economic and social problems for third States,
especially neighbouring States and those States that have
significant trade relations with the target.
In our View it is essential that the United Nations
system should develop a coordinated and integrated
approach designed to minimize unintended consequences
on civilian populations and third States. To this end, I
would recommend that the Council consider authorizing
the Secretariat to dispatch assessment missions to the
targeted States and neighbouring countries either before
sanctions are imposed or shortly thereafter. The aim
would be to assess the likely unintended consequences of
the sanctions and to propose measures that the Council
and the United Nations system could take to minimize
them. Suggestions for humanitarian exemptions and
assistance programmes should be included in such
assessment reports.

The Security Council may also wish to consider
including in its resolutions provisions to address the
impact of sanctions on non-targeted States and mitigate
Article 50 concerns. Practical assistance arising from
Article 50 could be addressed through special
arrangements with individual neighbouring States and
through donors' conferences to identify possible forms of
financial assistance and support for non-targeted States.

In conclusion, may I say that the administration and
effective implementation of sanctions regimes require the
commitment of adequate resources. The resources to be
made available should be weighed against the cost either
of using military force or of doing nothing in the face of
aggression and other threats to international peace and
security. Security Council sanctions can be effective, but
they will work only if the United Nations and its Member
States are prepared to shoulder additional responsibilities
and to develop the necessary capacity to ensure their
monitoring and enforcement. Let me, in this context,
recall the Secretary-General's appeal to the Millennium
Summit, contained in the concluding chapter of his report
for the Millennium Assembly, for us to resolve to adopt
measures

"to make economic sanctions adopted by the
Security Council less harsh on innocent populations
and more effective in penalizing delinquent rulers."
(A/54/2000/para. 365)

 

The attention given to this issue, as others I have
touched on this afternoon, by Member States in recent years
presents us with an excellent opportunity to take up this
challenge and to ensure that all sanctions imposed by the
Security Council achieve their goals with a minimum of
unintended consequences.

