Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): At the outset,
Mr. President, let me thank you for organizing this
debate and Under-Secretary-General Sir John Holmes
for his important briefing, as well as for the constant
commitment of Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs in this area. Austria associates
itself with the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the Czech Republic on behalf of the
European Union, as well as with the statement made by
the representative of the Costa Rica on behalf of the
Human Security Network.

Over the past 10 years, the Council has developed
a comprehensive protection agenda, imposing clear
obligations on parties to conflict and providing a
toolbox for Security Council action. The issues
addressed include compliance by parties to a conflict
with their obligations under international humanitarian
law, unhindered access for humanitarian organizations
to people in need, accountability for serious violations
against civilians, and the protection of civilians
through peacekeeping missions. Austria is a fervent
supporter of that protection agenda, and we stand ready
to contribute to its implementation.

We welcome the Secretary General's report
(S/2009/277) before us that identifies the major
challenges that we are facing in the implementation of
the protection of civilians agenda. The report provides
an excellent basis for our further work. Let me also
welcome the access annex attached to the present
report. More specific reporting on access constraints
will enable the Council to react in a more effective way.

Systematic attention needs to be paid to
protection concerns in the daily deliberations of the
Council. Therefore, Austria welcomes the establishment
of the Security Council Expert Group on the Protection
of Civilians, which has already demonstrated its
usefulness in better addressing protection concerns. We
hope that the Council will make full use of the
potential of this innovative mechanism.

More consistent and comprehensive reporting on
protection issues in the Secretary-General's regular
reports would enable the Council to act more
systematically regarding the protection of civilians,
and particularly of women and children. The aide-
memoire on the protection of civilians (S/PRST/2009/1, annex) offers a very good framework in this regard. Also,
the challenges identified in the Secretary-General's report
should receive particular attention.

The question of how to enhance the protection of
civilians through peacekeeping operations has been
identified as a major challenge. In recent years, several
peacekeeping missions have been mandated by the
Council to ensure the physical protection of the civilian
population. Indeed, its mandate to provide protection to
refugees and internally displaced persons was a strong
factor in Austria's decision to contribute troops to the
European Union Force in Chad and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT).

Austria has also contributed to the independent
study commissioned by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which seeks to analyse the
experiences so far in the implementation of such
protection mandates in peace operations. We look
forward to discussing the findings and recommendations
of that study. It is our hope that they will contribute to
the overall reform efforts of United Nations
peacekeeping and to the further strengthening of the
protection agenda of the Council. Our aim must be to
have more effective and better resourced peacekeeping
missions that are in a position to implement their
protection mandates in a credible and consistent
manner. Let me add that the recent mission of the
Security Council to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo gave us a very good opportunity to observe at
close range the complexities that United Nations
peacekeeping missions and troop-contributing countries
may face in the implementation of their mandates.

That is why we applaud the recent positive
developments in several peacekeeping operations, in
particular the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, such as the
adoption of a comprehensive strategy to combat sexual
violence and the decision to give clear priority to the
protection of the civilian population. From our point of
view, the task assigned to MINURCAT of
strengthening national police capacities in Chad is
another important positive development. We need to
take the lessons from such experiences and see how
they can be applied to other missions.

Ensuring better compliance of parties to conflict
with international humanitarian law has already been
rightly identified by many speakers as another area
requiring priority attention. This is a particular problem
with regard to many non-State actors. The Council
needs to continue consistently to call for compliance
by all parties to a conflict and to ensure investigations
in cases of alleged violations and consequences for
non-compliance. We welcome the experiences gained
by the United Nations in negotiating with parties to a
conflict, in particular non-State actors, in order to
improve humanitarian access and compliance with
international humanitarian law. Important efforts have
also been undertaken to secure commitments from
non-State actors to stop the recruitment of child
soldiers and to end the use of landmines.

The Security Council should further contribute to
strengthening the rule of law by supporting criminal
justice mechanisms and other mechanisms for
accountability and by affirming its opposition to
impunity. Fighting impunity should be seen as part of a
comprehensive approach to seeking sustainable peace,
justice, truth and national reconciliation. More efforts
are needed to strengthen national systems in order to
build their capacities to ensure that perpetrators are
brought to justice and that victims are granted an
effective remedy.

A further issue that needs urgent attention from
the Security Council is the vulnerability of civilians in
relation to the abundance of weapons, mainly small
arms and light weapons. Austria also welcomes the
emphasis placed by the Secretary-General on the
devastating humanitarian consequences of weapons
with area effects, such as cluster munitions. The
victims and survivors of these weapons need special
attention and protection. The provisions on victim
assistance in the new Convention on Cluster Munitions

comprehensively address the immediate concerns of
victims. In our View, this should become the new
international standard for victim assistance. Austria
calls on all States that have not yet done so to sign and
ratify the Convention as soon as possible.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
Security Council's first consideration of the protection
of civilians in armed conflict. This anniversary
provides us with a good opportunity to take stock and
to reaffirm our commitment to protecting civilians
from the devastating effects of armed conflict, as
emphasized by the Secretary-General in his report.

In response to this call of the Secretary-General,
Austria is therefore planning to organize a debate of
the Council, on the occasion of the tenth anniversary,
during its presidency of the Council in November.
Austria's Foreign Minister, Mr. Michael Spindelegger,
has a strong personal commitment in this area and
therefore intends to preside over that important
meeting personally. The aim of the debate should be to
identify a set of concrete measures to address current
challenges in the protection of civilians. We look
forward to working with all interested delegations and
the Secretariat towards this goal.

