Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): The rule of law and
transitional justice in conflict and post-conflict
societies is a matter of great importance to Palestine.
We are a society that has been trying to rebuild itself
and its institutions, including in the justice sector, as if
we were in a post-conflict situation. The international
community provided us with assistance in this field,
and some have even tried to hold us accountable to the
standards of justice that would be applied to a post-
conflict situation.

The problem, however, is that, in reality, we
remain in the midst of a raging conflict in which the
stronger party, the occupying Power, continues to
colonize Palestinian land and commit illegal acts
against the Palestinian people, seeking to ensure that
we do not succeed in our post-conflict reconstruction
and to create conditions intended to negate our national
rights and even our national existence. For example,
while the Palestinian Legislative Council has been
trying to create a body of Palestinian laws to replace
those that existed before, the occupying Power
continues to enforce its military orders and even to
invoke British emergency regulations in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, while at
the same time establishing a separate legal system for
the illegal Israeli settlers.

The international community must draw some
conclusions. It is imperative to ensure, at the very
least, a clear basis for an end to the conflict before one
delves into the tasks of post-conflict reconstruction.
Ignoring the crux of the problem and shelving
international law with regard to the conflict itself can
only lead to failure.

Today's debate concerns a broader theme, and we
welcome that, for there exists a simple reality: without
justice one cannot have peace, and without law one
cannot have justice. Further, in the absence of
compliance with the law and "playing by the rules", it
is chaos that will prevail, with outcomes that are
difficult to fully predict. We welcome the intention of
the Secretary-General to focus on the rule of law in the
coming period. We also welcome the increasing
significance that the International Criminal Court is
acquiring within the international debate, and we
strongly hope that more centrality is given to the
International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations system.

If we are to succeed in building and
institutionalizing a culture of law - especially in post-
conflict situations - we must ensure that conflicts are
resolved on the basis of law. In the case of Palestine,
the law has been elusive. At best it has been sidelined,
and at worst it has been transgressed in the most
egregious manner. The rights of the Palestine refugees
under international refugee law have been ignored,
including their right to private property. The human
rights of the Palestinian people under international
human rights law have been systematically violated.
The rights of Palestinian protected persons under
international humanitarian law have been trampled.
And even our rights under the Charter have been
denied, including our erga omnes rights such as the
right to self-determination.

It seems accurate to say that this is an
unprecedented case. The United Nations, especially the
Security Council, has failed in a historic way. It has
failed to implement its own resolutions; it has failed
for more than 37 years to prevent the insidious and
active colonization of Palestinian land and constant
attempts to change the status of Jerusalem, a city of
international importance; and it has failed to be faithful
to the purposes and principles of the Charter. In short,
it has failed to uphold the law.

To be fair, this is not the failure of the
membership as a whole. True, a few might have tried
to appease the aggressor at the expense of the law; but,
more significantly, one permanent member has
consistently prevented the Council from taking serious
actions, has provided the occupying Power with
unjustified diplomatic protection and has actively tried
to neutralize - and at times even to negate - the law.
The consequences of that behaviour have been
extremely detrimental, not only in terms of the rights
of the Palestinian people, but also in terms of the
international system and its authority and credibility.
That pattern of behaviour has undermined the rule of
law and has deepened cynicism regarding justice and
the rule of law, alienating those who believe in it and
discouraging reliance on it.

While that has been a disastrous factor in the case
of Palestine - compounding and prolonging the
conflict - we should not resign ourselves to accepting
that that is the way it has to be. Indeed, it is our deep
hope that that pattern - and not the law - will be cast
aside when the issue of the ICJ's advisory opinion,
which conclusively defined the applicable rules and
principles of international law on the matter - is
brought before the Council for consideration. The
importance of that issue with regard to the debate on
justice and the rule of law - both generally and
specifically in terms of Palestine - should not be
underestimated. A prerequisite for the building by the
Palestinian people of a different culture internally is
the existence of a culture in which their rights are
respected and in which the laws are upheld by an
international community that promotes justice and
peace by applying the same standard of law to all the
peoples of the world.

