The President: I thank the representative of the
United Kingdom for his kind words addressed to me.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of the Gambia.

The Government and the people of the Gambia are
very keen on having a world of justice and fraternal
cooperation, with intercultural exchange and free trade
among all the States of this world. It is for this reason
that we do not hesitate to make our voice heard on the
differences opposing the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on the
one hand, and the United Kingdom and the United States,
on the other, over the Lockerbie tragedy. We can imagine
the pain, the anguish and the frustration of the families of
the victims of the ill-fated Pan Am flight 103. Unless
justice is done, our collective conscience will never be
clear. A great African leader once said:

"Conscience is an open wound; only truth can heal
it."

Moreover, the longer justice is delayed, the greater
the anguish of those who lost their loved ones. Not only
is it true that justice delayed is justice denied, but by
delaying it, we also run the risk of adding insult to injury.

 

It is for this reason that President Jammeh and the
Government and the people of the Gambia would like this
matter to be laid to rest as quickly as possible. In this
connection, we are confident that we can rely on the long-
established ties of friendship and cooperation that exist
between each of the countries concerned and the Gambia so
that we can go the extra mile necessary to break the logjam
over the question of venue for the trial of the two suspects.

Guided by the rule of law and the spirit of
compromise and cooperation, the Organization of African
Unity, of which we are a member, in collaboration with the
League of Arab States and supported by the Non-Aligned
Movement, worked out a package with the following
options aimed at finding a solution acceptable to all: a trial
of the two suspects should be held in a third and neutral
country to be determined by the Security Council; the two
suspects should be tried by Scottish judges at the
International Court of Justice at The Hague, in accordance
with Scottish law; and a special tribunal should be
established at the International Court of Justice headquarters
in The Hague to try the two suspects.

It is self-evident that if the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
were not willing to cooperate, the Organization of African
Unity, together with all the other organizations, such as the
League of Arab States, the Non-Aligned Movement and,
indeed, the Organization of the Islamic Conference, would
not have been able to come up with such a practical and
constructive package. It is not designed to stand up to any
country; it is designed to allow us to move a step forward.

In addition to that, the International Court of Justice,
in its ruling on 27 February 1998, on Questions of
Interpretation and Application of the 197] Montreal
Convention arising from the Aerial Incident at Lockerbie,
brings in a new element to help us. My delegation sincerely
believes that we should not let this opportunity slip away.
Let us seize this opportunity to give the whole world a
chance to see Scottish justice at its best and in the fine
tradition of the British legal system, which has allowed the
Gambia today to be a peaceful and stable country in the
African continent. It could be of use to note that in the
Gambia today, even after its independence, Gambians can
still apply to the Privy Council in the United Kingdom.
That shows our confidence in the type of justice that is
established by that country.

Therefore, we believe that when we call for the trial
to be held in a neutral venue, we are only seeking greater
impartiality and neutrality to reassure the accused that they
would be given a fair trial. This does not in any way
diminish our faith in Scottish justice. But we fear that
insisting too much on holding the trial in Scotland and
nowhere else does not help the situation. The bottom line,
in our view, is to proceed with the trial under Scottish
law in a third country. As long as we are not
compromising on the principle of trying the suspects, the
venue should not hold us to ransom.

Having said that, I would now like to turn to a
related issue. I am referring to the decision by the
Council to maintain the sanctions imposed on the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya following a review of the situation a few
weeks ago.

Sanctions notwithstanding, it is a widely held view
that humanitarian needs and religious considerations
constitute an exception to the rule. In this context, my
delegation strongly believes that with regard to such
pressing matters as medical evacuations, the replacement
of aircraft used for medical purposes or similar things in
general, the Council should encounter no difficulties in
giving quick approval whenever the request is made.

As for religious issues, we are all well aware of their
highly sensitive nature. For Muslims throughout the
world, the annual pilgrimage, or Hajj, to the Holy City of
Mecca, one of the fundamental pillars of Islam, will take
place within the next few weeks. The Hajj itself is no
child's play. It is very, very demanding indeed. The
pilgrim needs all his or her energy, both physical and
mental, to carry out all the rites and rituals for the entire
duration of this most special event.

Taking into account all these factors, the delegation
of the Gambia is of the view that it would be in perfect
order to try to make an exception to the rule. Not that we
will try to erode the authority of the Security Council, but
we should see to it that the credibility of the Security
Council is not called into question and at least open some
leeway to be able to see what Libya will do if the
Security Council decides that the trial should be held
elsewhere. It is in this situation that we will see the good
faith of the Libyans, and it is in this situation that we will
also be able to prevent the suffering of innocent Libyans.

I believe that this is a historic moment. I think that
if we give it a chance it will only enhance the credibility
of the Council, and the Council will remain the tribunal
through which our political problems are solved in the
interests of the ideals of the United Nations, which are
not of coercion but of harmony and peaceful coexistence
among all its Members in a world of justice and law.
 

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from representatives of the Lao People's
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Uganda and Viet Nam, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao People's Democratic Republic), Mr. Moubarak
(Lebanon), Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka (Uganda) and
Mr. Ngo Quang Xuan (Viet Nam) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my list
is Mr. Hussein Hassouna, Permanent Observer of the
League of Arab States to the United Nations, to whom the
Council has extended an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.


