Mr. Spindelegger (Austria): As this is the first
time that Austria is taking part in a formal meeting of
the Council as one of the new non-permanent
members, let me begin by saying that it is an honour
for my country to serve the interests of peace and
international security in this capacity. During the two
years to come, Austria will strive to exercise this
important responsibility in the interest of the entire
membership of the United Nations.

I should like to thank Foreign Minister Kouchner
for taking this very timely initiative. You, Sir, can
count on Austria's full support and active cooperation
in all your efforts to end the bloodshed in Gaza and
southern Israel.

We greatly appreciate the presence of the
Secretary-General. Austria has taken good note of his
appeal to the Security Council and of his intention to
travel to the region soon. He has our full support.

The importance of today's meeting is also
highlighted by the presence of so many foreign
ministers around the table and in the Chamber. More
specifically, I wish to acknowledge the presence of
President Mahmoud Abbas, who has just had to leave. I
listened very carefully to his statement, as well as to
that of the Ambassador of Israel.

For many years, Austria has maintained close and
friendly relations with all the countries of the Middle
East. We are therefore extremely concerned about the
serious further deterioration of the situation in and
around Gaza.

Austria deeply regrets that calls by the Security
Council, the Middle East Quartet, the European Union
and others for an end to the violence have gone
unheeded. We also regret that the Security Council was
unable to formally agree on a call for an immediate,
permanent and fully respected ceasefire during its
emergency meeting on Saturday.

In the meantime, the European Union and France,
as well as other members of the Council, have
reinforced their efforts to help resolve the crisis.
Nonetheless, hostilities have so far continued unabated,
with an ever-increasing number of civilian victims.

Austria has repeatedly condemned the rocket
attacks by Hamas from Gaza on Israel. We respect the
right of Israel to safeguard the security of its citizens,
but we also believe that the military operations under
way are clearly disproportionate and continue to inflict
an unacceptable toll on Palestinian civilians. We
therefore call on both sides to adhere to an immediate
and permanent ceasefire, which needs to be effectively
monitored. There must be an unconditional halt to
rocket attacks by Hamas on Israel and an end to Israeli
military action.

Austria remains greatly concerned about the ever
more desperate humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip and its effects on the civilian population. We
therefore call on all parties to take all necessary
measures to alleviate the serious humanitarian situation
on the ground and to ensure the continuous provision
of humanitarian supplies to Gaza, including through a
lasting and normal opening of all border crossings. An
effective end to the smuggling of arms and ammunition
into the Gaza Strip is an indispensable prerequisite in
that regard. Moreover, we also call upon all parties to
strictly observe the rules of humanitarian and human
rights law.

If violence is not brought to an end, a resumption
of the diplomatic process towards a political solution
will become more and more difficult. The hostilities
have gravely disrupted the various channels of
communication that had been successfully established
during recent months. Continuing violence will have a
lasting negative effect, not only on the follow-up to
Annapolis but also on other developments towards
comprehensive regional peace, in particular along the
Israeli-Syrian track. Against that backdrop, Austria
welcomes the most recent diplomatic initiative in the
region, in particular the important statement made
today by President Mubarak and the contacts
undertaken by President Sarkozy.

The Security Council must remain actively
engaged in encouraging and supporting all efforts to
end the conflict and to bring about what peoples in the
region have been yearning for during decades - the
creation of a viable, independent, democratic and
sovereign Palestinian State living in peace and security
with Israel within recognized international borders.

We continue to believe that the objective of the
Security Council must be the rapid resolution of the
current crisis based on the following elements: a call
for an immediate, permanent and fully respected
ceasefire; free access for humanitarian supplies into
Gaza, including through the lasting and normal
opening of all border crossings; an effective end to the
smuggling of arms and ammunition into the Gaza
Strip; a call on all parties to fully respect their
obligations under humanitarian and human rights law;
full support for the regional and diplomatic efforts
under way to solve the crisis; and a call on Israelis and
Palestinians to continue negotiations for a
comprehensive solution as envisaged in resolution
1850 (2008).

I am convinced that that is an outcome that would
be in the interest of all parties. Austria will do
everything to help you, Mr. President, to move this
matter forward along those lines as rapidly as possible.

