Mr. Salarzai (Afghanistan): Let me first thank the
Mission of Poland for having convened this ministerial
open debate on the urgent issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would also like to extend
my delegation's gratitude to His Excellency the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Poland and to
other speakers for their statements today.

Today's meeting is of crucial importance for
Afghanistan, a country that has seen decades of
imposed conflict, including terrorism and violent
extremism, leading to a disproportionate number of
civilian deaths and injuries. Recently, we have seen a
significant increase in the number of barbaric attacks
on our civilians, where our schools, mosques, hospitals
and, as of late, electoral registration sites and other safe
spaces that are of a purely civilian nature have come
under attack. By systematically targeting our children,
medical personnel, journalists, commuters and ordinary
men and women, the Taliban and other terrorist groups
who have come from outside our borders have sought
to compensate for losses on the battlefield with attacks
on soft targets and by sowing fear and discord in
our society.

Based on our recent estimates, last year alone 2,903
civilian deaths and more than 6,000 civilian injuries
occurred as a result of enemy attacks nationwide,
mainly against civilian targets.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) 2017 report on protection
of civilians in armed conflict clearly depicts how the
Taliban and other terrorist groups have used suicide
attacks, including targeted and deliberate killings,
bombs and other explosive devices, abductions and
other arbitrary and extrajudicial punishments against
our civilian population. As we assemble here to discuss
the crucial issue ofprotecting civilians in conflict, only
a few hours ago another terrorist attack in Kandahar
reportedly killed 16 civilians and injured more than 30
others. The utter disregard for human life demonstrated
in these attacks constitutes a clear violation of
international law.

Against that backdrop, landmark resolution 2286
(2016) reaffirms the Council's determination to bring
the behaviour of parties to conflict and Member States
alike in line with international humanitarian law. It
also highlights the obligation of the parties to a conflict
to protect and care for the wounded and sick, and to
respect and protect those providing impartial medical
care and to facilitate their mission. In the same light,
prevention and mitigation of harm to the civilian
population remains a key priority for the Government
of Afghanistan.

Our brave defence and security forces, which are
at the forefront of fighting international terrorism,
have valiantly defended our territorial integrity and the
safety and security of the civilian population. We have
also developed and improved a number of strategic,
operational and tactical measures to protect civilians
during conflict.

In October 2017, we endorsed the national policy
on civilian casualty prevention and mitigation and its
implementation plan. This plan consists of specific
guidelines for our security forces to prevent and mitigate
civilian casualties and damage to property. Further, the
plan strictly prohibits any use of civilian facilities such
as schools, hospitals or clinics for military purposes.
Additionally, our Government agencies have continued
to promptly and thoroughly investigate any possible
violations of the provisions of the policy by any
Government official or agency and take the appropriate
corrective measures, as recommended in the UNAMA
2017 annual report.

We have also ratified the 1980 Convention
on Certain Conventional Weapons, including all
amendments and protocols, in August 2017, which will
result in improved protection of civilians. Additionally,
the Tawhid Center in the National Security Council
has been established to maintain a database aimed at
tracking conflict-related civilian casualties, among
other responsibilities.

We are strongly committed to ensuring that our
security forces operate within national and international
law and regulations to protect civilians during military
operations. Our Ministry of Defence has established an
internal board for investigating allegations of human
rights abuses, including civilian casualties and the
recruitment of children into the armed forces.

In 2010, we established an inter-ministerial
steering committee on children and armed conflict.
The following year, the committee developed a national
action plan to end and prevent the recruitment of
children in our defence and security forces.

Among other reforms, we established 21 child-
protection units with the Afghan national and local
police recruitment centres, which have prevented more
than 100 underage voluntary enlistments. Moreover,
NATO training sessions for senior Afghan National
Defense and Security Forces (ANDSF) personnel in
the area of civilian casualty tracking and mitigation is
offered at the strategic, operational and tactical levels.

Furthermore, the Civilian Casualties Avoidance
and Mitigation Board, intended to identify areas
critical to minimizing civilian casualties, meets every
three months and has developed the practical efforts
undertaken by domestic and international military
forces to mitigate casualties.

These measures are a clear reflection of our firm
commitment to the protection of the civilian population.
Our protection measures have had an impact on reducing
the number of casualties attributed to pro-Government
forces during combat operations against terrorists. We
are pleased that this fact was also acknowledged in the
UNAMA report. Moving forward, we will remain fully

committed to continuing to streamline, improve and
increase our measures aimed at lowering the number
of incidents resulting in civilian harm due to ANDSF
operations as much as possible.

Needless to say, the absolute majority of civilian
casualties are the result of the barbaric attacks
conducted by the Taliban and other terrorist groups,
who have no regard for human life and dignity.
Regardless of what we do, so long as their deliberate
tactics of attacking civilian spaces and targeted killings
do not cease, our civilians will continue to suffer. The
continuing attacks on hospitals, medical professionals
and humanitarian workers, among other civilians, as
well as the recent despicable attack in Kabul, where
an ambulance packed with explosives was used, show
their complete disregard for international law, the
Geneva Convention and resolution 2286 (2016). In fact,
these attacks constitute and meet the definition of war
crimes against the civilian population, and stringent
action must be taken against the perpetrators, financers
and planners of such ghastly action.

Terror, violence and insecurity in our country are
rooted in factors that lie outside Afghanistan and have
regional and global dimensions. Hence the goal should
be to address this issue and overcome the structural
drivers of conflict and violence. The Council has a
fundamental role to play in that regard as the United
Nations body entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security. We expect the Council
to respond appropriately to ensure the protection
and well-being of Afghan civilians, who are being
senselessly killed and maimed on a daily basis.

