Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): Liechtenstein
welcomes this opportunity to discuss the role of
peacekeeping in the context of the broader United
Nations efforts to sustain peace. We support the
initiatives of the Secretary-General to strengthen
the focus of the United Nations on prevention and its
ability to sustain peace. Peacekeeping operations under
the authority of the Security Council can make a vital
contribution to those efforts. Today's debate should
therefore feed into the broader agenda of making the
United Nations fit for purpose in order to achieve
our jointly agreed goals, including the Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs).

Liechtenstein supports General Assembly resolution

70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), as
they provide a basis for a more comprehensive approach
to sustaining peace, spanning the entire conflict cycle
and encompassing all three pillars ofthe United Nations,
including human rights and development. Peacekeeping
operations can make an important contribution to the
achievement ofthe goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development, in particular SDG 16.
Acting through its peacekeeping operations, the United
Nations should place stronger emphasis on enabling
and strengthening the rule of law and its institutions
at the national and regional levels. In the framework
of the review of the peacebuilding architecture, both
the Council and the General Assembly committed to
a comprehensive approach to transitional justice as
an important prerequisite for consolidating peace
and preventing conflicts and relapse into violence.
A thorough translation of that commitment into
peacekeeping mandates should therefore be a matter of
priority for the Council.

Deterrence is a key preventive tool and among
the main achievements of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), the central criminal justice institution.
The ICC remains a court of last resort, while the
primary responsibility to investigate and prosecute
atrocity crimes remains with States. Fighting impunity
is essential to strengthening the rule of law and
its institutions, as set out in SDG 16. Joining and
cooperating with the ICC is therefore a practical example
of implementing SDG 16. It is therefore particularly
important that the Security Council, acting through its
peacekeeping mandates, supports the work of the Court
by ensuring full cooperation and coherence of action,
including by sharing information and assisting States
in protecting witnesses and executing arrest warrants.

The Council has a responsibility to take action
to end and prevent mass atrocity crimes. The code
of conduct of the Accountability, Coherence and
Transparency Group, which to date has the support of
113 States, is a strong expression of the willingness of
the United Nations membership to hold the Council
accountable with regard to that responsibility. The
potential for early and preventive action by the United
Nations is particularly acute in situations in which
peacekeeping operations are already on the ground.
Accordingly, there is an expectation within the
international community that the Security Council
will consistently equip peacekeeping mandates with
the necessary means and flexibility to act decisively in
such situations.

At the same time, there is also a growing sense
of responsibility in the General Assembly should
the Security Council fail to prevent or end mass
atrocities in a timely manner. The establishment of the
International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism
to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes
under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab
Republic since March 2011 is a manifestation of that
responsibility. Liechtenstein congratulates the newly
appointed Head of the Mechanism, Ms. Marchi-Uhel,
and calls on States to support the Mechanism's work
both politically and financially.

The 2015 report (see S/2015/446) by the High-
Level Independent Panel on Peace Operations called
for renewed resolve on the part of United Nations peace
operations personnel to engage with, serve and protect
the people whom they have been mandated to assist.
That call applies in particular to the full implementation
of the women and peace and security agenda, both in
its protection and participation pillars, as well as to a
vigorous mainstreaming of human rights and gender
equality throughout the peacekeeping architecture.
Liechtenstein is encouraged by the Secretary-General's
commitment to that cause and expects the Security
Council to implement its own standards in that area
more consistently.

We also call on the Security Council to ensure
stricter accountability in cases of sexual exploitation
and abuse by members of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, whether civilian or military. The United
Nations cannot tolerate, or be perceived as tolerating,
any form of such misconduct or criminal behaviour
among its ranks without proportionate consequences.
While we acknowledge existing efforts in that regard,
we continue to see both the need and potential for the
United Nations to take a qualitative step forward.

