Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would like to join earlier speakers
in warmly congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council and express
my delegation's satisfaction at seeing such a worthy
son of Central Africa presiding over its work for the
month of October.

We believe that your intellectual ability and
diplomatic skills, together with your great experience
of international relations, will ensure the success of the
Council's work this month.

I would also like to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Stefan Tafrov of Bulgaria,
and express my sincere gratitude to him for having
guided the work of the Security Council so ably and
energetically during previous month.

International terrorism is a threat to international
peace and security. A concerted response by the entire
international community and all peace-loving States
will be required if we are to put an end to it. It
undermines the very principles that underlie our
universal Organization.

The horrific events of 11 September 2001 showed
clearly that no State is spared the scourge of terrorism.
Current scientific developments are disturbing, and
suggest the possibility that biological, bacteriological,

chemical and other weapons of mass destruction could
be used for terrorist purposes.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
always advocated combating terrorism in all its forms
and manifestations, and we therefore welcomed the
Council's adoption of resolution 1373 (2001) on 28
September 2001, which was certainly an important first
step towards curbing, if not eradicating, the scourge.
We also welcome the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, so skilfully chaired by
Ambassador Sir Jeremy Greenstock of the United
Kingdom.

I would like, on behalf of my delegation, to
commend Ambassador Greenstock for his excellent
statement last Friday on the work of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We would once again like to
thank him, the Vice-Chairmen, the members of the
United Kingdom Mission and the Secretariat for the
work that they done. An impressive number of initial
and supplementary national reports have been
submitted and there has been a significant number of
accessions to several conventions and protocols
relating to the suppression of certain manifestations of
terrorism.

My delegation believes that the participation of
the entire international community in combating this
scourge means a commitment by each State to comply
with the relevant international conventions through
acceding to them and through its ability to take action
at the national level to ensure their full implementation.

In accordance with the provisions of resolution
1373 (2001), the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has undertaken to sign all 12 international anti-terrorist
conventions and protocols, which form the core of the
legal arsenal in this respect. Furthermore, in an effort
to standardize and give specific effect to the efforts of
the international community against this scourge, my
country supports initiatives designed to resolve
outstanding issues, in particular the adoption of a
comprehensive convention and the convening of an
international conference on terrorism. Such initiatives
would round out commitments and actions at our
disposal to combat terrorism.

At the national level, my country's commitment
was given substance by presidential decree 70/2001 of
26 September 2001, which set up a national
coordinating committee to combat international
terrorism. The committee, which includes
representatives from the Foreign Ministry, the
Transport Ministry, the Interior Ministry, the special
security services, the police, the courts, customs, the
central bank and other public bodies, will be
deliberating on all issues relating to international
terrorism, coordinating the implementation of relevant
international conventions and defining, coordinating
and implementing all national strategies and measures
necessary to combat, prevent and suppress international
terrorism, through close collaboration with foreign
Governments and international organizations, in
particular through increased cooperation and the full
implementation of international conventions.

That committee will thus be the national body
responsible for taking action to combat terrorism in the
seven areas referred to in resolution 1373 (2001):
legislation, financial asset controls, customs,
immigration, extradition, law enforcement and arms
trafficking.

In addition to having established that committee,
we are in the process of drafting a law on terrorism. It
is geared towards bringing the national legislation of
our country into line with the principles of resolution
1373 (2001) and existing conventions, as well as to
filling in any gaps in our legislation by drafting a
specific law on the subject. The bill provides for, inter
alia, the identification of individuals and groups
involved in terrorism and terrorist activities,
prosecution, judicial cooperation and penalties for the
perpetrators of such acts, including those who finance
them.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo and its
people have been victims of the most insidious and
abject form of international terrorism - State
terrorism - perpetrated by neighbouring countries in
flagrant violation of the Charter. We are therefore ready
to promote discussion and bring to fruition our work on
terrorism.

Terrorism is not limited to acts by individuals or
isolated groups. It encompasses the large-scale
organized activities used by States as a political
instrument - activities whose nature and
consequences are very serious.

It is indeed that form of terrorism - State
terrorism - that we must combat fully. Its
consequences are incalculable and it represents a real
threat to international peace and security.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
always believed the problems facing the world today
cannot be resolved by the use of force. In order to
combat terrorism we must develop a universal
conscientiousness and sense of unity capable of
eradicating this scourge and other tragedies that
threaten the very survival of the human species.

We in Congo are in agreement with what you
said, Mr. President, in your brilliant statement made at
the closing of the general debate in the current session
of the General Assembly, that, in a situation which
does not always lend itself to optimism, the peoples of
the United Nations are nevertheless continuing their
progress towards the future as outlined at the
Millennium Summit - a world in which people will
live free from all fears and from need.

In this regard, my country believes that in
addition to strengthening the legal arsenal that we have
to suppress terrorism, which is necessary, combating
terrorism also requires an integrated approach and must
take account of the political, diplomatic, economic,
social and humanitarian dimensions of the problem.
For, rightly or wrongly, certain individuals or groups of
people feel that they are victims of injustice, and that
feeling feeds intolerance.

Hence the community of nations must take an
integrated and responsible approach and tackle the
problems head on, including armed conflict, poverty,
disarming armed groups and transnational crime in
general. My country will soon be making a request for
assistance to strengthen our institutions and human
capacity to combat terrorism. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo calls for greater solidarity and full
cooperation to combat terrorism and its causes,
including injustice, poverty, crime and armed conflict,
so as to free people from fear, as you so well said,
Mr. President, and ensure a better and prosperous
future for present and future generations.

