Mr. Mladenov: Today, on behalf of the Secretary-
General, I would like to devote my regular briefing
to the Council on the situation in the Middle East to
reporting on the implementation of resolution 2334
(2016). In this first report, I will focus on developments
on the ground, in accordance with the provisions of
the resolution, including on regional and international
efforts to advocate and advance the peace process.

Let me note from the outset that none of the
developments on the ground can be divorced from the
broader context in which they are happening - namely,
the stalled peace process, the lack of dialogue between
the parties and the increased radicalization on all sides.
The reporting period witnessed a notable increase in
statements, announcements and decisions related to
settlement construction and expansion.

Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on Israel to take
steps to "cease all settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem". No
such steps were taken during the reporting period. In
January, two major announcements were made for a
total of 5,500 housing units in settlements in Area C
of the occupied West Bank. Within three weeks, some
3,000 housing units were advanced through the various
stages of the planning process and over 240 units
reached the final approval stage. Separately, tenders for
some 800 housing units were issued. Eighty per cent
of the 4,000 settlement moves during the reporting
period were concentrated in and around major Israeli
population centres close to the 1967 line, while some
20 per cent were in outlying locations deep inside the
occupied West Bank.

Let me reiterate that the United Nations considers
all settlement activities to be illegal under international
law and one of the main obstacles to peace. On
1 February, the Government announced its intention
to establish a new settlement for the residents of the
illegal Amona outpost, following its demolition by
order ofthe Israeli High Court of Justice on 2 February.
While there was no advancement of settlement plans in
occupied East Jerusalem during the reporting period,
construction in at least four East Jerusalem settlements
was enabled by the granting of building permits for
over 900 housing units in Pisgat Ze'ev, Ramat Shlomo,
Ramot and Gilo southern slopes. Overall, the past
three months have seen a high rate of settlement-related
activity, especially when compared to 2016, which saw
tenders for only 42 units issued and some 3,000 units
advanced over 12 months in Area C.

The reporting period also witnessed large-scale
demolitions of structures in Palestinian and Bedouin
communities in Area C of the West Bank and East
Jerusalem, due to the lack of Israeli-issued building
permits, which are nearly impossible for Palestinians to
acquire. According to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, 145 structures were demolished
in Area C. It has affected the homes of some 220 people,
while another 4,000 people were impacted, directly
or indirectly, by the destruction of other property
and infrastructure. In occupied East Jerusalem, 48
structures were demolished and two seized, displacing
80 people and affecting 210 people.

There were also a number of concerning legislative
developments during the reporting period. On
6 February, the Israeli Parliament approved the so-
called Regularization Law, which, if implemented,
would effectively authorize the taking of privately
owned Palestinian land in occupied territory that has
been used for settlement purposes. It contravenes
international law and is deemed unconstitutional by
many Israeli legal experts, including the Attorney
General. Estimates suggest that the law could enable the
retroactive regularization of thousands of housing units
and the gradual legalization of dozens of settlement
outposts. The law marks a significant shift in the long-
standing Israeli position concerning the legal status of
the occupied Palestinian territory.

Allow me to turn to the problems of violence
and terror, inflammatory rhetoric and provocations
that remain a hallmark of the conflict. Resolution
2334 (2016) calls on all to refrain from such acts and
undertake efforts to combat them. During the reporting
period, the security situation in Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory remained relatively calm. There
was a rise, albeit from a low level, in certain categories
of incidents, namely, rocket attacks against Israel from
Gaza. Eleven Palestinians were killed and over 273
injured by the Israeli security forces, including during
attacks or purported attacks, clashes and security
operations. In addition, one Palestinian was killed
by an Israeli civilian while attempting to carry out a
stabbing attack, and two Palestinians died of wounds
they had sustained in October and November 2016 from
Israeli security forces.

Four Israeli soldiers were killed and 70 other
Israelis were injured in attacks by Palestinians.
On 8 January, a Palestinian man killed four Israeli
soldiers and injured another 15 in a ramming attack in
Jerusalem. On 9 February, in a terror attack in Petah
Tikva, a Palestinian from Nablus shot and stabbed six
Israelis. On 6 March, in a two-hour exchange of fire, a
Palestinian activist, Basel Al-Araj, was killed during an
arrest operation by Israeli security forces in Al-Bireh,
which is near Ramallah, in Area A.

After over three months of calm, between 6 February
and 19 March Palestinian extremists in Gaza fired 10
rockets towards Israel, five of which impacted without
causing injury. In response to these attacks, the Israeli
Defence Forces conducted 18 airstrikes at militant
locations inside Gaza. In total, two Palestinians in
Gaza were killed and 24 injured as a result of various
Israeli military actions. On 16 January, in the village of
Tuqu', near Bethlehem, a 17 year-old boy was shot dead
by the Israeli security forces. The Israeli authorities
have opened an investigation into the incident, bringing
to at least 17 the number of investigations opened into
similar incidents since September 2015. This period
saw a total of over 260 Palestinians killed by the Israeli
security forces, 170 of whom were carrying out or
reportedly carrying out attacks.

One case, against Sergeant Elor Azaria, has led to
an indictment and conviction for unlawful killing. On
4 January, Azaria was convicted of manslaughter for
shooting dead an incapacitated Palestinian assailant in
Hebron in March 2016. On 21 February, he was sentenced
to prison for 18 months and demoted. As noted by the
Spokesperson for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on 24 February 2017,
such a lenient prison sentence "is difficult to reconcile
with the intentional killing of an unarmed and prone
individual". On 7 March, the military prosecution,
calling the current sentence "excessiver lenient",
filed an appeal seeking a three-to-five year term of
imprisonment.
While the resolution calls upon both parties
to refrain from acts of provocation, incitement,
and inflammatory rhetoric, such actions continued
during the reporting period. The reactions of Hamas
officials to terror attacks against Israelis have been
particularly reprehensible and deserve condemnation.
A recent sermon by a Hamas leader and member of
the Palestinian Legislative Council in Gaza included
appalling and racist language inciting violence against
Jews. Statements were issued by Hamas and a number
of other Palestinian factions celebrating as "heroic" the
terror attacks in Jerusalem and in Petah Tikva. A senior
leader, addressing a rally following the truck ramming,
sent

"a message of encouragement and support for every
jihadi who carries out an attack that puts an end to
the acts of the Zionist enemy".

Regrettably, Palestinian Authority officials have not
condemned those attacks, while Fatah's social media
pages continue to commemorate perpetrators of
previous attacks against Israeli civilians.

Provocative statements also continued on the
Israeli side. A number of politicians have called for
the annexation of parts or all the West Bank and for
a categorical denial of Palestinian statehood. One
political leader called the notion ofa Palestinian State a
"historic disaster" and a "hallucination", while another
spoke of only the Jewish people having "national rights"
between the Jordan and the sea.

Resolution 2334 (2016) reiterates the call of the
Middle East Quartet on both parties to take affirmative
steps to reverse the negative trends on the ground
that are imperilling the two-State solution. Allow me
to outline some of the moves taken by Israel and the
Palestinian Authority that may be broadly considered
to be in this context.

In February, the Palestinian Authority took a
significant step towards strengthening its institutions
and improving governance, by finalizing the Palestinian
national policy agenda for 2017-2022. The agenda
reiterates the Palestinian Authority's commitment to
State-building and to guaranteeing the rule of law.
Continued support for the Palestinian Authority in
providing governance and security remains critical.
In January, the Palestinian Government approved the
general budget for 2017 and, owing to the strong fiscal
performance in the previous year, was able to reduce
the budget deficit. Continued fiscal discipline and a
push for revenue growth will be essential during this
year as economic and financial conditions are likely to
continue to be restrictive.

In a positive development, on 15 January, after six
years of inactivity, Israel and the Palestinian Authority
agreed to reactivate the Israeli-Palestinian Joint
Water Committee. It was established under the Oslo
agreements in order to improve the water infrastructure
and supply in the West Bank and Gaza. The new
agreement outlines the types of water projects that
need approval by the Joint Water Committee, and thus
by default those not requiring approval. This comes on
the heels of agreements on electricity, 3G and postal
services that have been signed in the past six months.

It is also important to note that both Israel and the
Palestinian Authority remain committed to maintaining
security coordination amid increasing political and
popular pressure on the Palestinian Authority to cease
such coordination. I take this opportunity to note the
professionalism of the Palestinian security forces
in providing public order. They operate in a highly
volatile environment, and I encourage Israel and the
international community to continue supporting the
advancement of their capacity and capability.

The reporting period also saw progress in Gaza
reconstruction and recovery. More than 225,000 tons
of cement were imported through the temporary Gaza
Reconstruction Mechanism - a significant increase
over the previous three-month period. Israel also
approved nearly 3,300 residential construction and
reconstruction projects, compared to only 78 over the
previous three months.

During the reporting period there were no
developments related to Member States' distinguishing,
in their relevant dealings, between the territory of the
State of Israel and the territories occupied in 1967.
There have, however, been efforts by the international
community to take up its responsibility to resolve
the conflict. In that respect, I would like to note
the international conference hosted by France on
15 January, which was attended by representatives
of some 70 countries. As a follow-up, interested
participants resolved to meet again before the end of
2017 to review progress and to support both sides in
advancing a resolution to the conflict.

In January, representatives of most Palestinian
factions, including Fatah and Hamas, met in Moscow.
The Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation
addressed the participants, stressing the need to
overcome divisions on the basis of the Palestinian
Liberation Organization political programme and the
Arab Peace Initiative in order to create the conditions
for meaningful negotiations.

On 7 March, I addressed a session of the Council of
the Arab League in Cairo, where I spoke of the need to
recognize that true peace requires the recognition that
both Palestinians and Israelis have legitimate national
aspirations that can be realized only in two States. The
Arab League adopted a resolution that calls, inter alia,
for developing an effective international mechanism to
follow-up on the Paris conference for ending the Israeli
occupation and achieving a two-State solution within a
specific time frame.

Last week, the United States Special Representative
for International Negotiations visited Israel, the West
Bank and Jordan for initial meetings with political,
security and civil society leaders and religious and
youth groups. In statements following meetings with
the Israeli Prime Minister and the Palestinian President,
the Special Representative reaffirmed the United States
interest in advancing a genuine and lasting peace. I am
encouraged by ongoing efforts to reach agreement with
the parties on steps on the ground that will create the
conditions for Palestinian economic development and
advancing peace.

In conclusion, I would like to share some broad
observations about the reporting period. The January
spike in illegal settlement announcements by Israel is
deeply worrying. The large numbers of advancements,
planned infrastructure development, legislative actions
and moves to undertake large-scale demolitions vis-a-vis
Palestinian communities in Area C indicate a clear
intent to continue expanding the settlement enterprise
in the occupied Palestinian territory. In the light of
this, the adoption of the regularization law is a highly
worrying development. Many of the advancements
that have been made in the past three months will
further sever the territorial contiguity of a future
Palestinian State and accelerate the fragmentation of
the West Bank. The expansion of the settlement of Kfar
Adumim, where 320 units were moved forward during
the reporting period, is gradually dividing the northern
and southern West Bank. Planned construction in
Shiloh effectively extends the zone that cuts across the
central West Bank. Announcements in Kokhav Yakov,
situated between Ramallah and East Jerusalem, and in
Shavei Shomron, located at a crossroads connecting
the three major Palestinian cities of Nablus. Jenin
and Tulkarem, are also of strategic significance. Such
actions are in breach of international law and must stop.
Settlement expansion undermines the very essence ofa
two-State solution. Resolution 2334 (2016) states that
the international community will not recognize any
changes to the 4 June 1967 lines, including with regard
to Jerusalem, other than those agreed to by the parties
themselves through negotiations.

Meanwhile, there has been little progress in
promoting Palestinian development in Area C. I am
particularly concerned about herding communities
in Area C in the West Bank, who are struggling to
maintain a minimum standard of living in the face of
pressure to move. The United Nations has repeatedly
stated that the relocation of communities without their
fair and informed consent would contravene Israel's
obligations as an occupying Power under international
law. To foster a climate conducive to meaningful
negotiations, Israel must do more to improve the daily
lives of Palestinians. It is still crucial to ensure that
they introduce significant policy changes that will
increase Palestinian civil authority, support Palestinian
development and preserve the prospect of a two-State
solution, in line with the recommendations of the
Middle East Quartet. The agreement to reactivate the
Joint Water Commission, after six years of inactivity, is
a step in the right direction, but much more can be done
by both parties. I would like to take this opportunity to
commend the Palestinian President and Prime Minister
for developing a national policy agenda. With foreign aid
continuing to decline, it is critical that the Palestinian
Authority and its international partners work together
in a structured, transparent and accountable way.

The continuing deadly Violence in Israel and the
occupied Palestinian territory during the past three
months also remains a concern. The recent increase in
rockets fired from Gaza towards Israel is a worrying
development. Such potentially lethal provocations
are unnecessary, dangerous and risk devastating
escalation. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls on all to
"clearly condemn all acts of terrorism". The continued
incitements to violence against Jews emanating from
Hamas extremists and some Palestinian groups is
unacceptable and undermines trust and the prospects
for peace. Similarly, it is important to note that despite
the continuing closures on Gaza, there has been an
increase in the importation of building materials
under the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism. However,
the continued restrictions on importing various
other materials 4 considered dual-use by Israel but
badly needed for humanitarian and development
efforts - continue to be a major obstacle. Despite this
positive development, much remains to be done.

International engagement on reviving the peace
process over the past three months has confirmed the
consensus that a two-State solution is the only way
to realize the national aspirations of both peoples. It
is critical to ensure that the momentum built over the
past year continues to expand and ultimately develop
into a concrete vision to end the occupation and the
wider conflict. Shaping a credible political horizon
through reviving engagement between the parties
with intensified international and regional support is
essential to advancing that goal. These international
efforts must be accompanied by significant steps taken
on the ground by the parties themselves in order to
create an environment conducive to negotations. The
United Nations will continue to call on and work with
the parties and all interested stakeholders to find a just,
sustainable and comprehensive solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, based on the relevant Security
Council resolutions.

