Mr. Mladenov: On 15 May, I briefed the Council on
the deadly protests that took place in Gaza the day before
(see S/PV.8256). At least 60 people were killed and the
number continues to climb. It was a tragic day in the
long history of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, another
reminder of the need to bring peace to this troubled
land. It was also a reminder of how easily violence in
Gaza flares up. It was a reminder that Gaza is on the
verge of collapse, that its people - who have lived for
more than a decade under the control of Hamas, with
crippling Israeli closures and with diminishing hopes
for an end to the occupation and a political solution, and
who have survived three devastating conflicts - are
increasingly desperate. We must act urgently to avoid
another war, to alleviate the suffering of people and
to empower the Palestinian Government to take up its
responsibilities in Gaza.

According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in the past month 76
Palestinians, including 11 children, have been killed by
Israel Defence Forces and over 3,000 injured by live
fire and other means. This period has seen by far the
worst levels of violence since 2014. There have been
no Israeli fatalities. Following the 14 May violence, the
Foreign Ministers of the League of Arab States held
an emergency meeting in Cairo and the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation held an emergency summit
in Istanbul. I also take note of the adoption of the
resolution of the Human Rights Council on 18 May,
which calls for the establishment of a commission of
inquiry into the events in Gaza.

Let me reiterate what I said last week in this
Chamber by calling on all to join me in condemning
in the strongest possible terms the actions that have
led to the loss of so many lives in Gaza. Israel has the
responsibility to calibrate its use of force, to not use
lethal force except as a last resort under imminent threat
of death or serious injury. It must protect its citizens,
but it must do so proportionally and investigate every
incident that has led to a loss of human life.

Hamas, which controls Gaza, must not use the
protests as cover to attempt to place bombs at the fence
or create provocations; its operatives must not hide
among the demonstrators and risk the lives of civilians.
Palestinians have a right to protest peacefully. As
demonstrations are likely to continue into the month of
June, I again reiterate our call for all sides to exercise
maximum restraint.

Council members have often spoken here in the
Chamber of the need to prevent war; and the Secretary-
General has put preventive diplomacy at the heart of
his agenda. It is time for our words to be tested in Gaza.
I have taken note of the request last week by several
members of the Security Council to bring forward
proposals to address the situation in Gaza, in line
with our commitment to advance urgent infrastructure
and economic development projects, improve
access and movement, and support the Egyptian-led
reconciliation process.

Gaza's infrastructure teeters on the verge of
total collapse, particularly its electricity and water
networks, as well as its health system. In the past, the
implementation of key infrastructure projects faced
significant delays and obstacles. Failure to implement
immediately, over the next 6 to 12 months, a set of
modest, achievable projects - already endorsed by
relevant stakeholders and some already funded - will
create an amplified humanitarian crisis with fewer
means to address it effectively.

We have all the instruments in place to address this
challenge. We just need to organize ourselves better.
As such, I plan to take the following actions: first, to
prioritize projects identified and agreed over the past
two years by the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee (AHLC);
secondly, to adopt a task force modality with an
enhanced United Nations project-management capacity
to speed up implementation of the projects on the
ground in Gaza; and, thirdly, to strengthen our close
coordination with the Palestinian Authority, Israel and
Egypt to overcome any political, administrative and
logistical blockages that may emerge.

Let me be very clear: the condition for success is
that the ceasefire achieved in 2014 be observed by all
factions in Gaza and that all factions refrain from illicit
arms build-up and militant activity on the ground.

If we are able to move quickly, we will reduce
the chances of military confrontation and another
devastating conflict. We will create the conditions for
relaxing movement and access restrictions and preserve
the fraying links between Gaza and the West Bank.
We will also support Egyptian reconciliation efforts,
and, most importantly perhaps, we will provide much
needed breathing space for ordinary Gazans.

Ultimately, these efforts are meant to
strengthen - not replace - overarching political
objectives: the unification of Gaza and the West Bank
under a single, democratic and legitimate Palestinian
Authority in line with the Quartet principles, and an
end to the occupation and a resolution of the wider
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

We are currently discussing with key stakeholders
how to move forward on this strategy. I am encouraged
by the positive engagement by all. I particularly
welcome Egyptian President Al Sisi's decision to
maintain the opening of Rafah crossing throughout the
holy month of Ramadan. That is an important step, and
I hope that the security situation will allow for more
regular movement through the crossing.

I also want to acknowledge Israel's efforts to
ensure the delivery of goods to Gaza, despite the
serious damage done to the Kerem Shalom crossing
by protesters during recent weeks. I look forward to
further measures that will enable an increase in the
entry of goods and stimulate economic activity.

I also welcome the decision by the Palestinian
Government to provide critical medical supplies and
doctors to Gaza after the tragic events of 14 May, as
well as their engagement with the United Nations on
facilitating much needed deliveries to Gaza.

The AHLC has identified several critical projects
aimed at ensuring a long-term future for Gaza, and
I am encouraged by ongoing work with our partners
to prioritize a short list of key projects based on
the conclusions of our recent meetings in Cairo,
Washington, DC, and Brussels.

We are engaged constructively with Israel, the
Palestinian Government and Egypt to discuss how to
improve coordination and move forward.

I also urge the international community to
generously support those goals, both financially and
politically. Progress is dependant on the coordinated
action and sustained commitment of all stakeholders.

Taking a step back from the immediate situation in
Gaza, the confluence of conflicts in the Middle East is
raising tensions on multiple fronts - in Syria, in Yemen
and, clearly, on the Israeli-Palestinian track. Amid the
political stagnation, frustration and disillusionment
in the Palestinian diaspora is also mounting. People
are watching events there very closely. Confined to
often squalid refugee camps, devastated by war, most
notably and tragically in the Yarmouk camp in Syria,
and with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East experiencing
a severe funding crisis, Palestinian refugees are
increasingly facing an untenable situation, risking an
expanded humanitarian crisis and further instability.

Developments inJerusalem andinGazareverberated
with some protests across Lebanon, mostly in refugee
camps. Thankfully, no violent incidents were reported.

In a important development on 30 April, the
Palestinian National Council convened in Ramallah
for the first time in 22 years, where President Abbas
was re-elected as its Chairman. While reiterating the
commitment to a peaceful solution based on long-
standing parameters and United Nations resolutions,
inter alia, the final statement urged the suspension of
the recognition of Israel, security coordination and the
Paris Protocol. It also outlined international moves that
the Palestinians are planning to take to advance the
goal of an independent Palestinian State and to seek
protection for the Palestinian people.

Regrettably, the announcement that the salaries of
Palestinian Authority employees in Gaza will be paid
has not been implemented, which further contributes to
the explosive situation in the Strip.

On 15 May, Palestine acceded to the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization and the
Convention on the Prohibition, Stockpiling and Use of
Chemical Weapons.

Meanwhile, in other developments I must note that
no settlement plans were approved and no tenders were
issued in the occupied West Bank, including Jerusalem,
during the reporting period. Settlement construction
in Area C in East Jerusalem, however, has continued,
and the Israeli Government has approved major plans
focused on solidifying its control of East Jerusalem.
Israeli authorities have also demolished or seized some
30 Palestinian-owned structures across the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. As a result, 43 Palestinians
have been displaced and the livelihoods of more than
140 have been affected. On 2 May, Israel demolished
or seized some 14 structures in the Masafer Yatta area
of xouth Hebron, located in an Israeli-declared military
firing zone. At least nine households have been
impacted, with some 35 people displaced.

I am also concerned by developments regarding
Khan Al-Ahmar/Abu Al-Helu, a vulnerable Palestinian
Bedouin community east of Jerusalem, home to some
180 people 4 over half of whom are children - who
also faced an increased risk ofdemolition and relocation.

In separate security incidents, Israeli Defence
Forces targeted Hamas facilities in Gaza on at least 10
occasions, with no injuries having been reported.

During the reporting period, the Israeli Defence
Forces also destroyed two tunnels it attributed to
Hamas, bringing the total number of tunnels destroyed
since October to 10. Amid Israeli reports of violence
directed at Israeli forces, on 16 May Palestinian
militants reportedly fired machine-gun rounds towards
Israeli troops, hitting several houses in the Israeli town
of Sderot, which caused damage but no injuries.

I also note the move of the Embassies of the United
States of America, Guatemala and Paraguay from Tel
Aviv to Jerusalem. I reiterate the position of the United
Nations that Jerusalem is a final-status issue that must
be resolved through negotiations between the parties
based on relevant resolutions. Given the importance to
Jews, Christians and Muslims, Jerusalem is a highly
sensitive and charged issue for millions of believers
around the world. Therefore, upholding the status quo
at the holy sites remains critical for peace and stability.

The Secretary-General voiced his utmost concern
following reports of heightened tensions, missile
launches from Syria targeting Israeli positions, and
retaliatory strikes by the Israeli Defence Forces. In
the context of the 10 May events, United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) personnel
have observed a high level ofkinetic activity in the areas
of separation and limitation and across the ceasefire
line. Some of that activity impacted locations in the
northern and central parts of the area of separation.
Throughout those events, UNDOF maintained liaison
with both sides to ensure that the parties respected the
1974 Disengagement of Forces Agreement.
In conclusion, I would like to say a few words on the
challenges and opportunities ahead. We need a unified
approach to change the current reality on the ground in
Gaza. While the international community has a central
role to play, leaders on all sides of the conflict must
show the political will and determination to achieve
genuine progress. Every day that the intra-Palestinian
political paralysis continues and every day that the
closures persist, more lives are put at risk in Gaza.
Turning the Gaza tap on and off is not a sustainable
strategy for anyone. We must break the cycle or risk
more lethal consequences. Gaza is an integral part ofthe
larger puzzle. Ultimately, the success of any initiative
in Gaza is linked to a credible political horizon that
unites all Palestinians.

At the same time, we cannot ignore the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, where settlement
construction continues and the situation remains fragile.
Nor can we lose sight of the broader political picture
and the need to bring the sides back to the negotiating
table. In that regard, as discussed on my recent visits
to the Russian Federation and Jordan, the Middle East
Quartet remains a key forum to discuss perspectives
for resolving the conflict, including within the broader
regional context. We must continue to work together to
end the occupation and bring abou ta just, lasting and
comprehensive resolution to the long-standing Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the basis of two-States and in
line with the relevant United Nations resolutions and
prior agreements. There is no alternative to achieving a
peaceful future for all the people of this troubled land.

