Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): The
situation in Somalia is worrisome and demands the
international community's priority attention. This is
why we voted in favour of resolution 2036 (2012)
today. We hope that it will contribute to the success of
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM). We pay
tribute to its personnel, who are carrying out a difficult
and critical task on the ground.

The adoption of resolution 2036 (2012) bears
witness to the commitment of the international
community and should lead Somalis to take up their
responsibilities so as to resolve the crisis in their
country. That will require the development of a sound
political strategy and effective administration in the
liberated zones of the country. We hope that the
London conference on Somalia will allow for progress
in that respect.

We must also encourage the development of the
Somali security forces. The European Union is making
significant contributions to that end and preparing to
strengthen its support to the maritime and legal
capacities of Somalia and the other countries of the
region. Others should contribute to that effort. Finally,
the Somali authorities must be fully committed to
combating piracy, including on the legal front.

I stress the importance of the financial support to
AMISOM. that is provided by the European Union,
which is financing personnel to the tune of some
€130 million. Obviously, the European Union, whose
members already contribute more than 40 per cent of
the budgets of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
cannot alone assume the entire financial burden for the
implementation of the decision taken today by the
Council. That would be taxing the European Union
5
twofold. We therefore call for new donors to commit
financially to the funding of AMISOM.

In conclusion, I recall the need for strategic
consideration of the future of peacekeeping operations
in general. Increasing troop levels alone cannot
guarantee the success of such missions. We must also
ensure that costs are controlled in an Organization
where five countries cover more than 60 per cent of the
budget of peacekeeping operations. In the context of a
6

global financial crisis, this is a limitation that the
Secretariat and all relevant players must take more
fully into account. We shall continue to accord great
attention to that issue.

