Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I thank all our briefers. I hear what you say, Mr. President, about interactivity, but this is an open meeting, and we have not had one for a couple of months, so please excuse me if I set out the United Kingdom's position. I promise that we will be interactive in consultations. The United Kingdom is extremely concerned that the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is compounding an already devastating humanitarian situation in Yemen. The officially reported cases do not represent the reality. Modelling shows that in a worst case scenario, 85,000 Yemenis could die. We are frustrated that the Houthis, in particular, are not reporting cases, have resisted implementing many mitigation measures and are preventing critical health activities from taking place, including vaccinations. We call on all Yemeni parties to ensure unrestricted humanitarian access, report cases transparently and facilitate the United Nations response. I am extremely concerned that the recent food security assessment for southern Yemen projects the fact that an additional 1.2 million people will be facing food insecurity this year. I note that the Houthis have obstructed the assessment in the north. This situation is driven by economic contraction. Yemen's currency is continuing to depreciate to staggering new lows this year, with food prices rising by more than 10 per cent in June alone. Let us be frank with each other - famine is now a realistic prospect, as Mark Lowcock has made only too clear. As we heard, this will disproportionately affect those who are already marginalized, particularly persons with disabilities. There are two key actions the international community can take to prevent a disastrous famine from being realized in Yemen this year. First is to urgently provide significant funding to the United Nations humanitarian appeal. The United Nations has received only $800 million this year, compared with $2.6 billion at this point last year. This gap is hindering, or crippling, the humanitarian response, with 12 of the 38 major United Nations programmes, including for food assistance, already forced to scale back. In response, the United Kingdom has already disbursed over 50 per cent of its £160 million, that is, $200 million, of funding in Yemen this year. We urge all donors to now step up and provide significant humanitarian funding to the United Nations. The second action is to provide financial assistance to the Central Bank of Yemen so that it has sufficient hard currency to sustain food imports. That will be decisive to preventing a further collapse of household incomes and to stabilizing prices. The Government of Yemen has a role to play in that regard. We call on it to develop a credible and transparent plan that reassures donors and includes the payment of public salaries. The United Kingdom is responding through that $200-million funding commitment to the United Nations this year. We expect to conduct more than 700,000 medical consultations for a range of health conditions, train 1,500 health-care workers to work safely ina COVID-19 environment and ensure a much- needed boost to nearly 600 health centres in order to continue delivering existing health services. We are also extremely concerned about the developing threat from desert locusts. We understand that favourable breeding conditions have existed owing to the heavy rain. There needs to be access to evaluate the options, including spraying, in order to mitigate this problem. The impact will be severe, not only in Yemen but also, potentially, across Africa and in Asia. We would welcome any update that Mark Lowcock can provide in the closed consultations. The risk of famine makes it all the more important that the Yemeni parties reach the necessary compromises to urgently agree a nationwide ceasefire and a comprehensive political process to end the war once and for all. While negotiations continue, the Houthis' offensive on Ma'rib and cross-border attacks in Saudi Arabia have provoked an escalation in the conflict. This behaviour has cast doubt over theirintentions, and the escalations have resulted in civilians dying in missile and air attacks. The Houthis must cease such provocations. I welcome the close coordination of Security Council members, both here and in the region, in their support to Special Envoy Martin Griffiths. We must remain resolute and unified in our message to the Yemeni parties - to all Yemeni parties - that now is the time to cease hostilities and agree to the proposals on the table. There was a welcome announcement this week that the Saudi mediation has led to renewed impetus to implement the Riyadh agreement. I must stress the importance of its swift implementation, including the formation of a joint delegation for the United Nations- led peace process. This month in the Council, we also focused on the devastating impact of an oil leak from the FSO SAFER tanker (see S/2020/721), as set out earlier by Mark Lowcock. Although the Houthis have repeatedly agreed in principle to United Nations assistance, they have proved unwilling to take that forward in practice, instead imposing preconditions and linking it with other issues. After 14 days, the experts' visas have not been approved. The Houthis momentarily approved them, only to cancel them the same day, claiming that was done in error. I urge the Houthis to facilitate the experts in that work. Anything less is extremely reckless. Let me conclude by echoing Martin Griffiths's warning over negotiations slipping away from us. It must be a clear expectation of all of us in the Council that we expect the Yemeni parties to resolve the outstanding issues swiftly and to agree a ceasefire and a political process. Let us all resolve to use all the tools at our disposal to achieve them.
