The President (spoke in Spanish): Putting aside
for a few minutes my functions as President of the
Council, I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Permanent Representative of Mexico.

I too thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe, for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General on mediation and settlement of
disputes (S/2009/189). I would also like to
acknowledge the efforts made by the delegation of
Burkina Faso in promoting awareness with respect to
this very important item on our agenda.

The large number of delegations taking part in
this open debate reflects the importance of mediation
for international peace and security. It also reflects the
great interest that we all share in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and the need to complement our
efforts, from within our own individual contexts, to
strengthen the Organization's role in mediation and
conflict prevention. Mexico is committed to promoting
compliance with those recommendations that are
relevant to the work of the Security Council as well as
to the fostering commitments that will be adopted after
this debate.
The introduction of the report of the Secretary-
General gives us an opportunity to discuss and propose
strategies for the settlement of disputes through
mediation.

Traditionally, the Organization has always sought
to resolve crises reactively once they have already
broken out, diminishing its capacity for immediate
action and its preventive role. From several points of
View, we must insist today on the great advantages
offered by United Nations prevention activities.

The cost of peace will always be less than that of
war. Several United Nations reports on conflict
prevention point out that the international community
spent roughly $200 billion in the seven largest
operations of the 1990s: Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Somalia, Rwanda, Haiti, the Persian Gulf, Cambodia
and El Salvador. These reports also calculate that by
taking a preventive approach the United Nations would
have saved the international community almost
$130 billion, not even thinking about the number of
victims of all of these conflicts.

Other studies have shown that over the past
15 years so-called military victories have only resolved
less than 8 per cent of conflicts, while negotiations
have prevailed in the remaining 92 per cent of the
cases.

Mexico has always spoken out in favour of the
peaceful settlement of disputes and remains convinced
that the true strengthening of the Organization's role in
the world depends largely on enhancing the application
of Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations.
Throughout its history, my country has been one of its
most active promoters, resorting to international
tribunals and arbitration and intensively promoting
peaceful dispute settlement through mediation in our
region.

Mediation basically refers to peacebuilding and
creative and coordinated participation in peace
processes with a view to forging agreements and
generating political and social stability through
negotiation and the fostering of dialogue, beyond
scenarios of social and political crisis.

We firmly believe that, to a large extent and
thanks to mediation, the region of Latin America and
the Caribbean has for several decades been one of the
most peaceful regions on the planet. Mediation has
favoured the settlement of political, ideological and
territorial conflicts and border disputes.

In 1983, the Contadora Group led mediation
efforts to restore and maintain peace and security in
Central America. Together with Colombia, Panama and
Venezuela, Mexico established a mediation mechanism
to achieve the easing of tension, political
understanding and cooperation in Central America. The
consensus achieved through this group is a clear
example that in a changing reality political dialogue
must be an essential tool for understanding between
States. Contadora laid the foundations for peace in
Central America, which are enshrined in the Esquipulas
Agreements undertaken by the States involved in the
region.

In the case of El Salvador, Mexico's participation
with the so-called Group of Four facilitated peace
efforts that afterwards made it possible to achieve the
signing of peace agreements in Chapultepec, Mexico,
in 1992. On that occasion, Colombia, Spain, Venezuela
and Mexico made up the so-called Group of Friends of
the Secretary-General, which offered ongoing support
to the negotiation efforts of the United Nations. In that
context, the Organization took part as an intermediary
and subsequently was in charge of verifying the
solution of a non-international armed conflict. This
negotiating process stood out not only for its success in
peacemaking but also for its innovative character and
for the precedent set at the international level.

Similarly, the Group of Friends of Guatemala
contributed to the restoration of constitutional and
democratic order in that country.

These episodes in Latin American diplomacy not
only provide the region of Latin America and the
Caribbean with broad experience in the area of
mediation and the peaceful settlement of disputes, but
have also laid the basis for the establishment of
mechanisms for consultation and political dialogue,
which are important assets in tackling threats to peace
and security in the region.

We should point out that the Contadora Group
and the Contadora Support Group gave rise to the Rio
Group, whose work has been recognized, for example,
in the recent crisis between Ecuador and Colombia in
2008. The work of the Rio Group was decisive in
preserving peace and taking the lead towards a
peaceful solution to the crisis.

The vocation of the Latin American and
Caribbean region is in favour of the peaceful
settlement of disputes. The settlement of conflicts such
as those of the Beagle Channel between Argentina and
Chile and the border between Ecuador and Peru, as
well as the referral of a number of territorial disputes
and border demarcation to the International Court of
Justice are all clear examples of our vocation.

As Article 33 of the Charter points out, the parties
to any dispute, the continuance of which is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace and
security, shall, first of all, seek a solution by traditional
peaceful means.

The Security Council must provide ample
opportunity for ongoing reconciliation procedures
before calling for action on the basis of Articles 40 and
41 of the Charter. It is precisely in accordance with
Article 33 that there is an obligation for all parties to a
dispute to seek to resolve them through conventional
means. Obviously, mediation must be consensual and
the ideal of obligations comes up once the actors or
parties to a conflict have agreed to resort to it.
However, both mediation and other peaceful means to
settle disputes must be exhausted before we resort to
actions provided for under Chapter VII.

In our efforts to strengthen mediation activities,
we must acknowledge that due to the diversity and
complexity of current conflicts, those activities must be
adapted to and control the specific context in which
they are to operate. Even though the United Nations
must play an important role in supporting mediation
processes, it does not have a monopoly on these
processes. Rather, we must acknowledge the
effectiveness that can be shown by diverse players,
such as the States concerned, regional and subregional
bodies and humanitarian, civilian and other
organizations, and we must support their work on the
basis of the characteristics of the dispute or conflict.
Examples of this approach can be seen in recent cases,
such as those of Zimbabwe and Kenya and in
resolution 1860 (2009) itself, adopted by the Council
last January.
Mexico believes that the Security Council has the
dual challenge of urging States to settle their disputes
peacefully and also to offer all the support necessary to
strengthen and contribute to mediation exercises that
are under way. For his part, the Secretary-General must
continue to play an important role in preventing

conflicts that endanger international peace and
security, offering his good offices to the parties in
conflict. We applaud the good offices of the Secretary-
General and welcome the establishment of the
Mediation Support Unit within the Department of
Political Affairs.

In my delegation's opinion, the Security Council
must be periodically informed on the progress that the
Organization is making in that area. In that regard, my
delegation believes that it is useful for the Secretary-
General to present timely and detailed information on
the mediation processes coordinated by the United
Nations.

I thus conclude my statement as the
representative of Mexico, and I now resume my
functions as President of the Council.

We shall now turn to the list of speakers under
rule 37. I first to give the floor to the representative of
Brazil.

