Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me begin by thanking High Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing. Let me say, Mr. President, that I believe you have today shown contempt for members of the Security Council. You, Mr. President, put a briefer to the vote. You received two votes in favour alongside your own. Members of the Council did not support your briefer, but you chose to ignore the decision of the Council. lam reminded of the time when Russia demanded a meeting on Ukraine (see S/PV.8529), which Russia insisted must be timed to coincide with the inauguration of the President of Ukraine. When you failed to get the votes in favour of that meeting taking place, you also read out your intervention as if the meeting were happening. Again, you showed contempt for the decision of the members of the Council. But it is perhaps not a surprise that Russia chooses to ignore the rules by which it wants others to abide. Resolution 2118 (2013) is clear on the purpose of our monthly meetings. It is for the Security Council to review the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013) and the decision of 27 September 2013 of the Executive Council of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). Our discussion should focus on these issues. Any briefers should be relevant to these issues and be able to brief us on them. And I would say to you, Mr. President, that when you propose briefers that we were not particularly enthusiastic about during your presidency last year, we accepted them. That was in a discreet counter-terrorism event, on an issue not usually discussed in the Council. But this meeting is a monthly meeting on a particularly sensitive issue on which Russia is directly engaged on the ground. So, please, do not pretend that it is some sort of presidential right to propose briefers. Russia is a party to the issue of chemical-weapons use in Syria, as we all know. We should be particularly cautious about agreeing to briefers whose only purpose can be to undermine and call into question the integrity of the OPCW. Such briefers well serve only to politicize our discussion and distract us from the real issues. With regard to Mr. Bustani, as I said before, he has had a distinguished diplomatic career, and we have full respect for him. But he left his role as Director General of the OPCW in 2002, and it was clear from your words today, Mr. President, that this casts a long shadow over him and his views. It was long before resolution 2118 (2013) was adopted, long before Syria even acceded to the Chemical Weapons Convention and long before the OPCW had carried out any investigations in Syria. I am afraid, with respect to him, he is irrelevant to our discussion of the implementation of resolution 2118 (2013). I therefore call on all those who continually seek to undermine the OPCW in order to protect the Syrian regime - and perhaps to protect themselves - from accountability to stop doing so. I want to express my full agreement with what my colleague from the United States said about the Aria Format meeting on 28 September. I would say that, were the Russian Federation at all interested in a genuine discussion of evidence, they would have attended the meeting during the Estonian presidency with the Director General of the OPCW and the head of the Investigation and Identification Team, Mr. Santiago Ofate Laborde. But the Russian relegation refused to permit the Head of the Team to brief in a formal Council meeting. It then left empty chairs and an informal meeting attended by all other Council members. So, given that the Russian delegation has spoken so passionately in favour of transparency today, and given it as willing to propose a briefer last involved with the OPCW 18 years ago, I have no doubt that the Russian delegation will be supporting an invitation to Mr. Ofate Laborde to brief the Council so that we may debate the evidence. Let me now turn to the real purpose of this meeting. I want to thank the Director General of the OPCW for his eighty-fourth monthly report (S/2020/961, annex). Regarding the work of the Declaration Assessment Team, we note that the Syrian regime has provided some further information to the Team, including two amendments to its initial declaration. That is why, by the way, we need the answers to the questions that have been raised continuously by the Declaration Assessment Team. Syria's declaration is not a complete declaration. These further amendments are, as I say, further evidence that the initial declaration was inaccurate. I hope very much that this further information assists in clarifying some of the many outstanding issues. I urge Syria to cooperate fully with the OPCW to make progress on all of the outstanding issues. As we said last month (see S/2020/902), the outstanding issues on Syria's declaration are significant and go to the heart of Syria's compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. Until all outstanding issues are resolved, we cannot be sure of the complete elimination of Syria's chemical-weapons programme. These concerns are not hypothetical, particularly in the light of the findings by the OPC W-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism, and now the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team, that the Syrian regime has used chemical weapons on at least seven occasions since 2013. After six years of outstanding compliance issues and further confirmation of the Syrian regime's use of chemical weapons by the Investigation and Identification Team in April this year, we welcome the robust, proportionate and reasonable action taken bythe OPCW Executive Council in its decision of 9 July. In that decision, the Executive Council gave Syria 90 days to come into compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. The deadline for this action is tomorrow, and we call on Syria to make a final effort to respect the decision to redress the issues in its declaration and to come into compliance with the Chemical Weapons Convention. Should the Director General find that Syria has not completed the stipulated measures in full, it will be for the Conference of the States Parties to decide on appropriate action to take. The confirmed use of chemical weapons by the Syrian regime represents a breach of resolution 2118 (2013), as does its ongoing failure to comply with the Convention and to cooperate fully with the OPCW. The Council should address non-compliance with its resolutions and the clear threats to international peace and security that they represent. Finally, we note that last Friday, 2 October, the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission published its reports on the alleged chemical weapons attacks in Saraqib in 2016 and Aleppo in 2018. We continue to consider the details of the report. In the case of the alleged Aleppo attack, in 2018, the findings of the Fact-Finding Mission appear consistent with our assessment at the time that it was highly unlikely that chlorine was used as alleged or that the opposition was responsible for the incident. I think it would have been helpful if Russia or Syria had provided evidence with the Fact-Finding Mission, had they had it, of any attack. In the case of the Saraqib report, there is evidence suggesting the possibility of a Syrian regime chlorine attack. There is evidence of the presence of a helicopter, a barrel bomb that was not filled with conventional explosives and exposure of victims to an irritant consistent with chlorine. These are all familiar characteristics of regime chlorine attacks, such as those on Qmenas and Sarmin in 2015, for which the Joint Investigative Mechanism identified the regime as responsible. In this case, however, the result of the Fact- Finding Mission's analysis of all available data did not allow the Mission to establish whether or not chemicals were used as a weapon. We are content to accept the Fact-Finding Mission's conclusion in the absence of further evidence that would clearly show whether or not a chemical attack took place. We welcome the fact that the Fact-Finding Mission, as in its investigation of the chemical-weapons attack in Duma, did not jump to hasty conclusions but took its time to carry out a thorough investigation and reach conclusions on the basis of all available evidence. We would encourage all parties to continue to do their utmost and in good faith to assist the Fact-Finding Mission with its investigations.
