The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity.

The founding Charter of our Organization affirms
faith in fundamental human rights and in the dignity
of the human person. It also establishes that Member
States are obliged to comply with the Security Council's
decisions. However, none of those assertions seems to
apply to Darfur, and to a large degree it is the Council's
responsibility to deal with that.
I wish to recall that 11 years have passed since the
Council referred the situation in Darfur. We therefore
reiterate our call to the Government of the Sudan to
comply with the mandate in resolution 1593 (2005) and
to cooperate with the International Criminal Court, in
compliance with its obligations as a Member State. We
would also like to remind States parties to the Rome
Statute of the obligation to cooperate that they assumed
upon ratification of the Statute.

While the decline in violence in Darfur is positive,
the situation is still very far from satisfactory. The
continuing clashes, especially in Jebel Marra; the
persistence of violations of international humanitarian
law and of violations and abuses of human rights;
the continued obstacles to access for the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
humanitarian organizations; and the persistent climate
of impunity are all unacceptable. We reiterate our call
to all parties to join a peace process, which should be
inclusive. We remind the Sudanese Government of its
special responsibility to protect the population. We also
reiterate our conviction that there can be no lasting
peace without justice.

This is the last statement that my country will make
in the Security Council when Ms. Bensouda is present,
and I would like to reiterate Spain's commitment to the
Court, which for my country is first and foremost a
commitment to victims. It is clear that the Court's work
with regard to Darfur has played a role in the crisis
that has arisen thanks to the decision of three States
parties to withdraw from the Rome Statute. Spain,

which last year enacted a law on immunities expressly
guaranteeing respect for obligations arising from its
membership in the Court, would like to reaffirm its
readiness to participate in a constructive dialogue that
can build bridges. The International Criminal Court is
the best instrument we have for combating impunity in a
world where respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law is lacking, and where violations have
reached intolerable levels. In that context, the Court is
our last hope, and the last hope of thousands of victims.

After some 12 years without results, it is easy to
give way to discouragement and frustration. But it is our
obligation - that of members of the Security Council,
of States parties and of Ms. Bensouda herself - to
safeguard and continue seeking avenues for dialogue
between the Council and the Court that would enable
us to return to the path of cooperation. We owe it to
the victims of Darfur. It is up to us to restore their
confidence in the authority of law and justice.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

