Mr. Ramirez Carreflo (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, on behalf of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, we congratulate
your country, Sir, on its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council, as well as the new non-permanent
members of the Council. Likewise, we appreciate the
convening of this very important open debate and the
concept note (S/2017/6, annex), which was diligently
circulated. We thank the Secretary-General for his
participation in this meeting and for the important
remarks that he contributed, and we reiterate the
support and full cooperation of the Bolivarian Republic
of Venezuela for his stewardship of the Organization.

In recent years, the evolution of the situation on
the ground throughout the world has transformed the
nature of conflicts and threats to international peace
and security, which today include not only bellicose
confrontations but also encompass economic, financial
and technological dimensions that negatively impact
the stability of countries, owing to new challenges
that violate the sovereignty of those countries and run
contrary to the principle ofnon-interference in countries'
internal affairs. The seriousness and complexity of
the challenges posed require a determined approach
by the United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, so as to enable Member States to agree on
new multilateral approaches and adequate responses,
within the framework of the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, to situations that
may arise from those new threats to the sovereignty and
political independence of countries.

Threats to international peace and security
resulting from terrorism, the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, prolonged conflicts and
unresolved colonial situations, as well as the cases of
violence and destabilization that have recently arisen
in the Middle East and North Africa, require strong
political will and willingness on the part of Member
States to conduct their international relations in the
framework of equality and respect for sovereignty
and territorial integrity, without interference in
their internal affairs, and with a commitment to the
peaceful settlement of conflicts. It is no secret that the
Organization, in particular the Security Council, reacts
reflexively when faced by conflicts, favouring the use
of short-term military and sanctions measures instead
of political actions that could address the root causes
of the problems. Moreover, most often, permanent
members of the Council are implicated and participate
directly in conflicts, providing military and financial
support to one of the sides involved, thereby rendering
it enormously difficult for the Council to take action.

Therefore, the peaceful settlement of conflicts,
particularly longstanding ones, such as the Palestinian
question and outstanding colonial situations in various
areas of the world, such as the question of Western
Sahara, the last colony in Africa, must remain an
essential aspect of the work of the Organization, in
particular the Security Council, whose responsibility
to maintain international peace and security gives
rise to its ineluctable obligation to deal with conflicts.
Often the consideration of such conflicts has been
deferred with regard to their solution but has often
been suppressed in the Council by the inaction of some
permanent members that put their national interests
before collective action that would promote the interests
of multilateralism.

A reflection of that reality has been the prolonged
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, resulting from Israel's
illegal occupation of the territory of the State of
Palestine. Seventy years have passed without the
realization of the legitimate and just aspirations for self-
determination of the Palestinian people, whose rights,
which should be expressed in the form of a sovereign,
free and independent State, have been violated by the
occupying Power with the support of members of the
Security Council. We also see a similar situation in the
Western Sahara, which has been occupied by Morocco
for 25 years since the referendum that was promoted by
resolution 690 (1991).

Moreover, the settlement of conflicts and the goal
of sustainable peace include a whole range of political
and institutional activities and long-term development,
which seek to address the profound causes of conflicts
and prevent those root causes from surfacing or
resurfacing, as well as bring about lasting peace. Last
year, the peacebuilding architecture was the subject of
reflection on how the United Nations should be dealing
with this issue. My country, during its presidency of the
Security Council, took that opportunity to contribute
to the discussion through the convening of an open
debate on peacebuilding held on 23 February 2016 (see S/PV.7629).

Achieving sustainable peace will be possible only
to the extent that we address the root causes of conflicts.
In this regard, we must place greater emphasis on
relaunching sustainable economic development in
countries that have just emerged from or might fall
back into conflict situations. We cannot claim to be
sustaining peace when we ignore the need of peoples
to overcome their most basic socioeconomic problems,
obtain the means to earn a living and lay the foundations
for inclusive development and social justice.

Despite the fact that the majority of countries in
post-conflict situations take some 20 years to recover
their capacities, international financing drops off after
the first four to eight years. This is due to the fact that
many bilateral or multilateral assistance packages
set conditions with regard to quality of governance
and institutional capacity, which very few countries
in these terrible circumstances cannot satisfy fully.
Capacity cannot be generated overnight, and solutions
are not quite as simple as some seem to think, given
the institutional weakness of countries emerging from
conflict. To grasp the particular circumstances of
such countries is especially important. International
financial institutions and donor countries must keep
this in mind and offer assistance and aid in a more
flexible and sustained manner. Countries emerging
from conflict can take a long time to recover, and that
process can be a stop-and-start one. But international
assistance must be sustained and continue over the long
term. That is the only way in which root causes can be
dealt with and the vicious circle of conflict broken.

We cannot but warn that any intervention that
promotes the dismantling of State institutions, as,
unfortunately, happened in Iraq, Libya and Syria, is
counterproductive in terms of achieving a sustainable
long-term peace, as it promotes the expansion of
extremist and terrorist groups on a country's territory.
The creation of resources at the national level is
therefore vital to sustainable peace.

Finally, all of these steps are key to giving
countries emerging from conflict the capacities
necessary to prevent any replapse into conflict and
build a sustainable peace.

