Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. De Mistura and Ambassador Tanin for their
briefings, and endorse the statement to be made by the
representative of the European Union.

As we prepare to renew the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), the report of the Secretary-General
(S/20ll/120*) reminds us of the overall political

l 1-26621
context in which that decision is being taken. With the
Kabul process and the declaration on the transition
adopted in Lisbon on 20 November, the Afghan
Government and the nations committed to it set out a
road map for Afghans to resume full exercise of their
sovereignty.

President Karzai will soon announce the list of
the first towns and provinces for whose security
Afghans will assume responsibility, the first phase of a
gradual transfer throughout the entire country by the
end of 2014. France fully supports the transition
process. Together with the Afghan Government and our
allies, we are committed to making that transfer
possible in those areas where our civilian and military
components are deployed. We want this to be lasting
and irreversible, and to lead to Afghan assumption of
responsibilities for governance and development.

To that end, we must advance on three fronts.
First, on the security front, we have retaken the
military initiative and allowed the Afghan State to
regain its footing in a number of areas. The Afghan
army and police are increasing in power. Our military
and training efforts are beginning to bear fruit, but at
the cost of very heavy fighting that has led to an
increase in civilian deaths. We know that three-quarters
of such deaths are caused by insurgents who no longer
hesitate to strike civilian targets and ramp up their
assassinations. We understand the emotion that this
engenders, and should ensure that the number of
civilians killed or wounded by pro-Government forces
continues to decrease as it has done in recent years.

In the political field, now that legislative
elections have been held and the new Parliament has
been seated, we call on all Afghan institutions to meet
the true expectations of the voters and to respect their
mutual competencies in the framework laid out in the
Constitution and based on the principle of the
separation of powers.

We also note the progress made in inter-Afghan
reconciliation. We continue to support President
Karzai's efforts and the actions of the High Peace
Council. The insurgents, whoever they may be, need to
understand that, if they wish to rejoin political life in
Afghanistan, they must break their ties to Al-Qaida and
not allow their country to become once again a
platform for international terrorism.

On the development front, we have mutual
obligations. The international community must better

11-2662]
coordinate its civil assistance and align it with Afghan
budget priorities. The Government must provide
assurances that its funds will be used appropriately and
directed to where they are most needed at the local
level and in the building of infrastructure that will
allow Afghan resources to be developed and exported
and the country to be opened to the outside world.
France will contribute to that effort in the framework
of its presidency of the Group of Eight and the plan
defined by the competent Afghan ministers at recent
international conferences. We will continue to closely
follow the consequences of the Kabul Bank affair.

This context makes the presence and activities of
UNAMA and the United Nations as a whole more
necessary than ever in that country. I take this
opportunity to reaffirm our gratitude to the staff of
UNAMA and to express our support for the efforts of
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura. We believe
that the mandate adopted last year in resolution 1917
(2010) identifies key priorities that remain relevant.
The coordination of assistance via the co-chairmanship
of the Joint Coordination and Monitoring Board,
electoral reform, reconciliation through the work of the
Salaam Support Group, the timely lifting of the
sanctions regime pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999),
military-civilian coordination in the framework of the
transition, and regional cooperation should continue to
guide the efforts of the Special Representative.

We take note of the letter addressed to the
Secretary-General by Mr. Rassoul (see S/2011/ 118) and
are pleased to note that most of his requests have been
incorporated into the draft resolution. Some points
should still be recalled.

First, we believe that the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General should remain involved in
electoral system reform, although the latter should be
undertaken first and foremost by the Afghans
themselves. The United Nations supported the Afghans
in the holding of elections in 2009 and 2010 and,
through its efforts on other fronts, accumulated
expertise that it would be a shame to squander.

Secondly, we need to adapt the mandate of
UNAMA to the new context of the transition, which
will gradually redefine the outlines of our civilian and
military involvement in Afghanistan. We will need
more than ever a robust United Nations presence in
Kabul and at the local level. The role of UNAMA
should therefore be strengthened and converted to take
into account international efforts on behalf of
Afghanistan. In the case of NATO, such efforts include
the launching of a long-term partnership with
Afghanistan. The lead role of the United Nations in
these efforts should be consolidated during the
transition.

Lastly, as requested by the Afghans, we must
profit from this context to make an overall assessment
of the work of UNAMA with a view to the next
extension of its mandate in March 2012. This
reconstruction should be undertaken in full
transparency with the Afghan authorities. Through that
l2-month re-extension, which we support, we reaffirm
our trust in the activities of the Special Representative
and our common desire to see an Afghanistan that is
democratic, independent, stable and prosperous and has
rejected violence and instability once and for all.

