Mr. De Gucht (Belgium): Madam President, I am
most grateful for your kind invitation to participate in
this debate on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. I commend you, Madam, and the
other members of the Council for the importance the
Security Council continues to give to this region and
for the special attention it is receiving under your
presidency.

Let me at the very outset stress the indispensable
and prominent role played by the United Nations in
Africa, both here in New York and in the field. Let me
also on this occasion share my personal feelings and
those of the people of Belgium with the families of the
eight peacekeepers who just a few days ago lost their
lives in the cause of peace.

Africa is one of the highest priorities for my
country, which is fully committed to its cause,
particularly to peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. Africa's problems are of concern
to us all. They need a forceful response, first and
foremost from Africa, but also from Africa's partners
within the international community. Belgium, working
bilaterally and very closely with its partners within the
European Union, is fully committed to a progressive
political and economic agenda for Africa. I should like
to associate myself fully with the statement made by
the representative of Austria on behalf of the European
Union.

Conflicts, together with the limited capacity of
many African States, greatly reduce the development
prospects of the whole continent. While Asia is lifting
itself rapidly out of poverty and Latin America
continues to make steady progress, the situation in
Africa is quite disturbing.

It is true that Africa has been a victim of past
history, of exploitation and of the slow response of the
international community to its needs. However, Africa is
also the victim of internal strife, endless war and regional
conflict, corruption and poor management. This cannot
go on - for Africa's sake and for the world's.

A real and sustainable take-off of the African
continent as a whole will be successful only if we can
establish lasting peace and stability in the Great Lakes
region. It is an illusion to think that a continent can be
developed as long as its heart is engulfed in conflict
and poverty. The Great Lakes region, and the Congo in
particular, have the potential to become the motor of
African development. It is therefore of the utmost
importance that the transition in the Congo be a
success and that the other countries in the region -
Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda - continue their
political and economic reconstruction process towards
the establishment of stable and democratic societies,
with a responsible leadership eager to build modern
state institutions based on the rule of law.

It is my strong opinion that the fate of Africa will
to a large extent depend on the future of the Great
Lakes region. We must seize the opportunity to help
the countries of that region pursue and consolidate
change, and we must do it now. How do we proceed?

I think that the time for reflection has passed.
International gatherings and conferences have no doubt
played a role in the overall awareness of the African
plight. But the time has now come to deliver - to
make sure that the average citizen in Africa can see
and feel that things are moving.

That implies a reappraisal of the donor efforts in
Africa. Have we been doing the right thing? Were we
perhaps inspired by colonial reflexes, by rivalry, or
simply by actors wanting to promote their short-term
interests without taking into account the needs of the
population? Are we doing enough to open up our
markets to African products? In short, is the
international community really gearing up for a much-
needed, comprehensive effort to give Africans all the
opportunities they need and deserve?

We, as representatives of the international
community, must dare to ask these critical questions.
But, conversely, Africans, too, must dare to live up to
their responsibilities. Former Minister Ousman Sy of
Mali said: "Africa is not poor, it is badly governed".
That is definitely too harsh a statement, but we have to
reflect upon it.

When speaking of good governance, I am not
referring to a moralizing concept imposed by outsiders.
Nor am I pleading for a system by which good and bad
points are distributed in a senseless contest. What I
mean by good governance is effective governance. It is
about institution-building, about Governments capable
of producing tangible results for the benefit of the
people. It is about creating the proper conditions for
sustainable development. Of course, it is impossible to
turn failing States into perfectly governed States
overnight. But it is possible to gradually improve and
to relentlessly enhance the performance of
Governments.

In that context, I would like to encourage current
African efforts to redress poor governance, such as the
African Peer Review Mechanism of the New
Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD). But I
am also thinking of concrete economic mechanisms
such as the Kimberley process. That mechanism has
proved to be quite efficient in containing the
smuggling of diamonds and in effectively limiting the
financing of conflicts in the continent. My country,
together with others, is currently studying the
possibility of introducing a similar system for the trade
in other raw materials.

Lasting and sustainable solutions to the
challenges at hand have to grow bottom-up, from the
inside, by empowering civil society and the emerging
political class fully to assume their newly recovered
responsibilities - bottom-up, not top-down; from the
inside, not the outside; and through empowerment, not
through tutelage. If that approach is to be successful,
we, the international community, must redirect our
attention from the abstract level of vague policy
recommendations to the concrete level of effective
implementation, in the field, for the benefit of the
people, whose fate is the ultimate object of our
concerns.

For any development to have a reasonable chance
of success, armed conflict must cease, the security of
people must be assured and the rule of law must be
guaranteed. Peace can be assured only when armies are
integrated, when the military personnel are decently
paid, when police forces are well organized and when
the judiciary is properly functioning.

I am convinced that the regional approach taken
by the Security Council when dealing with security
issues in a number of countries - such as Sudan, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Burundi - is
the right one. I commend the Council for its efforts and
refer in this respect to resolution 1625 (2005), as well
as to the resolution the Council will adopt today.

Long-term stability in Central Africa definitely
does require a regional approach. My vision for the
region is one of a growing pool of democratic countries
with inclusive Governments, stable institutions and a
functioning judiciary. I trust that the International
Conference for the Great Lakes Region, through its
action plan, will foster regional initiatives, including in
the field of development, in a focused way. I see a
stabilizing influence coming from regional economic
cooperation through a revitalized CEPGL - the
"Communaute Economique des Pays des Grands
Lacs" - which can be an instrument of integration
bringing the people of Congo, Rwanda and Burundi
closer together.

I think that, already at this stage, particular
attention should be given to the post-electoral period in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with a special
focus on good governance, development cooperation
and economic reconstruction. It is my personal opinion
that the new Peacebuilding Commission could play a
useful role in post-transition Congo.

I am very much encouraged by the smooth
transition and election process in Burundi, which opens
up prospects for lasting peace and stability not only in
Burundi itself but in the Great Lakes region in general.
In Burundi also, the Peacebuilding Commission may
be called upon to play a useful role.

Before concluding, I would like to stress the vital
contribution that countries of the region have made to
the restoration of peace and security in the Great Lakes
region. Some of those countries, such as Tanzania and
the Republic of the Congo, are currently members of
the Security Council. Others are not but play a role no
less crucial. Allow me to refer specifically to South
Africa and Angola. My country very much values its
cooperation with all these countries.

You can trust, Madam President, that we will
continue to work with all the countries of the region,
with all our partners in Africa and indeed with the
African Union itself, towards the establishment of
lasting peace in the region of the Great Lakes.

