We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened today's important meeting on the situation in the Persian Gulf. As we discuss this important issue, we deem it pertinent, like other speakers, to pay tribute to His late Highness Sheikh Sabah Al-Ahmad Al-Jaber Al-Sabah, Amir of the State of Kuwait, who was a beacon of peace and diplomacy. We appreciate the extensive briefing provided by the Secretary-General, as well as the information shared by Mr. Malley and Mr. Naumkin. Indonesia shares the concerns regarding the growing tensions in the Persian Gulf. Indeed, the increased risk of conflict in the area is troubling. I believe that everyone would agree that neither the region nor the international community can afford to deal with the consequences should the crisis further escalate. The scenario would be too grim. With that in mind, I wish to highlight some key elements that my delegation considers crucial in addressing the current issues as well as in ensuring long-term stability and security in the Persian Gulf. The first element is a coordinated approach to conflict prevention and mediation. It is evident that, besides the commitment of the regional actors to averting any escalation, an integrated approach to prevention on the part of the United Nations and the international community is also significant. Dialogue and mediation must always be encouraged when tensions arise. Diplomacy must be at the forefront, with the aim at achieving concrete solutions that would lead to regional stabilization. That is not easy, obviously; however, it is possible. In that context, Indonesia believes that it is essential for all parties to continue supporting the full and effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) and resolution 2231 (2015). The JCPOA, endorsed by resolution 2231 (2015), remains vital and relevant to the global nuclear non-proliferation architecture as well as to regional and international security. My delegation therefore calls on all JCPOA participants to fulfil their obligations completely and effectively, and to resolve all differences constructively within the JCPOA dispute resolution mechanism. Secondly, comprehensive measures are needed in addressing the political and socioeconomic issues in the region. We are all aware that tensions in the Persian Gulf are interrelated with the overall situation in the Middle East. It is crucial that the long-standing conflicts in the region, such as in Syria and Yemen, as well as the plea of the Palestinian people for their freedom, always be highlighted in our related discussions. It is of paramount importance to continue our efforts to reach a sustainable political settlement in this area. In addition, it is imperative to address mistrust and enhance confidence-building among the key players. We cannot resolve the security issues facing the Gulf region and the Middle East by using inflammatory rhetoric or accusations that are damaging to the prospects for peace. Again, we should not give up on dialogue and diplomacy. Specifically on the question of Palestine, Indonesia remains committed to extending unequivocal solidarity and support to the Palestinian people so that it can gain its rights, including the establishment of an independent State of Palestine, within the pre-1967 borders, and with East Jerusalem as its capital. We therefore should welcome and show our support for President Abbas's call at the high-level debate last month (see A/75/PV.10) for the Secretary-General to commence, together with the Quartet and the Security Council, an international conference with all the parties concerned to engage in a peace process, based on international law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and other internationally agreed parameters. It remains the obligation of the Council to safeguard the two- State vision for the sake of the Palestinian people and for that of the stability of the region and beyond. My last point is on respecting sovereignty and territorial integrity as the foundation of all efforts to create and maintain stability in the region. We agree that, in order to achieve a sustainable recovery of the situation in the Gulf, collective measures are paramount and must be based on firm respect for sovereignty. Neither can we forget the necessity of abiding by the Charter of the United Nations, international law and international humanitarian law as well as of the faithful implementation of all Security Council resolutions. A resolution, if not implemented, remains just a piece of paper. My delegation cannot offer a perfect scenario in addressing the complexity of issues in this region. However, Indonesia wishes to encourage all the relevant parties to give peace a real chance, based on good faith, that would lead to a sustained stability that leaves no room for tensions. We must put aside any potential steps towards politicization, which would only cause the people more suffering. Finding the path to peace is not difficult. When there is a will, there is a way. The challenge is whether we will take that path alone or together, and whether we will take it with each other or against each other. The options are clear, and our decision must be clear as well. Again, let us give peace a real chance.
