Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate.

Pakistan aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered by the Permanent Representatives of
Egypt and Kazakhstan on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization oflslamic Cooperation,
respectively.

We in the Security Council hold monthly
consultations on the Middle East, followed by these
quarterly open debates. The idea is to remain abreast
of the situation through closed consultations and
by listening to the views of non-members on how
to proceed in the open debates. We all agree that
this is the core issue in the Middle East. Without its
resolution, comprehensive peace will continue to
elude the region. Yet, the Middle East peace process
has stalled, and we see no serious effort towards its
resumption. Well-established terms of reference of
the peace process, including the Arab peace Initiative
and Security Council resolutions, provide an elaborate
framework. It is the political will of one of the parties
that continues to stymie us and, as a consequence, the
prospects of peace in the region.

The current situation gives rise to questions about
the role of the major actors, including the Security
Council and the Quartet. What is the role of the
Quartet? Is it doing justice to the task entrusted to it?
Similarly, why do countries that have influence over
the intransigent party not use that influence to nudge
it towards a resumption of the process? While we
continue to dither, the region is in turmoil. Without a
clear road map, chances of escalation remain high. The
Security Council must act now. Otherwise, the situation
may spiral totally out of control.

The Security Council continues to pay lip service to
the plight of Palestinians while they continue to languish
in abysmal conditions. According to the conclusions ofa
study called "Children in Military Custody" conducted
by a team of British lawyers and funded by the British
Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the occupying
Power imprisons hundreds of Palestinian children and
is in blatant breach of a number of provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Two legal systems continue to be in operation in
the occupied lands. This year's report (S/20l2/261) of
the Secretary-General on children and armed conflict
draws several conclusions. How can the rights of
Palestinians be protected under such unethical policies?
The Palestinians just marked five years since the
imposition of Israel's illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip.
According to United Nations estimates, 44 per cent of
the Palestinians in Gaza are food insecure, and 80 per
cent are aid dependent. Unemployment remains high,
and 38 per cent of the population lives below the poverty
line. While the collective punishment of 1.6 million
Palestinians continues unabated, in flagrant violation
of resolution 1860 (2009), the Security Council remains
paralysed and indecisive.

Does the international community think that
inaction will somehow lead to a resolution ofthe problem
on its own? Earlier, we proposed, and today reiterate,
that the Secretariat should present the Council with
a matrix on the implementation status of resolutions
adopted by the Council on the Palestinian question,
beginning with resolution 1860 (2009). It is only logical
for the Council to review the implementation of its own
resolutions and consider appropriate steps to address
non-compliance.

With the further intensification of the illegal
settlement campaign, it has again become evident that
prospects for a two-State solution on the basis of the
pre-1967 borders are being eroded. The announcement
in June of plans to construct additional units and to
grant subsidies for homes in the West Bank settlements,
backtracking on promises made earlier this year to deny
such incentives, are further proof of that mindset.

A report prepared by the Economic and Social
Council of West Asia on people living in the occupied
Palestinian territory states that Israel persists in
exploiting and endangering natural resources in the
territories. In addition, Palestinians and Syrians living
under occupation continue to suffer from discrimination
with respect to the allotment of water. The Human
Rights Council has established a fact-finding mission
to investigate those issues further. We hope that it will
be allowed to undertake its mandated task.

The question of a visit by the Security Council
to the occupied Palestinian territory remains on the
Council's agenda. The visit, we feel, would not only
provide Member States with an opportunity to observe
conditions on the ground; it would also restore much
needed attention and focus on the part of the international
community to that festering sore. The Council should
have responded positively to the Palestinian invitation.

Pakistan supports lasting peace for all inhabitants
of the Middle East. That is not possible without the full
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied lands, including
those of Lebanon and the Syrian Golan.

The solution to Syria's internal situation lies in a
Syrian-led political process and the framework of the
Council's resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). The
consensus adoption of resolution 2059 (2012) provides
an opportunity for all sides to commit to peace and for
all quarters to use their influence to genuinely support
the Special Envoy's plan.

The denial of the Palestinian's right to self-
determination remains at the heart of unrest in the
region.

Many speakers have mentioned the Arab Spring. In
our view, the essence of the Arab Spring, which is the
fulfilment of legitimate aspirations through peaceful
means, is of direct relevance to the Palestinian question.
It should be a reason to do away with the lethargy
and intransigence, and serve as the prime mover for
concerted actions to finally resolve a dispute that has
been hanging fire [at risk of exploding unexpectedly]
for decades.

Our ultimate objective is the creation of an
independent sovereign and viable Palestinian State. We
welcome the backing of the League of Arab States for
a Palestinian plan to ask for United Nations recognition
of the State of Palestine. We remain ready and willing
to assist.

