The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Senegal.

I wish to thank today's briefers for their
presentations of outstanding quality and clarity. Given
the remarks that have been delivered, I will not revisit
the framework of mechanisms and modalities of the
multidimensional cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
(OIC). Our meeting this morning has established that
such cooperation, seen from the point of view of the
fight against extremist ideology, shows the vitality of
the relations between the two organizations, which
share the same ideals of peace, security and security
and development, to name a few.

The convergence of objectives forms the basis ofthe
dynamic framework of cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC, marked in particular by the holding of
biannual coordination meetings for more than 25 years,
the last of which took place in May 2016 in Geneva,
leading to the adoption of a framework defining all
areas of cooperation, as well as the modalities and
mechanisms of implementation.

The vitality of the cooperation between the United
Nations and OIC is also evident on the ground, where
those great institutions have had a very positive impact
working closely on the restoration ofpeace and security
around the world, including in Palestine, Afghanistan,
Yemen, in Europe in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and also
in Africa in Sierra Leone, Mali, the Central African
Republic, Somalia, Libya and Darfur, among others. The
joint efforts of OIC and the United Nations in all areas
of international cooperation, including institutions such
as the World Health Organization, not only in the fight
against major pandemics, but also in the framework of
intercultural dialogue and fighting violent extremism
and terrorism, have been most important.

With regard to terrorism and violent extremism,
the delegation of Senegal welcomes the effective
collaboration between OIC and the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre, especially in support of
capacity-building aimed at preventing the phenomena
of extremism and terrorism. The discourse and,
unfortunately, the actions of terrorism and extremism
continue to deeply destabilize our societies by
corrupting some of our young people and women,
leading the future of our nations towards a dead end. We
must recognize that the current scope and new forms of
terrorism make the fight against it even more complex.
States, international organizations and civil society
must adapt and coordinate strategies and methods for
addressing it.

The Muslim world, which includes the countries that
are paying the highest price occasioned by terrorism,
needs more than ever for OIC to be its voice. Indeed, the
unjustifiable acts of terrorism hurt Muslims and lead
unfairly to mistrust or even fear of the religion of Islam.
Senegal, which solemnly reiterates its condemnation
of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, also
refutes, in this very Chamber, any attempt to attribute
terrorism to any religion, culture or civilization, just as
it denounces the desire to manipulate some groups of
misled people with a view to turning them Islamophobic.

Meanwhile, we welcome the significant progress
made on the ground in the fight against Da'esh, Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Iraq,
Syria, the Great Lakes Region of Africa and the Sahel,
but we must agree that security alone is no longer a
suitable solution in efforts to address the scourge of
terrorism. For however many terrorists are physically
eliminated, the ideology that underpins their actions
remains alive, as long as that ideology is not destroyed.
Furthermore, ulemas, scholars, intellectuals and other
educators around the world have a significant role
to play in deconstructing that ideology, a task that
requires dynamic interaction with youth, women and
all vulnerable groups, in order to pass on the message
of peace and moderation of the sacred book of Muslims
the Koran, and the teachings of the Prophet Mohammed.
That preventive strategy seems quite appropriate and
fortunately occupies an important place on the agenda
of our two organizations, which have made intercultural
dialogue an essential component.

The close collaboration between OIC and the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations is evidence of
that relationship. We align ourselves with the strategy
that stresses education for youth and women, and the
importance of better media in the fight against violent
extremism and terrorism. It would indeed be most
effective to educate youth and women with the relevant
information. Senegal therefore calls for broader
participation of young people and women in the design
and implementation of any future strategies dealing
with the scourge of terrorism, because they, the youth
and women, are the main targets and also the main
victims of it.

President Macky Sall of Senegal, in his added
capacity as Chair of the Standing Committee for
Information and Cultural Affairs of the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, announced, at the thirteenth
Islamic Summit held in Istanbul in April, the launch of
an international award to recognize the media and the
women and men of the media who exemplify tolerance
and intercultural harmony by fostering dialogue. I call
on all States members of OIC and the United Nations
to support that award, which will surely encourage the
press to work towards peace and stability.

If extremism has been able to thrive to such a
worrying extent, it is because the conditions of its
propagation are ripe within the vulnerable factions of
our populations that are strongly impacted by poverty
and underemployment, thereby leading to a breeding
ground for terrorism. It is in all of our interests to
strengthen our strategy in the fight against poverty and
underemployment. The new OIC Ten-Year Programme
of Action 2016-2025 gives an important place to
the eradication of extreme poverty in the member
countries. That goal is shared by the United Nations and
therefore requires our coordinated action for greater
effectiveness.

In closing, I would like to thank the contributors,
the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the
Secretary General of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, who are aware of the magnitude
and complexity of the challenges, which is why
they have been working for years to strengthen
organized and productive cooperation between the
two organizations. We urge Antonio Guterres, the
Secretary-General-designate of the United Nations,
and Dr. Yusuf Al-Othaimeen to persevere in carrying
out that duty. We should also build upon what was
said by Mr. Souleymane Bachir Diagne, namely,
to use education, enhance pluralism and promote
environmental awareness everywhere and at all levels.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Opeloyeru to make
observations on the statements delivered.

