At the outset, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the French presidency of the Council for organizing this important meeting on the situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question. My delegation also wishes to thank the Secretary-General and the other briefers for their comprehensive briefings. The Middle East is a region of great geopolitical significance that has attracted much international attention in recent years. Needless to say, instabilities in the region can pose multifaceted and complex implications for international peace and security. Among those, perhaps the situation most desired to be addressed is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Unresolved historical, religious and territorial issues have contributed to the protraction of tensions and conflicts ever since the early years of the United Nations, causing tremendous losses and casualties, especially to the Palestinian people. Viet Nam joins the international community in its unwavering support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian people and their inalienable rights. We strongly support the two-State solution, including the establishment of the State of Palestine with East Jerusalem as its capital, in peaceful coexistence alongside the State of Israel, with secure and internationally recognized borders on the basis the pre-1967 lines and negotiated settlement, and in accordance with international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the relevant United Nations resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016). Viet Nam has closely followed the situation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. We share the international community's concerns over the information on Israel's possible annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank, which, if it happens, may have serious and irreversible impacts on the viability of the two-State solution as well as on peace and stability in the Middle East region. Viet Nam therefore calls on the parties concerned to refrain from any unilateral action that could complicate the situation or escalate ongoing tensions. We further urge the parties to continue to exercise self-restraint and to refrain from the use of force or any incitement to violence. As the coronavirus disease pandemic continues to spread in the Middle East, we call on the relevant parties to facilitate humanitarian activities aimed at supporting the Palestinian Authority's response and preventing the creation of further economic, social and humanitarian burdens for the Palestinian people. Viet Nam supports the continuing efforts aimed at reaching a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict through dialogue and negotiation, thus helping to protect the lives of peoples and ensure the legitimate interests of the parties concerned, as well as to promote peace, stability and development in the Middle East. To that end, Viet Nam welcomes all initiatives and efforts by international stakeholders and the Palestinian people to restart the Middle East peace process. We will actively contribute to fostering direct discussions between Israel and Palestine within and beyond the United Nations framework. Viet Nam also wishes to take this opportunity to express its appreciation and strong support for the role played by and the endeavours of the United Nations, the Secretary-General and the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process. To the best of its ability, Viet Nam has continued to make financial contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and calls on the international community to strengthen budgetary support for the Agency in order to provide adequate and timely humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people.
