Mr. Ngwej (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): As Luxembourg's presidency of the
Security Council comes to an end, allow me, first of all,
to congratulate you, Madam President, on your conduct
of the business of this principal organ of the United
Nations responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. I once again reiterate how pleased
we are to see you presiding over the Council during the
month of March.

I would also like once again to reiterate to the
Council the gratitude of the people and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of Congo for the efforts
made by the United Nations to preserve the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of our country and to ensure
peace and stability.

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to His Excellency
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his steadfast
attention and personal involvement in working to
strengthen peace in my country.

The Security Council has just adopted resolution
2147 (2014), which renews the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Force Intervention Brigade. We are all aware
today of the effective and commendable role played
by the Brigade alongside the Forces armees de la
Republique democratique du Congo (FARDC) to assert
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of my country
and to restore State authority throughout the national
territory.

That is why the second mandate of the Force
Intervention Brigade should marshal the efforts already
made to consolidate and preserve lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and throughout the
entire Great Lakes region. I wish sincerely to thank the
Council for that renewal, which is so crucial to securing
my country. I would also like to assure the Council that,
on its part, the Congolese Government, in line with its
commitments, is currently preparing the rapid-reaction
force that will take over from the Force Intervention
Brigade when the time comes. The standing up of that
force is at a very advanced stage, although not yet
complete. The brigades that will make up the force
have already been constituted and are currently being
trained in the various specialties. Adequate equipment
to enable the forces to carry out their mission is being
acquired.

Parallel to that effort, significant progress has
clearly been made in the fight against negative forces,
the protection of civilian populations and the capacity of
the Government to provide security for its population.

With specific regard to the fight against negative
forces, we have prioritized the protection of the
Congolese people and the preservation of our country's
territorial integrity and sovereignty. The Mouvement
du 23 mars (M-23) has been defeated. The fight against
the Ugandan rebellion by the Allied Democratic
Forces/National Army for the Liberation of Uganda is
coming to an end, followed by mopping up operations.
Operations against the Forces democratiques de
liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) are about to begin.
With regard to the threat posed by the rebellion by the
Lord's Resistance Army, we welcome the efforts being
undertaken, specifically by the American Government,
to protect civilians from abuses by Joseph Kony and his
associates.

This meeting provides us with an opportunity to
reassure the Security Council of the determination
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to eradicate all negative forces without
exception. That is a crucial element for the return of
lasting peace, not only for our country but also for the
region. We reiterate that decisive operations against the
FDLR will not be delayed.

Today's resolution meets the expectations of the
Congolese people, who wish to find the peace denied
them for nearly two decades. It strengthens all the
commendable initiatives aimed at the return of normalcy
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
throughout the region. In that connection, the mini-
summit of the leaders of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region (ICGLR) held in Luanda on
25 March, at the invitation of the Chairman-in-Office,
His Excellency Mr. Jose Eduardo dos Santos, addressed
those very goals. The meeting discussed the current
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the region and reiterated the need to neutralize negative
forces by all means possible. The Luanda meeting also
launched an urgent appeal to the various rebel groups,
calling on them to take advantage of the political
opening and opportunity for dialogue and to participate
in the broader process of peace and social and political
integration that is under way.

For its part, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has spared no effort to fulfil its responsibilities. With
regard to the commitments flowing from the Addis
Ababa Framework Agreement, on 11 February President
Joseph Kabila Kabange promulgated the amnesty
law covering insurrection, acts of war and political
offences committed on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between 18 February 2006 and
20 December 2013. The amnesty allows former rebels
who are not responsible for crimes against humanity or
war crimes to find a place in the national community,
if they want one and undertake not to take up arms
against their country. Efforts are under way to bring
home as many eligible former rebels as possible.

Furthermore, a disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) programme has been
developed that fulfils the need for disarmament and
civic and vocational education and seeks to achieve
a successful reintegration process that is accepted
by the communities that were once victimized. The
identification of combatants from armed groups in
North Kivu who have been assembled in Bweremana
and Kanyaruchinya is completed. Those who are eligible
for the third national DDR programme have begun to
be evacuated to triage centres for DDR operations. At
the same time, the evacuation of ex-Bakata Katanga
combatants who qualify to the Kitona triage centre
continues. A framework for dialogue with international
partners has been established to harmonize views
and thereby implement that programme in an orderly
fashion.

In the same vein, under the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is holding
consultations with host countries on the gradual
return of Congolese people who have sought refuge
in neighbouring countries. We should also note the
increasing number of internally displaced persons
gradually returning to their home areas, which have
become safe since the recovery of areas formerly
occupied by hostile forces.

In the electoral sphere, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo established a new Independent National
Electoral Commission, which includes representatives
from the majority, the opposition and civil society.
Organizing and holding elections under the best
possible conditions is a priority for the Government.
We must now accelerate preparations for the elections,
which are to be held according to the schedule laid out
by the Commission, and we must manage that process
in a peaceful environment. As to the role expected
of the United Nations, I would like to reiterate the
Government's request to receive appropriate logistical
and technical support when needed.

In terms of our national reconciliation efforts, in
October 2013 in Kinshasa, the Congolese Government
brought together all of the nation's movers and
shakers - the political class, the majority and
the opposition and civil society - for national
consultations. Participants stated their commitment to
the country's unity and their respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. More than 600 resolutions and
recommendations resulted from those meetings, and
will be without a doubt the basis for the Government's
programme for national cohesion, which the Head of
State intends to introduce shortly.

In order to strengthen its young democracy, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is pursuing without
hesitation the process of decentralization that was started
in 2006. With the end of the war and the restoration
of State authority throughout the country, our country
now intends to accelerate reforms. Significant progress
in this area will be made despite the obvious difficulties
inherent in such an undertaking.

The problems related to sexual violence, which
are quite rightly cause for national and international
concern, are always on the Government's emergency
agenda. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
adopted a zero-tolerance policy in that respect, as
shown by the uncompromising Minova trial and the
indictment of several rebel leaders. Again, we would
note that the pacification of the liberated areas has led
to a significant reversal in the incidence of such abuses.

In order to fulfil its sovereign prerogatives, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has undertaken a
thorough reform of its security sector.

Some concrete actions that have already been
undertaken to make the defence of our country more
effective and improve State authority include the reform
of the structures and personnel of the army, security
services and police; the defence forces' recruitment of
Congolese youth from every province of the country;
the reopening of military academies; and the training,
with assistance from bilateral partners, of special forces
and support units, with the primary aim, we would
recall, of standing up the rapid reaction force.

With respect to training the national army, bilateral
efforts have been given priority. We are in the process
of implementing the relevant agreements, which have
already been negotiated and concluded with certain
countries. We thank all our bilateral and multilateral
partners for this crucial support to security sector
reform, which is in fact aimed at consolidating peace and
security and will undoubtedly lead to the establishment
of an army and a national police force that we hope will
be professional, disciplined and competent.

The Democratic Republic of the Congo must,
however, express some concerns. The first pertains
compliance with the regional commitments undertaken
in the implementation of the Framework Agreement
signed in Addis Ababa. While our country strives to
fulfil, one after the other, the responsibilities that have
been assigned to it, some countries do not seem to care
about fulfilling their own. I would like to draw the
Council's kind attention to the fact that we feel that the
international community is not paying due attention to
this issue.

Among other things, I refer to the question of
the significant weapons stocks found by our armed
forces and MONUSCO after the defeat of M-23 and
the liberation of the mountainous area of Tshanzu,
which remains to this day unanswered. This question is
worrying, as the quantity and type of military weapons
found on-site indicate that the M-23's sponsors had
prepared for a widespread and long-term war against
our country. The United Nations, in its role as
peacekeeper, must consider the true purpose of such a
powerful arsenal and publicly denounce all the leaders
of that criminal organization, which could have caused
the death of several other million citizens. To maintain
the fragile balance in the region, it would be wise for
everyone to actually fulfil their commitments.

Our second concern relates to the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism. The Mechanism, which
initially only included the delegates of chiefs of staff
of the Congolese and Rwandan armies, was extended to
include all the countries of the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region and, recently, South Africa,
not to mention the representatives of MONUSCO and
the African Union. The Mechanism, which remains
essential, is sorely lacking the resources necessary to
carry out its noble task. We would request the Security
Council to include this issue among its priorities.

A third concern has to do with the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. In the spirit of the
Framework Agreement signed in Addis Ababa, this
issue, like that of the hostile forces, was selected as
being, fundamentally, one of the root causes of the
cycle of violence in the region. While significant
progress has been observed in fight against the hostile
forces, the same is not true with this issue. We call for
more diligence on the part of the Security Council in
supporting the region's efforts to certify the origin of
exported products. Even today, the official statistics
of some countries in the region indicate the export of
products in quantities incommensurate with their well-
known mining resources.

In view of the reconfiguration of MONUSCO's
mandate and the transfer of its responsibilities, the
Government has taken note of the road map developed
for the reallocation of MONUSCO's tasks to the United
Nations country team. It stands ready to discuss
practical arrangements for the implementation of the
road map, and would like to express its full confidence
in the joint assessment team, which it calls on to
shoulder more responsibility for the reconfiguration of
the United Nations Mission with a view to a progressive
and orderly withdrawal.

I cannot conclude my statement without expressing
my Government's gratitude to Mr. Martin Kobler,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and to all
the MONUSCO personnel and all the civilian and
humanitarian staff who have been involved in the
tireless efforts to achieve lasting peace and security
in my country. It would be remiss of me ifI did not
express our gratitude to Mrs. Mary Robinson, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region of Africa, for her commitment and efforts in
restoring lasting peace in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region. I would also
like to express my country's gratitude to all Council
members for their devotion to the cause of peace and to
restoring the dignity of the Congolese people.

