We thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of the Secretary- General for the presentation of Secretary-General's report (S/2020/943) on the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia. We welcome the participation in this meeting of Ms. Claudia Blum de Barberi, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. We share the Secretary-General's growing concern with regard to the continuing killings and violence perpetrated against participants of the peace process, community leaders, social activists and members of ethnic minorities. Ensuring the safety and security of the civilian population must be the top priority. In order to effectively carry out that task, it is essential to address the vacuum of State presence in remote areas, whose residents do not feel safe, and therefore often have to leave their homes to escape the violence of organized criminal groups that produce and deal in drugs. The result is thousands of internally displaced persons. Equally important, the peace process should be driven by the reintegration of former combatants. Comprehensive land reform remains critical for Colombia, including such aspects as land allocation and the proper implementation of crop- substitution programmes. Until that is addressed, it is hard to speak of promoting socioeconomic reintegration. We hope that future reports of the Secretary-General contain more information on the political reintegration of peace process participants. Are there any major difficulties, or is everything proceeding smoothly? With regard to other problems highlighted in the report, we cannot fail to mention a noticeable build-up of a repressive component in the actions of the authorities. That is reflected in particular in the use of force against civilians during the recent protests, as indicated in the report. We would like to draw attention to the fact that the figures of victims among the protesters in Colombia are comparable to, or even surpass, the respective numbers in other countries that receive the vibrant attention of our colleagues in the Security Council and become the focus of the Secretariat and the statements of the Secretary- General's Press Secretary. We expect the Secretariat and our colleagues to use the same standards in their reactions to all disturbing events around the globe. Decades of internal conflict in Colombia have shown that violence can never lead to lasting solutions. That is why the Secretary-General's call for a universal ceasefire amid the pandemic is so relevant for the country. In that context, we note the unilateral ceasefire initiatives. Regrettably, they have not found any support within the Government. We call on Colombian actors not to miss this opportunity to resume dialogue. After all, sustainable peace is hardly possible unless the entire range of opinions is considered. We also must address another highlight of the Secretary-General's report - the reduced financing of State institutions in charge of the implementation of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. Instead, there is a 10 per cent increase for bodies investigating the events dating back to the time of the internal conflict. As we learned from the report, there has been some progress, particularly with regard to confessions by former members of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo. It must be noted that, according to the final peace agreement, such confessions are to be heard by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, which must be fully independent. Any interference with its competencies or attempts to move particular cases outside of its jurisdiction are unacceptable. Good-faith compliance by the participants of the peace process with their responsibilities under the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace should not be used to neutralize political opponents. We would like to receive more information from the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia on similar confessions by State participants in the conflict. We hope to see new tasks added to the Mission's mandate in order to monitor the implementation of the sentences of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. That will enhance the efficiency of that body. As a general remark, we would like to point out that an investigation of the events of the conflict is, by all means, important, but the genuine success of the peace process depends on the work ahead, not on the grievances of the past. In that regard, we take note of the report by Colombia's Prosecutor General, which cites some irregularities in post-conflict planning - including that 60 per cent of the funding has been allocated to only 5 per cent of the projects. As pointed out by the country's Comptroller General, under those circumstances, the implementation of the final peace agreement would take at least 25 years, as opposed to the initial plan of 15 years. Such estimates are not at all encouraging. We followed carefully the 16 September address of Colombia's leadership to the international community with regard to progress made in the implementation of the "Peace with legality" policy. Although we do not wish to diminish the importance of a number of achievements, we emphasize that the final peace agreement is the cornerstone of the Colombian peace process, as this document envisages the responsibilities of the various Colombian actors. It is important to remain committed to that historic document, which enjoys the support of the Security Council, the Secretary-General and the international community. We hope to learn more about the implementation of the final peace agreement from the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia. We reiterate our firm support for the work of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia under the leadership of Carlos Ruiz Massieu. Finally, we believe that the Council should review its practice of considering reports of the Secretary-General right after adopting resolutions that extend mission mandates. The order should be the opposite. We note that the most recent report, issued on 25 September, quite adequately reflects the developments in the country. Russia and all other members of the Security Council, as well as all the members of the international community, should continue contributing to the Colombian peace process in order to ensure its sustainable and lasting nature.
