The President (spoke in Spanish): At the outset,
I should like to acknowledge and welcome the
presence in the Council Chamber of Her Excellency
The Honourable Dame Billie Miller, Senior Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade of
Barbados; His Excellency Mr. Celso Luiz Nunes
Amorim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Brazil; His
Excellency Mr. Ignacio Walker, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Chile; His Excellency Mr. Carlos Morales
Troncoso, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Dominican Republic; His Excellency Mr. Renaud
Muselier, State Secretary for Foreign Affairs of France;
His Excellency Mr. Yvon Simeon, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Haiti; and His Excellency Mr. Roger
Noriega, Assistant Secretary of State for Western
Hemisphere Affairs of the United States.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question of Haiti

The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Barbados, Bolivia, Canada, Chile,
Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sime'on
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with the usual practice, and in the absence of objection,
I shall take it that the Security Council agrees to extend
an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of

procedure to Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Valdes to take a seat at the Council
table.

In accordance with the usual practice, and in the
absence of objection, I shall take it that the Security
Council agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Luigi R.
Einaudi, Acting Secretary General of the Organization
of American States.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite Mr. Einaudi to take the seat reserved for
him at the side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. I
now give him the floor.


