Mrs. Carrion (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay thanks the Bolivian Presidency for having
organized today's informative meeting, as well as for
circulating the concept note and putting forth today's
draft resolution. Due to today's meeting being on a
topic of particular importance for the maintenance of
international peace and security, it requires our attention.
We would also like to thank the Assistant Secretary-
General for the Rule of Law and Security Institutions
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Alexander Zuev, for his briefing, and Ms. Nathalie
Ochoa Nifio of the United Nations Mine Action Service
in Colombia. I would like to congratulate her for the
work she is doing and for her very eloquent briefing.

Uruguay, commensurate with its long-standing
pacifist philosophy, is a country deeply committed
to the disarmament and non-proliferation regime and
advocates for strengthening multilateralism as part of its
efforts to promote universal and complete disarmament.
In line with the this, Uruguay has signed and ratified
the relevant existing regional and international treaties
for such purposes.

We all know that anti-personnel mines and explosive
remnants of war are responsible for countless Victims
in various conflicts, many of which continue to rage.
Every year, these weapons kill or injure thousands of
people, without making a distinction between civilians
and combatants, and imperil the lives of those living
in the affected areas and limit the local populations'
access to basic services. A large number of civilians
die or suffer injuries from these weapons, even long
after the end of armed conflict. Of particular note is
the risk of unexploded remnants of war explosives
to children, who are the most vulnerable Victims in
conflict situations.

In the light of the foregoing, it is essential that
we strengthen the regulatory framework prohibiting
the use of anti-personnel mines and spare no effort
to universalize the Convention on the Prohibition
of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of
Anti-Personnel Mines and on their Destruction. In that
regard, Uruguay would urge States that have not signed
the Convention to accede to it as soon as possible, in
particular those States that currently manufacture and
sell such weapons. Similarly, Uruguay encourages all
Member States to comply fully with their international
obligations and uphold their existing commitments
under international law pertaining to disarmament and
non-proliferation.

The regulation of the arms trade and the
implementation of existing instruments are crucial if
we are to avoid the consequences suffered by civilian
victims of armed violence and if we are to promote
international peace and security. As the Secretary-
General points out in his most recent report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2017/414),
commitment to conflict prevention compels us to
address the illicit and irresponsible transfer of weapons
as such transfers make armed conflict possible and
jeopardize efforts to protect and build peace. For
that reason, the ratification of, and accession to,
international instruments intended to protect civilians,
such as the historic Arms Trade Treaty, will make a
major contribution to protecting civilians from harm.

With regard to mine action within peacekeeping
operations, Uruguay wishes to acknowledge the
assistance provided by the United Nations in affected
areas. We also wish to convey our gratitude and
appreciation to the agents and institutions that work to
clear out landmines and remnants of war explosives and
to mitigate the impact of these arms on people's lives.

Finally, we would like to emphasize that, if we are
to end the suffering of thousands of people caused by
these weapons, we must secure the commitment and
determination of the entire international community
to eliminate them, because the use of anti-personnel
mines by any actor is unacceptable.

