Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): We of the South
Africa delegation wish to warmly congratulate Argentina
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We
are also happy to see the continued practice of open
debates in the Security Council, which is an important
part of the ongoing efforts to democratize it.

South Africa salutes those United Nations staff
members and humanitarian personnel who have paid the
ultimate price while bringing relief in conflict situations.
It is deplorable and totally unacceptable that caregivers to
the most vulnerable in conflict situations - namely
women, children and the elderly - should have their
lives taken so frequently and with such impunity.

The role that humanitarian personnel play during
conflict situations is of immeasurable value. In many
cases, particularly in Africa, such assistance represents the
only means of survival for civilian populations affected
by conflicts. In 1999, more than 700,000 people benefited
from food aid in Somalia, while more than a million
people are currently receiving such aid in Angola.

Yet, millions more remain in dire need, as they will
not receive even this basic level of assistance due to the
unacceptable threats faced by United Nations and
humanitarian personnel. Frequent attacks on and the
killing of humanitarian personnel in Somalia are
preventing food assistance from reaching an estimated
65,000 people in dire need. The criminal actions of armed
groups in that country are also disrupting vaccination
campaigns against polio. In Angola, at least 700,000
internally displaced persons go without food and shelter.

We are convinced that no one benefits from such
criminal actions. Civilians may be the immediate victims,
but Government and non-state actors alike suffer in the
long run when humanitarian assistance is suspended. For
example, the brutal murder in October last year of two
United Nations officials in Burundi severely curtailed
humanitarian assistance in that country and the prevailing
insecurity continues to do so.

It is clear from these examples that the suffering of
civilian populations is exacerbated when United Nations
and humanitarian personnel are not protected. Killings,
attacks and harassment of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel are therefore tantamount to

 

waging war on unarmed civilians. For this reason, the
protection of such personnel requires urgent attention.

My delegation strongly supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation, contained in his report
S/1999/957 of last year, that civilian populations should
have unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance.
Realizing this goal should be the Council's first order of
business when addressing any new or existing conflict. It is
imperative to obtain firm guarantees from state and
non-state parties for the safety of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel, even if this requires the imposition
of targeted sanctions.

It is important to remind ourselves that the primary
responsibility for the protection of United Nations and
humanitarian personnel lies with the host Government.
Non-state parties should similarly protect such personnel, in
line with the provisions of international humanitarian law.
The Council should also promote the wider acceptance of
the Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. In this regard, my delegation further
supports the recommendation by the Secretary-General that
efforts be initiated to extend the scope of the Convention.

We welcome the classification of intentional attacks
against humanitarian personnel as war crimes under the
Statute of the International Criminal Court. South Africa is
actively participating in the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, which we believe will further
promote the protection of United Nations and humanitarian
personnel.

My delegation strongly believes that a distinct
division should be maintained between humanitarian actions
and efforts to secure political settlements. Only by
maintaining the impartial nature of humanitarian personnel
and the assistance they provide can continued relief be
ensured to those who need it most.

Millions of people affected by conflict rely on United
Nations and humanitarian personnel for their daily
existence. If we do not protect these personnel, we will be
failing them, the people who depend on them, as well as
our own humanity in which we pride ourselves.

