Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): On 16 April 2014, the
Security Council adopted resolution 2150 (2014) on
the occasion of the twentieth commemoration of the
genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda. The resolution
also commemorates Hutus and others who were killed
because they opposed the genocide. Obviously, Captain
Mbaye Diagne could be categorized among those. But
for us Rwandans, Captain Diagne is more than that. He
is a hero. He was a son ofAfrica, born in the great nation
of Senegal, which is represented here by His Excellency
Mr. Abdou Salam Diallo, Permanent Representative to
the United Nations, who I salute.

Captain Diagne, as a peacekeeper in the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR),
understood better than anyone else what his mission
was. In the face of evil, he refused to be a bystander.
He chose to become an upstander. He acted as a
peacekeeper. He acted as a solider. He acted as a human
to save lives, even against the UNAMIR mandate,
against the rule of engagement and against instructions
from New York. With no guns, no weapons, armed only
with courage and a sense of responsibility, Captain
Diagne decided to conduct several missions, passing
through dozens of checkpoints held by armed militias
to save hundreds, perhaps thousands of Rwandans
during the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi.

For his courage and bravery, Captain Mbaye
Diagne was, on 4 July 2010, posthumously awarded
the Umurinzi medal by the Government of Rwanda,
together with 11 other exceptional men who contributed
to the campaign against the genocide in Rwanda. I am
convinced that his wife Yacine, his daughter Coumba
and his son Cheikh will always be proud of him, just as
we Rwandans and we nations of the world will always
be proud of his service to humanity.

It is in this context that we particularly thank His
Royal Highness Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein
and the Jordanian mission for submitting resolution
2154 (2014), which was adopted unanimously today
and created the Captain Mbaye Diagne Medal for
Exceptional Courage, to be awarded to those military,
police, civilian United Nations personnel and associated
personnel who, in the future, will demonstrate similar
courage while fulfilling the mandate of their missions
or their functions in the service of humanity.

We believe that this medal is not only a recognition
of the courage of the man, but also a reminder of what
a soldier and a peacekeeper should be - a woman or
a man dedicated to promoting peace, to saving lives
against all odds and to obeying the most important
rule, the protection of the vulnerable. Let us hope that
this medal will encourage the Security Council, the
Secretariat and peacekeepers to better promote the
protection of civilians and the responsibility to protect.

While celebrating the exceptional courage of
Captain Mbaye Diagne, we also remember the heroic
acts of ordinary Rwandans, many of whom paid the
ultimate sacrifice to protect the Tutsi and oppose the
genocide, which took the lives of more than one million
Rwandans in 100 days. We also pay tribute to other blue
helmets who were killed during the genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, including the 10 Belgian peacekeepers
who were killed while protecting the former Prime
Minister, the late Agathe Uwilingiyimana. To their
families, we offer prayers and solace. Rwandans will
always be grateful.

To conclude, I sincerely hope that the Captain
Mbaye Diagne Medal for Exceptional Courage will
serve as an opportunity for soul-searching on the part
of the United Nations, which should always ensure that
humanity is collectively preserved by the community of
nations and guided by moral rules and principles rather
than only protected by the courage - I am so sorry, I
must pause, this is emotional for me - of exceptional
individuals like Captain Mbaye Diagne, whose life we
are celebrating today.

