Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we congratulate you, Sir, and express our
confidence in your presidency. Our thanks go to
Ambassador Lavrov and his team for their excellent
work in guiding the work of the Security Council last
month.

We thank Mr. Michael Steiner, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, for his
briefing on the situation in Kosovo. We especially
value the efforts and professionalism shown by
Mr. Steiner and his team during his term at the head of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), in which Chile has the honour to
participate. We wish him every success in his future
endeavours.

After reviewing the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2003/675) and listening to Mr. Steiner, we
should like to hail the significant progress made in
achieving a substantial degree of autonomy during the
period in question. At the institutional level, we must
recognize the gradual transfer of non-reserved
competencies in conformity with chapter 5 of the
Constitutional Framework, and the work of the
Transfer Council. Also noteworthy is the increase -
albeit slight - in the average number of policy
decisions adopted per month by the Government of
Kosovo compared to the first three months of 2003, the
significant increase in the proportion of those having
legal implications and the progress in promulgating
legislation with broad support. In addition, we
welcome the Government's establishment of a
Commission for Cooperation with the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

Our support for UNMIK's work notwithstanding,
we cannot fail to express our alarm at the violent
incidents and crimes committed against minorities -
for example, the horrible murders committed in Obilic
on 4 June. All manifestations of ethnically motivated
violence, harassment or discrimination run counter to
achieving the goal of a multi-ethnic Kosovo and violate
the spirit of resolution 1244 (1999). We appreciate the
measures undertaken by UNMIK to find the
perpetrators of those crimes and to bring them to
justice.

Moreover, without significant and sustainable
returns of internally displaced persons and refugees -
and we welcome the progress made in that area - it
will be impossible to build a multi-ethnic and
democratic society in Kosovo capable of including all
its inhabitants. Nor do we support the politicization of
the civil servant hiring process in municipalities or the
existence of parallel municipal structures, which
violate the provisions of resolution 1244 (1999).

We must make every effort to overcome the
difficulties affecting freedom of movement,
particularly for Kosovo's Serb community.
Furthermore, we must spare no effort to bring to justice
those guilty of acts such as the explosion that occurred
on 12 April on a railway bridge in Zvecan.

The future holds other challenges. One of them,
for example, is to maintain and increase the level of
efficiency of Kosovo civil servants in the light of the
reduction in the number of international civil servants
now in Kosovo.

Finally, we join in the appeal that other Council
members have made to the parties to intensify the
dialogue, because without a constructive dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina or between UNMIK and
the Kosovo Assembly, the achievement of concrete and
tangible results with regard to overcoming the major
challenges would be a distant prospect. Even worse,
that would affect the most important objective: that all
inhabitants of Kosovo be able to live in their homeland
in dignity, freedom and safety.

