Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): I will be making a shorter
statement while the full text is circulated.

I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
this important open debate of the Security Council on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and with the
statement to be made by the representative of Djibouti
on behalf of the Organization ofIslamic Cooperation.

Malaysia welcomes the resumption of direct talks
between both sides and wishes to underline our support
for the State of Palestine in its negotiations towards a
just and lasting solution to the question of Palestine
and a comprehensive peace in the Middle East. We also
welcome the efforts of the other stakeholders involved
in that important process, including United States
Secretary of State John Kerry, the Middle East Quartet
and the Arab Peace Initiative. Malaysia has always
believed in a two-State solution, based on the borders
of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as the capital of
Palestine. We urge all parties to demonstrate honesty
and sincerity towards achieving those objectives.
Words must be followed up with actions to reflect the
genuine desire for peace.

The commitment of the Palestinian side is clearly
seen in the way the Palestinians have continued to foster
an atmosphere conducive to the continuation of the talks.
However, that commitment is not matched by those on
the other side of the negotiating table. Our Palestinian
brothers and sisters have shown tremendous courage
and sacrifice as they proceed down the path of direct
negotiations. They do so while knowing full well that
they are backed by the overwhelming encouragement
and support of Member States for their efforts to fully
advance their interests within the United Nations and
its organs, following the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 67/19.

Yet, despite that, Israel continues to announce the
construction of new illegal settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory. Malaysia condemns Israel's
building of illegal settlements in Palestinian lands,
including in Jerusalem. Justice is long overdue for that
violation, one that threatens to completely undermine
the possibility of ajust and lasting solution.

Malaysia furthermore reiterates its grave concern at
the desecration by Israeli settlers ofholy sites, including
the recent attacks on the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Settler
violence has also risen due to the olive season, with
more Palestinian-owned groves and farms deliberately
burned or robbed. Palestinian prisoners remain
under long detention, in violation of international
humanitarian law.

My delegation also demands an immediate end to
Israel's blockade of Gaza, in particular in the light of the
serious humanitarian situation and food security needs
of the population. The people of Gaza are being denied
their livelihood through collective punishment by the
occupying Power that is both inhumane and illegal.

With regard to the occupied Syrian Golan, the
occupying Power continues to act with impunity
and to change the physical character, demographic
composition, institutional structure and legal status
of the territory. My delegation reiterates our strong
objections to Israel's pillaging and profiteering from
the illegal exploitation ofoccupied territories, including
the geological surveys recently concluded by a United
States-Israeli company on oil deposits in the southern
half of the occupied Syrian Golan. Malaysia calls for
the immediate and full withdrawal of Israel from the
occupied Syrian Golan, in line with resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981).

Malaysia takes note of the recent discussions on the
date and modalities of the conference to follow up on
the 30 June 2012 meeting of the Action Group on Syria.
My delegation expresses our continued support for the
tireless efforts of Joint Special Representative Lakhdar
Brahimi. In that regard, we call on all parties to come
together and work towards a political solution that is
Syrian-led and inclusive.

With regard to Lebanon, Malaysia reiterates that
Israel must desist from its continued and almost daily
violations of Lebanese sovereignty, whether by air,
water or land. Israel must fully implement resolution
1701 (2006), which calls for the full cessation of
hostilities and the complete withdrawal ofIsraeli troops
from Lebanon, with full respect for the Blue Line.

In conclusion, while there are significant
developments in the Middle East peace process, the
Security Council is also currently witnessing other
openings for peace in other areas of conflict. At the
same time, voices of hate and ignorance continue to
incite violence and oppression in the region. Malaysia
continues to believe in a moderate approach to conflict
resolution in order to bridge the differences and restore
stability to the lives of Palestinians, Syrians and other
peoples in the Middle East. We must collectively
summon the political will to bring an end to the
immediate suffering in those areas and commit to a
moderate cause which could secure greater gains than
if we were divided by conflict.

