Mr. Lacroix: I would like to start by thanking
the Security Council for convening this briefing on
strategic force generation. This is the first time that the
Council dedicates a meeting to this topic, and today's
discussion follows the adoption of resolution 2378
(2017), which showed the Council's strong commitment
to strategic force generation as one of the core elements
of peacekeeping reform.

Generating uniformed personnel and units for
United Nations peacekeeping is a tireless and enormous
task. It means generating and rotating more than 300
units, including 76 infantry battalions, with tens of
thousands of troops and police from over 120 countries,
while selecting and deploying several thousand
individual staff and police officers throughout the year.
That is done by a small team of dedicated officers, and
I would like to take this opportunity to express my
gratitude to it.

Dozens of Member States have made substantial
investments in their capabilities for United Nations
peacekeeping by improving their equipment, training
and levels of readiness. I am grateful to those Member
States and I look forward to hearing more today on how
we can continue and further deepen that productive
partnership.
(spoke in French)

In April, the Secretary-General presented an
outline of what peacekeeping should strive for - a
more adapted, agile and flexible instrument capable
of responding rapidly and aptly to requirements
on the ground, through being supported by strong
competencies and good equipment based on the mandate
provided by the Council. Strategic force generation is
a tool to implement that vision. It entails identifying
current and future operation needs and communicating
them in a targeted and sustained way to Member States
that may be able to satisfy those needs.

High level events, which began with the first
summit on peacekeeping in 2014 and the creation of a
Strategic Force Generation and Capabilities Planning
Cell in 2015, have played a crucial role in that effort.
The Cell worked closely with co-organizers and with
other Member States to organize the summit of Heads
of State and the Ministerial Meetings that took place in
London and Paris. Of course, we are eagerly awaiting
the Vancouver Meeting.

From the beginning, those events have brought
together the major troop- and police-contributing
countries from Asia, Africa and Latin America, and
have generated impetus. Various States representing
all regional groups have participated in those events,
including Member States of the Security Council.
The subsequent meetings between Heads of State and
police have allowed us to strengthen our commitment
to Member States.

It is no exaggeration to say that Heads of State,
Heads of Government, Defence Ministers, armed-
forces officials and police forces around the world have
never been so involved in supporting peacekeeping.
The commitments and subsequent pledges have made
it possible to fill capacity gaps in current missions,
strengthen certain missions and cope with any new
deployments that the Council has considered or might
consider in the future.

In London, the system marked the first contribution
pledges for rapidly deployable units. The final
communique, which was endorsed by 63 Member States,
set our new objectives for 2017 and beyond. In Paris,
the specific needs were considered for peacekeeping in
French-speaking areas and commitments were made to
provide more French-speaking military troops and police
personnel. The creation of a Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System (PCRS) was a determining factor in
our new approach for strategic force generation. The
PCRS is constantly updated, thereby enabling us to
understand which units are available by conducting
evaluation and advisory visits, and to better understand
their readiness levels and ability for deployment.

Since March 2016, we have conducted 39 evaluation
visits concerning 105 deployable units. Those visits
make it possible not only to identify which units are the
most suited to certain operations, but also to explain in
detail to contributing States the standards and technical
specificities that are expected. Such dialogue is also
essential as part of the general strategy to improve
the conduct and discipline of deployed personnel, in
particular as part of the strategy to prevent and combat
sexual abuse and exploitation.

Those Visits also sometimes make generating
additional contributions possible, such as Jordanian
helicopters to be deployed in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) or to identify priority areas for
improvement with contributing States. Resolution
2378 (2017) calls on the Secretary-General to report on
mechanisms to address capability gaps, and we will take
the opportunity to outline how that is being done today
and present a few ways of improving the coordination
of efforts in the areas of training and capacity-building.

To date, 81 Member States have provided
contributions to the PCRS, which is an impressive
success only two years after its establishment. Twenty-
nine PCRS units have already been deployed to
missions, including in MINUSMA, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
In recent weeks, we have received new pledges of
contributions, the most recent of which came on behalf
of China and Germany. I am very grateful to those two
countries.

(spoke in English)

One ofthe key aims of our strategic force generation
efforts is to facilitate more rapid deployment of
uniformed capabilities to the field. Rapid deployment
is a costly, complex and difficult process that requires
the commitment of the contributors as well as the host
country and neighbours. In the weeks and months that

pass from the issuance of the mandate until the mission
reaches a minimum operating capacity, lives can be
lost and our credibility undermined from the outset.
There are financial implications to long-deployment
timelines, as a peacekeeping operation deployed too
late will have a more intractable situation to address,
potentially requiring a larger footprint and prolonging
the life of that mission.

With the support of Member States and thanks
to the concerted effort across the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field
Support, we have been making significant progress
towards more rapid deployment. Just to take a recent
example, we replaced a battalion in MINUSCA, in the
Central African Republic, that was facing conduct and
discipline issues with three different contingents in less
than 60 days, two of them had registered in the PCRS.
We are very grateful to the countries that contributed
those units. Members States also agreed earlier this
year that units accepted to the rapid deployment level
of the PCRS would receive financial compensation for
maintaining the readiness of their major equipment
during their time on the rapid deployment level.

I am pleased to say that we recently received
sufficient pledges to fulfil nearly all the requirements
for a vanguard brigade of roughly 4,000 troops and
police for the remainder of2017 and the first half ofnext
year. We plan to conduct an exercise of key personnel
on the rapid deployment level and key United Nations
personnel to further strengthen our ability to respond
to future rapid deployments in the area. We are also
developing an overarching rapid development concept
and related training materials that bring together all
of the civilian military police and support elements
needed for rapid deployment.

Despite the success of the past two years, a number
of specialized capabilities remain in short supply,
particularly high-value enablers such as helicopters,
quick-reaction forces, explosive ordnance disposal
units with counter improvised explosive device training
and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance
companies. Pledges to the PCRS of those kinds of
units are welcome, but it is precisely in our most
challenging missions that we need them the most. I am
also disappointed with the lack of progress towards our
targets for female peacekeepers, and very much hope
that Member States will attend the Vancouver Defence
Ministerial Meeting in mid-November with concrete
pledges and proposals.

One thing we have learned is that strategic
force generation needs to be better linked to regular
force planning for each mission, which also needs
to be improved. The MINUSMA force generation
conference in May was an important milestone in that
regard. Member States discussed their plans for future
contributions to Mali and potential partnerships for
critical capabilities. We hope to build on that new effort
to find creative ways to fill the most stubborn gaps,
including by allowing troop-contributing countries
to rotate scarce capabilities. However, no matter how
creative we can be, we will need Member States to step
forward, contribute new capabilities and help share the
burden, particularly in Mali and especially in the most
volatile areas.

The Security Council has a crucial role to play in
defining and helping us meet the capability requirements
of our missions. A number of permanent and elected
Council members have stepped up to host high-level
meetings, pledge and prepare new capabilities, offer
training and capacity-building support and provide
direct financial and political support to our strategic
force generation efforts. That is fully consistent with
the call for a more active role of the Council itself in
force generation, and I strongly welcome it.

I also encourage Council members to come
forward with new, innovative contributions, including
through the provision of tailored and sustained training
and capacity-building efforts to address our mid- to
long-term capability gaps. The trilateral partnership
between Japan and several African troop-contributing
countries is a good example of that kind of initiative,
and we strongly encourage further partnerships of that
kind. There are a number of additional ways in which
the Council can assist in helping us meet our capability
requirements, and I will refer four of them.

First, the Council can take into account current or
potential capability gaps, such as those in MINUSMA,
when drafting or renewing mandates. That should be
done in close consultation with us and is critical to
managing expectations. Clear, prioritized mandates will
enable us to better guide and assess the performance of
uniformed capabilities.

Secondly, challenges relating to the timely
deployment of capabilities, particularly for missions
like UNMISS, are often associated with the consent
and capacity of the host Government. Council members
should engage collectively and individually to ensure

that host Governments fully comply with the status-of-
mission agreements and that the Council act accordingly
when host Governments fail to do so.

Thirdly, strategic force generation is intricately
linked with performance. The leadership of the Council
is critical in ensuring the full implementation of our
performance, training and conduct requirements.
In instances where action must be taken to address
underperformance or misconduct, the Secretariat relies
on the consistent support of Council members.

Finally, I ask for the support of the Council in our
efforts to foster a culture of continuous improvement
and adaptation through strategic force generation and
other reform efforts. We aim to create a virtuous cycle
of performance improvement through assessment
and advisory Visits, regular in-field performance
assessments, better planned rotations and deployments
of new capabilities and training and capacity-building
improvements. We will do all that together, working
closely with troop- and police-contributing countries.

Strategic force generation is an important and still
relatively new initiative. I am confident that it will help
us to improve our uniformed capabilities significantly
over time. It should also be seen as only one part of
a broader, ongoing effort by the Secretariat to make
peacekeeping operations a more efficient, effective and
accountable tool for the international community.

