Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation welcomes the opportunity to discuss the
question of Palestine as the centre of all conflicts in
the Middle East during the quarterly open debate of the
Security Council. We thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Maldenov for his briefing.
I align myself with the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Israeli occupation has long been at the centre
of international discussions on Palestine in the Middle
East. By blaming all others but the occupying Power,
the United States seeks to erase the question rather than
address it. The United States and the Israeli regime
want to remove the Palestinian issue, which is central
to all of the conflicts in the Middle East that these open
debates focus on. The United States and Israel do not
like the reports of the United Nations that document
and expose Israeli apartheid and inhumane policies to
the world. When the latest report was presented, they
reacted by pushing for the report's withdrawal and
proudly forcing the resignation of its author.

Today, we heard unsubstantiated allegations against
my country, which I categorically reject as part of a
misleading propaganda campaign against Iran and its
role in the region, designed and perpetrated hysterically
by Israel and certain countries in the region, including
those that fully supported Saddam Hussein's aggression
against Iran.

The Israeli regime's record is full of aggression
against its neighbours, including other countries in
the Middle East and beyond. We can count at least
14 instances of that since 1948. Israel continues to
flout all international regimes governing weapons of
mass destruction by refusing to adhere to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
Chemical and the Biological Weapons Conventions. It
is the only obstacle in the way of establishing a zone
free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East. Indeed, nuclear weapons in the hands of the
Israeli regime pose the most serious threat to the
security of all States in the Middle East and to the
global non-proliferation regime, for which the Security
Council is primarily responsible.

The Israeli regime has flagrantly violated at least
86 of the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
in response to the Israeli regime's repeated acts of
aggression and illegal occupation. One can also cite
its well-documented atrocities, apartheid policies and
war crimes against the Palestinian people. Its violations
started with resolution 54 (1948) and, so far, have
extended to resolution 2334 (2016) on illegal settlement
activities. The regime enjoys total impunity.

The tragedy in Khan Shaykhun took place after the
Government of Syria had been verifiably disarmed of
all of its chemical weapons by the United Nations; the
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra
Front were not. The military action launched by the
United States against Syria happened without any
verification - either independent or by the United
Nations. The attack was a clear act of aggression
against a Member State and a violation of the Charter
of the United Nations and international law. Such
pointless misadventures only serve to send the clear
and catastrophic message to the terrorists that if they
repeat their atrocities, such as the one carried out on
4 April, they will be rewarded with retaliation against
the Government by the United States. They did it
again in Al-Rashidin on 15 April, when at least 126
people, many of them children, were killed. Where
is the accountability for the perpetrators, organizers,
financiers and sponsors of such shameful acts? Such
acts kill the innocent and spoil the Astana process.

In general, the world, and particularly the Middle
East, is still paying for the catastrophic unilateralism
of the past, which has been premised on self-serving
allegations. The world should not forget the events and
the allegations of weapons of mass destruction in 2003
in Iraq and the consequences of those allegations, which
now include the formation of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, which continues to burden the world. It
has helped the terrorists and has destabilized the whole
region. Surprisingly enough, those who destabilized
the region and helped the emergence of terrorist groups
are now bashing Iran, which has played a big role in
containing and combating such global terror networks.
Those familiar with history know that peace cannot
be sustained without justice. Proudly introducing a
sheriff's approach into the work of the United Nations
means relying on destructive power as the only option.
That will lead to nowhere but to a continued cycle
of violence.

Accepting such a reckless and dangerous approach
would endanger all of the founding principles of
the United Nations, multilateral diplomacy and
its undeniable achievements for humanity and the
international community.

