Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank
Messrs. De Mistura, O'Brien and Cappelaere for
their briefings.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela expresses
its concern about the humanitarian situation in Syria,
especially in the city of Aleppo. That is why we value
the efforts of the humanitarian agencies, which, at great
risk and in situations of all-out conflict, do extraordinary
work to help millions of Syrians. We appreciate the fact
that the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, together with the
Syrian Government, has helped thousands of people by
providing food, medicine and other necessities in the
recently liberated areas. Of special importance is the
delivery of food and medicine to F oa'a, Kefraya, Madaya
and Zabadani under the four-towns agreements. In that
context, we support initiatives aimed at alleviating the
humanitarian tragedy in Aleppo. Nevertheless, such
proposals need to take into account the nature and
scope of terrorism as a destabilizing factor.

Our country has been denouncing the threat
of terrorism to peace and stability in Syria and the
region for some time now. As Mr. De Mistura said, the
existence of terrorism in Aleppo is clear. The Al-Nusra
Front, with the support of various armed groups that
some have described as moderate, holds more than
200,000 people hostage and unable to leave the area
under its control. The Syrian Government therefore
has a legitimate right to defend its sovereignty and
territorial integrity against terrorism.

We therefore welcome the fact that areas of eastern
Aleppo have been liberated where more than 90,000
people live. It is a paradox that the so-called moderate
opposition says that in Aleppo and other parts of the
country there are people who, instead of fighting
terrorists from the Al-Nusra Front and associated
groups, are preventing civilians from leaving by
way of military operations. Since October, they have
blocked and rejected a series of humanitarian pauses in
eastern Aleppo.

The humanitarian situation in Syria is worsening
by the day, as indicated by today's briefers. We
therefore hope that we can achieve a minimum level of
consensus to facilitate the entry of humanitarian aid,
without halting the fighting against terrorist groups and
their affiliates.

As Mr. Cappelaere mentioned, Syrians, and
especially children, are asking "Why?". We also wonder
why some members of the international community are
continuing to finance non-State armed groups with
the single goal of achieving national interests without
caring for the suffering of millions of people. That
is why it is necessary to end the interventionist and
destabilizing policies that deny the Syrian people their
right to live in peace as a sovereign and free nation.

Finally, we would reiterate that overcoming the
humanitarian crisis is linked to ending the armed
conflict. That is why we reaffirm our support to
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Staffan de
Mistura, in his efforts towards peace aimed at finding
a peaceful political solution to the Syrian armed
conflict. As tragic as the situation is on the ground, it
cannot be an obstacle to the parties negotiating without
preconditions. As all members of the Council have said,
political solutions are the only way to grapple with the
reality. Prolonging the conflict will lead only to greater
suffering and destruction.

