Mr. Annabi: I will try to respond briefly to some
of the main issues that have been raised. There was a
question regarding the resignation of Xanana Gusmao
at the beginning of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT) congress. That congress represents
the first opportunity for the parties that have joined
ranks under the umbrella of the CNRT to debate openly
the political future of East Timor. The CNRT was
formed in April 1998 to promote independence and to
prepare for the popular consultation. During the
congress, they have been discussing the reorganization
of the CNRT so that it could more adequately address
the issues of transition and prepare for independence.
So, in some ways, it was normal for the leadership to
stand down. The new leadership will, of course,
probably be designated at the end of the congress. It is
likely that Xanana Gusmao will continue to play a
constructive and central role in the transition process.
In fact, he has indicated to the participants during the
congress that he would be prepared to continue to play
such a role should that be the wish of the rank and file.

We will, of course, as I said in my briefing, revert
to and give more details on the proceedings of the
congress and on the decisions taken by it, since it is
only ending today, and we do not have a detailed report
at this point.

There was a question regarding the provision of a
military assessment of the security situation in East
Timor and its implications for the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
As members of the Council will have noted, I described
the current security situation in East Timor at some
length during my presentation, as well as UNTAET's
concerns in that regard and its assessment of the
security threat and the possible motivations behind it. I
also described the initial measures taken by UNTAET
to restructure the force and to redeploy troops so as to
enhance security in the central and western sectors of
the territory.

It is in some ways difficult to predict very
precisely at this point how the situation will evolve,
since of course that evolution is linked fairly closely to
the situation in West Timor and militia activities there.
But the situation will be kept under review. Once he
has received a more detailed assessment from the
mission as to what additional measures might be
required, the Secretary-General will come back to the
Council. As I said, for the time being he has decided
that the proposed downsizing of the force in the eastern
sector will be delayed in order to enable UNTAET to
be better positioned to respond to whatever threats may
arise.

There was a question about the investigations into
the militia killings of UNTAET personnel. There is a
joint investigation underway with Indonesia into the
killing of Private Manning, the soldier from the New
Zealand contingent who was killed in the border area.
However, the investigations regarding the Nepalese
soldier and others who were killed well within East
Timor are being conducted by UNTAET. We will of
course bring the conclusions of those investigations to
the Council's attention once they are completed.

I was also asked what measures UNTAET has
taken to reintegrate refugees returning in the future.
The Special Representative has stated on a number of
occasions that there are arrangements in place to
receive large numbers of additional returnees when that
takes place. In fact, the process has so far gone
reasonably well. Close to 170,000 East Timorese have
returned from West Timor. Although there have been
some isolated incidents here and there, those returnees
have generally been well received by the population.

In cooperation with the Office of the United
Nation High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
UNTAET is also continuing to facilitate and encourage
family visits and what we call "go and see" visits to
show to potential returnees the prevailing conditions in
East Timor and to apprise them of the arrangements
available for their reintegration, should they decide to
go back. At this point, of course, the main issue is to
create conditions that will allow those wishing to go
back to exercise that choice in full freedom and
security.

We heard the representative of Indonesia confirm
today the decision of his Government to work with the
United Nations to resolve the issue of refugees in West
Timor. Mr. Vieira de Mello will be visiting Jakarta in
the next few days. I am sure he will pursue the
discussions on this subject with the Indonesian
Government. I hope that some progress can be made in
that area so that the return of those who wish to go
back can take place, and so that the necessary measures
are also taken to curb the activities of the militias.

I think this covers the main issues raised. I will
therefore stop here.

