Mr. Motoc (Romania): I wish first to warmly
congratulate you, Sir, and the Philippines presidency
on convening this meeting on a highly topical matter.
Our appreciation also goes to Under-Secretary-General
Jan Egeland for his telling briefing.

I would like at this stage to mention that Romania
associates itself with the statement to be made by
Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union.

We welcome the Secretary-General's report. It
provides us with an accurate representation of the
situation on the ground. It bears confirmation of the
performance and progress in the humanitarian work the
United Nations and its partners have put together since
the Secretary-General's last report. It is nonetheless
evident that the facts we are dealing with remain
disturbing. Although the protection of civilians in armed
conflict is at the core of our work in the Security Council,
the facts alone prove that we need to say and do more.

This Council has made an important number of
commitments to the protection of civilians in armed
conflict and identified certain priorities which are
addressed in the report before us. Nevertheless, we are
forced to adjust the ways we address the problem by
the ever-changing picture of the conflicts we deal with
today. Asymmetric warfare, which has tended to
replace the conventional form of conflict, challenges
our approach to peacemaking and burdens the Security
Council with the effort to come up with new solutions
each and every time we deal with a new actor and
weapon of war. For instance, the emergence of non-
State actors presents us with a difficult choice: either
the United Nations must open channels of dialogue in
order to engage in negotiations on humanitarian issues,
thus legitimising groups with sometimes dangerous
agendas, or it must keep its distance, thus relinquishing
the possibility to exercise positive leverage.

Maybe the most outrageous evidence of the
changing nature of conflict is that civilians are no
longer just incidental victims of armed conflicts, but
have become targets and even tools in warfare. Acts
such as terrorism and sexual Violence against women
and children shock our collective conscience and
ultimately keep this Council, as the actor responsible
for the maintenance of world peace and security,
permanently engaged in the search for better ways to
protect civilian populations. Furthermore, we are
confronted with situations in which targeting United
Nations and non-governmental humanitarian workers
has become a tactical move frequently resorted to by
factions engaged in conflict. Since a sustained
humanitarian presence and unrestricted access to
civilians in areas of conflict are sometimes
fundamental for the very survival of those civilians, the
Council must make sure that the security of
humanitarian personnel is guaranteed by all parties
engaged in armed conflict. We take this opportunity to
reaffirm the importance we attach to the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and
Associated Personnel. We shall support every effort to
expand the application and scope of its provisions.

In observing transitions from conflict to peace
and moving from one conflict to the next, we perceive
new trends and become aware of new needs related to
the protection of civilians. We have constantly defined
new threats to civilian populations, including the most
vulnerable - women and children - and have
fostered attempts to come up with proper answers -
often on a case-by-case basis - to protect them. Every
conflict is a milestone in this effort and teaches us new
lessons. The Council has the obligation to adjust its
response accordingly.

First, we must strengthen norms and ensure their
proper implementation. The Security Council must
make sure that parties to a conflict are pressured to
comply fully with the provisions of the Charter and the
rules and principles of international law, in particular
international humanitarian, human rights and refugee
law, and to implement fully the relevant resolutions of
the Council. The Council must demonstrate its will to
condemn and take action in every situation where
breaches of law deprive civilians of their rightful
protection and to ensure that those acts are properly
addressed and do not go unpunished. The same applies
to United Nations personnel. The Security Council
must remain vigilant and take action to ensure that
United Nations humanitarian personnel do not inflict
further harm on civilians in areas of conflict. The
Council's mandates for peacekeeping missions must
incorporate the minimum standards of behaviour set
out clearly in the Secretary-General's bulletin of
October 2003 (ST/SGB/2003/13).

Secondly, although responsibility for protecting
citizens rests with States, and the work of the United
Nations is complementary to such efforts, it is up to the
Security Council to intervene when Governments are
unwilling or unable to take responsibility for protecting
civilians in armed conflicts. We must assign the
international community a role. Romania has always
been a strong supporter of the United Nations
entrusting regional organizations with the mandate of
taking up this agenda and with bringing to fulfilment
the tasks attached to it.

We are of the opinion that, in order to better
calibrate the Council's answer to the evolving
environment of conflicts and to build a viable system
of protection with respect to the issues of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and rehabilitation, as well
as to the problems of refugees, internally displaced
persons and small arms, the Council must think of the
regional dimension and engage the United Nations in
mutually beneficial cooperation with regional
organizations. Romania would certainly like to see better
coordination and partnership between the United Nations
and regional organizations on the safe return and the
reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons in the post-conflict situation in Kosovo.

In arriving at the proper answer, we acknowledge
that the input of the Secretariat is essential for the
improvement of the Council's analysis and decision-
making. We are appreciative of the Secretariat's work,
and we welcome any further advice or
recommendations on the matter.

