Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Allow me,
Mr. President, to read out the statement of Mr. Ahmed
Aboul Gheit, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States, who would have liked to attend today's
meeting in response to your kind invitation, but urgent
circumstances required that he be in Cairo.

"I would like to begin my statement today
by expressing our deep appreciation to you,
Mr. President, for your pioneering initiative to
convene today's high-level open debate. I thank
you for inviting me in my capacity as Secretary-
General of the League of Arab States to participate
in the meeting.

"We welcome the briefings by Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs; His Excellency
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, High Representative of the
African Union Commission for Silencing the Guns
in Africa, whom we wish every success in his new
post in Algeria; and Mr. Vasu Gounden, Founder
and Executive Director of the African Centre for
the Constructive Resolution of Disputes, whom we
also congratulate on his achievements in Africa.

"We also congratulate you, Sir, on the
unanimous adoption by the Security Council of
resolution 2457 (2019).

"There is no doubt that the pioneering African
Union initiative to silence the guns by 2020 is an
effective framework for strengthening cooperation
between our organizations. It is something I
strongly emphasized at the thirty-second summit of
the African Union, held in January in Addis Ababa.
It was not only because halfofthe States members of
the League of Arab States are prominent members
ofthe African Union or because Egypt is the current
Chair of the African Union for 2019 - as Egypt is a
founding member of the Arab League, the African
Union and the United Nations - but because of a
number of facts and common interests that require
us to intensify our Arab-African efforts to achieve
that noble objective.

"The Arab world represents the strategic and
natural geographic extension of Africa, just as
Africa represents the strategic depths of the Arab
world. That has led the African Union and the
League ofArab States to intensify their cooperation
by convening four Arab-African summits, hosted in
Cairo, Sirte, Kuwait and Malabo, in your brotherly
nation, Sir. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will host
the fifth summit this year. It is all in an effort to
achieve the common interests and objectives of our
two organizations and work together to achieve
the goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, the regional goals of Agenda 2063 of
the African Union and the Arab goals determined
by the Arab Summit resolutions.

"That will require us to intensify and coordinate
cooperation on a number of fronts to overcome
all challenges that prevent implementation. At
the same time, the Arab world and Africa need
strengthened cooperation to address the root causes
of armed conflict. We both need effective measures
to limit the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons and to overcome the weak control systems
for such weapons. We need to combat terrorist
organizations, such as the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham (Da'esh) and the Muslim Brotherhood in
the Arab world, as well as Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab
and others in Africa. We both need great reform
in the security sector to enable us to address
developments in transnational organized crime,
cybercrime, terrorism and violent extremism. We
both need strengthened regional and subregional
mechanisms to resolve conflicts and operationalize
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration.
We both need to strengthen early warning systems
and preventive diplomacy to prevent conflicts, hold
peaceful elections, ensure good governance and
achieve lasting peace. The list goes on.

"The Arab League agrees with the conclusions
of the report on silencing the guns, presented by
Equatorial Guinea on behalf of the African Union
Peace and Security Council at the most recent
African summit, especially since the report included

the five comprehensive aspects of addressing the
issue, namely, the political, economic, social,
environmental and legal dimensions. The League
also agrees with the importance of national
ownership and of expanding popular participation
in the implementation process through civil
society and the private sector and with a focus
on young people and women, backed by regional
organizations and the United Nations.

"In that regard, the League of Arab States
attaches importance to strengthening cooperation
at the regional and international levels for
implementation purposes by enhancing cooperation
between the African Police Cooperation
Organization and the Council of Arab Interior
Ministers in silencing the guns. The effort includes
support from United Nations disarmament and
counter-terrorism entities, as well as from political
and peacekeeping/peacebuilding mechanisms of the
AU, the Arab League, the European Union and the
United Nations, through various alternatives that
were discussed at the high-level meeting hosted by
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra in Addis Ababa on 11 and
12 October 2018. The Arab League participated in
that high-level meeting in an effort to strengthen
cooperation between the two organizations in
that area.

"Within that important initiative, we must also
invest in the reforms adopted by the United Nations
based on the initiative of Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres, especially the adjustments that are being
implemented within the African Peace and Security
Architecture. In that regard, the Under-Secretary-
General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
senior officials who specialize in Africa and the
Arab region must cooperate and coordinate with
one another and promote preventive diplomacy
and conflict prevention. They should also enhance
cooperation among the Security Council, the
African Peace and Security Council, the EU
Political and Security Committee, and the political
and security committees of the Arab League in
order to implement initiatives that lead to silencing
the guns.

"An example of such action is the Africa
Amnesty Month for the Surrender of Illegally
Owned Weapons and Arms initiative, which began
through a flagship project in various African
States, including Burkina Faso, Madagascar, Mali,

the Sudan and Zambia. We look forward to its
implementation and celebration on a regional level
soon in order to reach a continental agreement
on small arms and light weapons, in line with the
provisions of the relevant resolutions of the Arab
Interior Ministers Council. That topic, among
others of importance, was discussed at the first
Arab League-European Union summit, which was
held for in Sharm el-Sheikh on 24 and 25 February,
with a view to promoting cooperation among the
Arab League, EU and AU.

"While Africa and the Arab world share the
international concern with regard to the global
challenges facing multilateral systems in the
area of combating weapons of mass destruction
as an extremely fundamental pillar to achieve
international peace and security, we also underscore
the importance of joint international efforts to
establish a zone free of nuclear weapons, including
weapons of mass destruction, in the Middle East.
We must together implement the provisions of
the Pelindaba Treaty, which is the basis for the
maintenance of international peace and security at
both the African and Arab levels.

"Similarly, and through that same effective
partnership and joint efforts, we look forward
to reaching a just and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East in a manner that significantly
contributes to silencing the guns through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State,
with Jerusalem as its capital, and through peaceful
settlements, free of guns, in Syria, Libya, Yemen,
Iraq, Somalia, the Sudan and other Arab States.

"In parallel, our effective partnership
continues to consolidate lasting and inclusive
peace in Burundi, The Gambia, Guinea-Bissau,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic and other African States,
with the support of the United Nations and the
European Union, as well as other regional and
subregional organizations.

"We thank the representative of Lebanon, who
spoke on behalf of the Arab Group, and we align
ourselves with everything she said in her statement.

"We are confident in that regard that the
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations will lead to the desired
results on the African and Arab levels."

