Mr. Manzi (Rwanda): Iwould like to thank Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her briefing on the Prosecutor's report
to the Security Council. We also take note of the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative
of the Sudan, Mr. Osman, and of the steps taken by
the Government of the Sudan to implement the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, restore peace and
harmony in the communities of Darfur and appoint a
special prosecutor for Darfur with a team to help ensure
accountability for perpetrators of crimes in Darfur.

However, while we acknowledge that progress, there
are also cases reported of human rights violations and
abuses and active hostilities between the Government
of the Sudan and armed groups that affect civilians.
Repeated attacks on United Nations peacekeepers are
now complicated by cases of intercommunal violence
over land and other natural resources in the region. We
encourage the Government of the Sudan to investigate,
to bring the perpetrators to justice and to ensure that
reparations are made and victims protected.

The Security Council has been an active partner
in working for peace in Darfur for more than 10 years
through its decisions and continuing support to the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). It has endeavoured to protect

Darfur's civilians. While there are challenges, we note
that there are also opportunities that the Council should
not squander if we do indeed want peace and security in
Darfur. First, we commend the efforts of Mr. Mohamed
Ibn Chambas, the Joint Special Representative and Joint
Chief Mediator, to bring all stakeholders, especially
the non-signatories of the Doha Document, to the
negotiation table, and we urge the Council to rally
behind those efforts.

While the Government of the Sudan and other
signatories to the framework are making efforts to
implement the Doha Document, it is unfortunate that
three major groups in Darfur have not yet joined it. It is
essential that the Council and all its members, especially
those with influence on the parties concerned, to push
them towards adhering to the Document, in order to end
this long conflict. It is essential that the Government
and the other signatories to the Document redouble
their efforts to implement it, especially in the areas of
security, landownership, the rule of law, civil service
reform and justice, which, as the Secretary-General's
recent report on UNAMID (S/2013/607) indicates, still
lag far behind the implementation timeline. Equally
important for ensuring the successful implementation
of the Doha Document is that the donors from the Darfur
donor conference should honour their commitments.

The other opportunity that the Council has been
presented with concerns the justice system in place in
Darfur. The Secretary-General's report on UNAMID
indicates that since his appointment in 2012, the Special
Prosecutor for Darfur has brought nine cases of serious
crimes to trial, resulting in 42 convictions, and is
currently investigating another 57 cases. In that regard,
it would be wise for the ICC and the Council to support
the work and initiatives of the Special Prosecutor. One
way to do that is to monitor the status of his cases under
either the Doha Document or, as was requested at our
most recent meeting on UNAMID (S/PV.7048), through
the Council ensuring that the Government of the Sudan
regularly informs us about the status of investigations
and prosecutions, mainly of the perpetrators of attacks
on peacekeepers and humanitarian staff.

Regarding the indictment issued by the Prosecutor
of the ICC against officials of the Government of the
Sudan, including President Omer Hassan Al-Bashir,
our position is well known. Rwanda endorses all
seven decisions of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union on the issue adopted
since February 2009. We would particularly like to
reiterate our support for the African Union's view
that the quest for justice should be pursued in a way
that does not impede or jeopardize efforts to promote
lasting peace. We believe that all African countries that
have received President Al-Bashir in their territories
have done so in conformity with the decisions of the
African Union summits and in pursuit of the same
goal of peace in the region. We take this opportunity
to once again underscore the importance of genuine
cooperation between the Security Council and regional
and subregional organizations. That cooperation can
never flourish without two-way, mutual respect.

Rwanda also calls on the Council and human
rights and humanitarian actors to continue supporting
UNAMID as it provides technical assistance to both
State and non-State counterparts in order to build their
capacity to recognize, analyse and productively address
human rights issues in Darfur.

To conclude, let me reaffirm that Rwanda, as a
member of the Security Council, a member of the
African Union, and one of the major troop- and
police-contributing countries in UNAMID, will
continue to work towards sustainable peace and genuine
reconciliation and accountability for the most serious
crimes in Darfur while promoting complementarity
and the equal sovereignty of nations.

