Mr. Zehnder (Switzerland) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to begin by transmitting my
sincere condolences to the Russian Federation after the
sudden passing of Ambassador Churkin yesterday.

We thank Ukraine for organizing today's meeting.
The ongoing or protracted conflicts in Europe prevent
the creation of a common space of security, stability
and prosperity throughout the continent. In View of that
situation, we value the fruitful cooperation establishedin
different settings between the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) to address the unresolved conflicts and
their consequences.

The illegal annexation of Crimea by the Russian
Federation and the conflict in eastern Ukraine have
caused a major crisis in Europe. In recent weeks we
have seen upsurge in ceasefire violations. The conflict
in eastern part of the country has already left nearly
10,000 people dead, including many civilians.

Switzerland notes with concern a lack of respect
by the parties so far for their obligations under
international humanitarian law. The way hostilities are
being conducted has led to a rising death toll among
civilians and the destruction of things needed for their
survival. The humanitarian and human rights situations
in the conflict area are precarious. For Switzerland,
greater political will is indispensable for implementing
the agreements reached in the OSCE Trilateral Contact
Group and in the Normandy format, including the
understanding reached on 18 February in Munich.
Switzerland calls all sides to respect international
humanitarian law and allow humanitarian access.
All sides must adhere to the ceasefire and the other
commitments made in the Minsk agreements.

With respect to Georgia, the United Nations, the
European Union and the OSCE continue to co-facilitate
the Geneva International Discussions, which are a
good example of effective cooperation among these
three organizations. The discussions have in fact
recently allowed for the resumption of the Gali Incident
Prevention and Response Mechanism after a four-
year interruption.

The Nagorno Karabakh region saw an upsurge
in violence in April last year. Post-crisis diplomacy
prevented the large-scale use of force. Nonetheless,
ceasefire violations are still all too frequent. The
co-Chairs of the Minsk Group continue to do their
utmost to prevent a worsening of the situation.
Switzerland believes that more intense, structured
negotiations to arrive at a comprehensive settlement
could pave the way for a peaceful solution.
With regard to the process for resolving the
Transnistrian conflict, in June last year the German
presidency of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) managed to restart
the official 5-1-2 negotiations, after a two-year break.
The parties have reaffirmed their willingness to hold
regular meetings, and we commend their commitment.

In the Western Balkans, several recent incidents
have affected relations between Belgrade and Pristina,
such as the sispatch ofa train from Belgrade to northern
Kosovo. Such tensions are of concern. Switzerland
welcomes the commitment shown by authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina, with a view to continuing talks
in Brussels within the high-level dialogue to normalize
relations, facilitated by the European Union.

For Switzerland, the intensification of the
dialogue among the parties on the question of Cyprus
is encouraging. We thank the United Nations for its
commitment to help find a solution to that issue. To date,
Switzerland has hosted several rounds of negotiations
in Mont Pelerin and Geneva, and we stand ready to
continue our efforts in support of the process.

Let me underscore four ways in which the United
Nations could respond to conflicts in Europe.

First, the notion of sustaining peace offers a
comprehensive new approach to addressing conflicts,
also applicable to Europe. Although the traditional
notion of peacebuilding is linked, above all, to post-
conflict situations, lasting peace encompasses the
entire cycle of conflicts.

Secondly, the United Nations is best placed to
provide global experiences related to sustaining peace
that could be beneficial to Europe. In 2015, the Secretary-
General published a report (A/70/328) to promote the
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations to build mediation capacity. In Europe,
the OSCE has established its own Mediation Support
Unit, with significant support from Switzerland.

Thirdly, the United Nations has enormous
experience in assisting people affected by conflict,
including the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, which continues to play
a key role. We must do all in our power to reduce the
suffering of people affected by conflict.

Fourthly, for many years the United Nations has
been working with regional players, including the
OSCE and the European Union. Its experience would be
useful in the areas of early warning and the deployment
of special political missions. Switzerland believes
that preventive diplomacy must be strengthened, and
organizations such as the OSCE must benefit from the
experience of the United Nations.

