Mr. Krokhmal (Ukraine): Like previous speakers,
I would like to thank Mr. Annabi for his informative
briefing on the latest developments in East Timor.

 

My delegation shares most of the views that have
already been expressed this morning, in particular those
relating to security issues. Allow me now to make brief
remarks only on certain points which my delegation
considers to be important.

We share the concerns about the economic and social
conditions in East Timor. Of course, their substantial
improvement will come about only through the persistent
efforts of the international community. In this connection,
we welcome the fact that the United Nations mission in
East Timor, the World Bank and the United Nations
Development Programme have signed a grant agreement on
the project to increase the rate of employment in the
poorest communities of the city of Dili, as well as the
introduction by the mission and the United States Agency
for International Development of an emergency scheme that
will enable districts to hire local staff on a short-term basis.

We are pleased to note that Special Representative
Sergio Vieira de Mello has signed the instructions
establishing district advisory councils. We feel sure that
these will be of value in moving forward the dialogue
between the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET) and district representatives.

Turning to the Memorandum of Understanding on
cooperation in legal, judicial and human rights matters, my
delegation supports the cooperative approach shown by the
parties towards the investigation of the violence and human
rights abuses and the prosecution of those responsible for
them. Clearly, UNTAET and the Government of Indonesia
have much to occupy themselves with in order to have in
place a proper political framework which supports and
facilitates a restoration of justice in East Timor.

As this briefing indicates, the number of refugees
returning from West to East Timor has decreased
significantly this month. Obviously, because of deterioration
of basic services and uneven food distribution in the
Indonesian-run refugee camps in West Timor, there has
been a problem of sporadic food rations in the past three
months. The Indonesian Government supplies roughly 10
per cent of the food that the refugees need, while the World
Food Programme covers 45 per cent and the Catholic Relief
Services handles the rest.

We are concerned with this situation. Since last
October more than 158,000 refugees have returned to East
Timor, including 30,000 who have returned this year.
According to the Indonesian authorities, there are still
134,000 refugees in West Timor. We believe that the
resolution of the problems of unemployment and the
valuable reintegration of refugees into East Timorese
society will facilitate their return.

A high rate of unemployment remains a serious
problem and is also causing the increasing crime rate.
Timely and complete civilian police deployment is very
important in this regard. I am pleased to inform you that
the Ukrainian rapid reaction police unit has this month
joined the civilian police component of UNTAET. We
believe that implementation of the reconstruction and
development projects will create new job opportunities
and eventually will be a substantial contribution in terms
of internal stability within East Timor society.

It is also of critical importance now to stop the
cross-border incidents along the border with West Timor.
In this regard, we are pleased to note the efforts
undertaken by the Indonesian Government to clamp down
on the militia activities in West Timor, and we urge it to
continue such efforts.

In conclusion, Mr. President, let me pay tribute to
the Special Representative, Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello,
and the United Nation staff for their efforts, which my
delegation strongly supports.
