Mr. Koncke (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Uruguay
commends the presidency of the Security Council for
convening this meeting on this very important and
urgent problem.

My delegation will make a very brief statement,
given the time restrictions.

First, on behalf of my Government, I offer our
condolences to the families and the Governments of
the victims. We also wish to underscore the value of
resolution 2177 (2014), which was unanimously adopted
today by the Security Council with an historic level of
sponsorship.

Uruguay recognizes the importance and gravity
represented by the swift development of this terrible
disease in the western region of the African continent
and its global significance and impact, which could
grow very quickly. The magnitude of this tragedy in
the affected region not only destroys the life and health
of its people, but also threatens its social fabric and
economy and the very existence of those States that
do not have the infrastructure or adequate means to
confront the epidemic.

We are especially concerned about the devastating
impact that this disease has on women, as a consequence
of their activities within the heart of their families and
communities. That is why the fight against this disease
requires a joint effort of the international community.
In that regard, Uruguay recognizes and appreciates the
effort being made by the United Nations, particularly
the World Health Organization, and other organizations
already on the ground, and by those Member States that
have pledged resources and personnel to address the
threat.

Although we are aware of the varying scale of the
situation, Uruguay notes with particular concern the
appearance of another Ebola outbreak in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where our country has deployed
a contingent of nearly 1,200 forces. This makes my
country even more alert to the depth of the problem,
in virtue of having to generate an adequate system
for evacuation and the treatment of a disease without
precedent for Uruguay. In this context, Uruguay for its
part reaffirms its international commitment to maintain
its staff deployed in the area of the Mission, despite
the increased level of risk posed by the appearance of
Ebola, and pledges to seek ways to cooperate to cope
with the disease and its consequences within the actual
capacities of the country. It is in that spirit that my
country has sponsored today's adopted resolution.

