Mr. Derbez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): The
delegation of Mexico has taken due note of the useful
information presented to the Council by the
Government of the United States. This presentation
clearly contains valuable information to help determine
and guide the Council's decisions. It will also give us
additional elements of judgement in determining the
extent to which Iraq has complied with the resolutions
adopted by this organ.
The presentation by Secretary of State Powell
reinforces Mexico's firm belief in the need for progress
towards the effective and verifiable elimination of
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, as well as the
facilities for developing them. Mexico's position in the
Security Council has been unequivocally aimed at
achieving the disarmament of Iraq in the most effective
way possible and by peaceful means, while ensuring at
all times that this goal is achieved at the lowest cost in
terms of human suffering and economic instability and
without undermining the urgent battle against
international terrorism.

Consistent with that position, the Government of
Mexico has made direct approaches to the Iraqi
authorities, urging them to cooperate without delay in
the manner required by the inspectors. We have shared
the content of these initiatives with other members of
the Security Council so that this message might be
conveyed to the Iraqi authorities as forcefully as
possible and through the greatest possible number of
channels. Once again, with the presence of the
representatives of Iraq at this table, we repeat our call
for their authorities concretely, immediately and
urgently to translate their declared intentions into
active cooperation and genuine collaboration with the
inspection process, as provided for in resolution 1441
(2002).

Mexico reaffirms its confidence in the inspection
activities now under way as the best possible way to
detect, destroy and verify the elimination of weapons
of mass destruction in Iraq. We are in favour of
intensifying and strengthening those inspections, as
well as the assistance which members of the Council
and the international community in general may
provide to the United Nations Monitoring, Verification
and Inspection Commission and to the International
Atomic Energy Agency to successfully accomplish
their delicate mission.

It is in that context that Mexico recognizes the
importance of Secretary of State Powell's presentation
to the Security Council. It warmly welcomes the
contribution of elements that support the work of the
inspectors, enhance the accuracy and effectiveness of
their mission and help to expedite and increase the
reliability of the disarmament process.

Mexico's emphasis on a multilateral approach is,
indeed, consistent with the views and convictions of
the Mexican people. But it is also in keeping with a
pragmatic concern to build the international consensus
required by a task of such global implications as the
elimination of weapons of mass destruction.

That is why Mexico reiterates its readiness to
continue to make a constructive contribution to the
work of the Security Council, in the conviction that
cooperation and the search for multilateral solutions
will give greater weight to the decisions of this body.
Perhaps even more important, we reiterate our demand
to the Iraqi Government that it work urgently and on an
ongoing basis to grant access to all of its facilities so
that the inspections can be successfully concluded.
That will make it possible at the end of this process not
only to have a strengthened and revitalized United
Nations system, but also to provide the international
community with guarantees that the mission of
disarmament has been fully accomplished.

