Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (Spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to express my condolences to
our brothers in the Republic of the Sudan following the
death of former President Field Marshal Abdel Rahman
Swar Al-Dahab. May God rest his soul in peace.

I would also like to thank the Joint Special
Representative for Darfur, Mr. Mamabolo, for
his valuable briefing on the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

In our discursion today, I will address four topics:
the security situation in Darfur, internally displaced
persons, the UNAMID exit strategy, and its review
and indicators.

First, on the security situation, we take note of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/912), which
highlights an improvement in the security situation
across most areas in Darfur and a reduction in criminal
acts. Undoubtedly, that is a positive sign that we
should build upon in order to achieve full security and
stability in Darfur. We underscore the need to support
the efforts of the Sudanese Government to extend
its sovereignty across all national territories and to
shoulder its primary responsibility to protect civilians.
We welcome the unity of the Council in adopting
resolution 2429 (2018), which contributed to reducing
the military component of UNAMID. That is evidence
of the continued stability in Darfur and a reduced need
for United Nations military forces in the region.

Secondly, I would like to touch on internally
displaced persons. The fight against rebel factions in
Jebel Marra has had an impact on the displacement
of some inhabitants of Darfur, as have flooding and
heavy rainfall, according to the Secretary-General's
report. It is therefore important to recognize two things
when discussing displaced persons and their numbers.
Displacement is not due entirely to the deep-rooted
causes of the conflict; Darfur has seen the return of
displaced persons and a new wave of displacement. On
the whole, when compared to the figures from last year
and previous years, it can be said that the number of
displaced persons continues to fall. According to the
report, displaced persons are concerned by several
factors, including the presence of armed groups in
camps. That is why it is important to continue the
weapons-collection campaign in the Sudan.

Thirdly, on the exit strategy ofUNAMID, resolution
2429 (2018) had a substantial impact in encouraging
the Sudanese Government to further cooperate with
all parties in order to complete the strategy by 2020.
At the meeting of the Arab Ministerial Council held
in Cairo in September, the League of Arab States
welcomed the resolution, as well as the Sudan's efforts
in implementing the objectives of that resolution. We
also take note of the annex and the proposed indicators
in the Secretary-General's report, which are in line
with the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We note
that the Implementation Follow-Up Commission is
continuing to work towards the implementation of the
Doha Document.

Fourthly, on the exit strategy and its indicators,
as we stated at the Council's meeting on UNAMID
in March (see S/PV.8202), UNAMID's mandate and
the Secretary-General's reports are related to Darfur.
Therefore, the indicators should not be applied beyond
Darfur to the entire Sudanese territory. As the Special
Envoy of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
brotherly State of Qatar underscored in July, following
the thirteenth meeting of the Implementation Follow-
Up Commission - which included members of the
Council - 85 per cent of the provisions of the Doha
Document have been implemented. The indicators
should therefore focus on the points that have not yet
been implemented.

The Sudan sorely needs the support of donors, which
must honour their commitments. I commend the efforts
of the joint mechanism between the Sudan and the
League of Arab States pertaining to the follow-up and
implemention of Arab development projects in Darfur.
A donor conference should be organized to support the
Sudan and help it to move from the peacekeeping phase
to that of building peace.

In conclusion, it is time for the Council to strengthen
its support for the Sudan as it seeks to focus on
political solutions to achieve peace in the country and
neighbouring countries. The Sudan must be supported
so that security and stability on its territories and in the
wider region can be achieved.

