Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank you, Mr. President, for
calling this public meeting to consider once again the
question of East Timor.

The situation is West Timor remains a cause for
great concern. United Nations personnel have been
attacked and murdered. United Nations officials
present at the weapons turnover ceremony were
subjected once again to threats and intimidation. The
Chinese delegation strongly condemns the incidents of
violence against United Nations personnel that
occurred in West Timor. We demand that the
perpetrators be brought to justice.

The Chinese delegation notes that the Indonesian
Government has taken serious, effective measures. It
has collected a large number of weapons and has acted
to restrain the militias. All these measures have
demonstrated the earnest desire of the Indonesian
Government to resolve the situation there. We are
convinced that the Indonesian Government has the
ability to keep the situation under control. Of course,
the process of collecting weapons is not without
problems, some of which are quite serious. We look to
the Indonesian Government to earnestly carry out its
commitment to restore stability and order in West
Timor, to ensure that violence against United Nations
personnel will not happen again and to provide security
and safety to the refugee camps in order to pave the
way for an early return of United Nations agencies and
personnel and to facilitate the provision of
humanitarian assistance to refugees, who are in dire
need.

Resolving the militia question is a daunting task.
For quite some time, the Security Council has been
making repeated calls, but so far this issue has not been
resolved in a satisfactory manner. Now is the time for a
real solution. We look to the Indonesian Government to
take genuinely forceful measures. At the same time, we
believe the international community should support the
Indonesian Government and encourage it to take
action, and should refrain from undermining the
authority of the Indonesian Government and its ability
to keep the situation under control. Particular care
should be taken to avoid a course of action that is
likely to lead to a confrontation between the United
Nations and Indonesia, which would not be well
received by the Indonesian people and would have a
profoundly adverse impact on the future work of
United Nations personnel in Indonesia.

The question of the refugees remaining in West
Timor is a complex one that involves many factors. It
needs to be addressed in a comprehensive and
integrated manner. We hope that the Indonesian
Government will continue to extend wide-ranging
cooperation with the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor. At the same time, the
international community should provide the necessary
assistance in this regard.

Lastly, we wish to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Vieira de
Mello, for his comprehensive briefing. We highly
commend and fully support the work of Mr. Vieira de
Mello and his staff. We thank them for doing great
work in a very dangerous and difficult situation.

