Mr. Mminele (South Africa): We would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and
timely debate on the theme "Respect for the principles
and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations as a
key element for the maintenance of international peace
and security". We also thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing. The fact that this open debate comes in
the year that marks the seventieth anniversary of the
founding of the United Nations is highly significant.
South Africa wishes to place on record its firm
continued commitment to the purposes and principles
of the Charter, which remain as valid today as they
were 70 years ago. We believe that the world is better
off because of the United Nations than it would have
been without this Organization. My delegation remains
committed to fostering the development of its bilateral
and multilateral relations on the basis of the purposes
and principles of the Charter.

Since its establishment, the United Nations has
registered remarkable accomplishments in fulfilling
its mandate, including the role it played in the fight
against apartheid and colonialism. The Charter of the
United Nations is the single most important source
of international law, and all Member States have the
responsibility to uphold it.

The United Nations has also demonstrated that it
can be adaptable to new global realities, if the necessary
political will exists within its membership. We will all
agree that today the United Nations is at a crossroads,
requiring our renewed commitment and focus to guide
the Organization into a new phase of its rich history.
One area we have agreed to improve is the way in which
we appoint the Organization's Secretary-General. Our
joint commitment to make the process more democratic,
inclusive and transparent has to date resulted in a much
improved process.

Nevertheless, other areas remain in desperate need
for change. The most important of which is the long-
outstanding reform of the Security Council, which
remains unrepresentative. The status quo is particularly
discomforting because the Council is the principal
organ tasked with the management of the core mandate
of the United Nations, namely, the maintenance of
international peace and security. Fundamentally, it is
important to remember that, to achieve lasting peace,
there is always a need to vigorously pursue collective
security through preventive means first, rather than a
reactive approach to conflict resolution.

In that regard the Council has been inconsistent and
selective. The current state of play in the Middle East is
a direct indictment ofthe Council, as over decades it has
failed to adequately address the question of Palestine.
The Security Council has even failed to enforce its own
decisions - a failure replicated in Western Sahara.
Furthermore, often when it does act, the Council's
first response is to act under Chapter VII with coercive
measures, ignoring the Charter's guidance and
compulsion for the need to settle differences through
peaceful means.

In Chapter VIII, the Charter recognizes that the
efforts of the United Nations in the maintenance of
international peace and security can be improved by
working in cooperation with other organizations. As
emphasized at the 2005 World Summit, the Charter
further recognizes the importance offorging predictable
partnerships and cooperation arrangements between
the United Nations and regional organizations aimed at
addressing international peace and security challenges.

During its non-permanent membership of the
Security Council, South Africa worked tirelessly to
turn that decision into action, specifically as it relates to
the African Union (AU). We believe that it has become
essential to allow the AU to respond to conflicts in a
proactive and rapid manner, with a view to limiting
the escalation of conflict and human suffering. That
applies especially in cases involving the United Nations
because its processes translate into a longer response
time, while the situation on the ground is getting out
of hand.

In conclusion, the Charter underscores the
importance of States Members of the United Nations
working together in dealing with challenges to global
peace and security. The Security Council should
guard against the flouting of international law by
Member States to serve their own self-interests. The
principles of non-interference and the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of all Member States should remain
protected by the Charter. South Africa believes that
any intervention should be done in adherence with the
Charter's principles and Articles and in the framework
of international customary, humanitarian and human
rights law.

I wish to stress that South Africa remains
committed to honouring and respecting the provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations.

