The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United States.

Let me also begin by thanking Ambassador
Nishida for his briefing today and for his own and
Japan's exemplary leadership of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) over the
past two years. The Committee has accomplished a
great deal and he has set a very high standard for his
successor to live up to.

Six months ago, almost to the day, this Council
adopted resolution 1929 (2010) in response to Iran's
continued refusal to comply with its international
nuclear obligations. Since then, Iran's non-compliance
with its obligations to the Security Council and under
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons has persisted, as has its lack of full
cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) and, as we have just heard, have its
numerous violations of Security Council resolutions.
Allow me to make three brief points on the current
situation and appropriate next steps.

First, unfortunately, when it comes to the actions
of Iran, not much has changed since we last met. Iran
10-68565

 

continues to violate its obligations to the IAEA and the
Security Council. The latest report on Iran of the IAEA
Director-General, released just a few weeks ago, again
underscores Iran's continued refusal to comply with its
international nuclear obligations and to cooperate fully
with the IAEA.

Most notably, the report underscores Iran's
ongoing uranium enrichment at 3.5 per cent and
near-20 per cent levels. The report also details Iran's
continued construction of a heavy water research
reactor, its refusal to permit the IAEA the access it
needs to answer long-standing questions about the
Qom enrichment facility, and its non-response to the
questions around a possible military dimension to
Iran's nuclear programme. In sum, the latest IAEA
report records Iran's continued defiance of its
international obligations and shows that Iran has yet to
take the meaningful steps required by this Council and
called for by the IAEA Board of Governors.

Secondly, we must continue to maintain the
pressure on Iran to change course. All Member States
have an obligation to fully implement Security Council
resolutions. We urge those that have not yet done so to
report to the Committee on their national
implementation efforts as soon as possible. These
Security Council resolutions affirm obligations on Iran
with a clear objective: to resolve the international
community's concerns about Iran's nuclear activities.
The 1737 Committee and the recently-constituted
Panel of Experts will help to maintain the pressure on
Iran by monitoring and improving the implementation
and enforcement of the Iran sanctions regime.

In particular, we urge the Committee, with the
Panel's support, to investigate thoroughly all reported
sanctions violations. We commend Nigeria for having
seized Iranian arms exported in violation of United
Nations sanctions. We also commend Italy for seizing
items that Syria was attempting to procure illicitly
from Iran. Investigations into these incidents can help
us to better understand and to halt Iran's arms
smuggling and proliferation networks in violation of
Council resolutions.

We are pleased that the Panel of Experts is now
operational. The Panel is an exceptionally well-
qualified team, and we expect that it will significantly
improve our ability to monitor and tighten enforcement.

Finally, let me reiterate my Government's
commitment to a dual-track strategy of both pressure
 

and engagement to convince Iran's leadership to
change course. Earlier this week, we held frank
discussions and dialogue with Iran and our E3+3
partners. We aim to continue a careful and phased
process of building confidence between Iran and the
international community.

As we have said before, we recognize Iran's
rights, but we insist that Iran fulfil the obligations that
accompany those rights. Iran's choice remains clear. If
it builds international confidence and respects its
obligations, we will reciprocate; but if Iran refuses, its
isolation will only grow. We will base our actions on
Iran's degree of cooperation. We look forward to
 

continued talks in late January to discuss practical
ideas for a way forward to resolve our core concerns.
We remain committed to working closely with our
partners in this Council and the international
community to prevent Iran from developing nuclear
weapons.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.
10-68565
