Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan is deeply
concerned that, despite the signing of the agreement on
the cessation of hostilities, the protection of civilians
and humanitarian access, as well as numerous calls from
the Security Council and all signatories, we continue
to receive reports of continuing military actions and
flagrant violations of international humanitarian law
and human rights law. Moreover, the parties to the
conflict have not made sufficient compromises to
overcome the outstanding issues on governance and
security matters.

We therefore express our readiness to discuss
appropriate additional measures by the Council
against those who violate the agreement. However,
the position of countries in the region and regional
organizations, namely, the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) and the African
Union (AU), should be taken into account in the
Council's deliberations on such measures. We all
support a bigger role for regional organizations in the
work of the Security Council. Our delegation abstained
in the voting on resolution 2418 (2018) because the
positions and concerns of the countries of the region
with regard to the timing of such actions were not
adequately reflected. We support the idea of postponing
the Council's new measures and giving IGAD some
additional time to realize the objectives of the High-
level Revitalization Forum process.

It is of critical importance that the Council remain
united in supporting the efforts of IGAD and the
AU. We should give Government officials as a party
to negotiations the chance to achieve the desired
progress, and we strongly urge them to do so. We
welcome the decisions set out in the communique of the
Extraordinary Session ofthe IGAD Council ofMinisters
on the situation in South Sudan, adopted today, and
hope that the parties will be able to reconcile their
differences and make significant progress on bridging
proposals on governance and security issues. This is a
wake-up call for the Government to be proactive and
to genuinely engage in the peace process. Otherwise,
the consequences of inaction and further delays will
be dire for the Government, which was put on notice
today with the adoption of the resolution. However, we
are against the annex and including the names of the
officials before we see the results.

