Mr. Marsico (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like at the outset, Mr. President, to thank you for convening
this open briefing. You are well aware of the importance
that we attach to this kind of meeting. I wish also
especially to thank Ambassador Robert Fowler, the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee on Angola, for his
introduction to the report of the Panel of Experts, contained
in document S/2000/203, and, through him, all of the
members of the Panel.

Furthermore, I wish to welcome the presence at this
meeting of the Minister of External Relations of Angola,
which I deem of the greatest importance, and of Minister
Peter Hain of the United Kingdom, who has honoured us
once again with his presence, sharing with us his
tremendous and broad-ranging personal and professional
experience in matters relating to Africa.

For more than 20 years, the international community
has been striving to secure a peaceful settlement to the
conflict in Angola. My country can identify itself with these
efforts; indeed, from 1989 onwards it has deployed
personnel there, since the operations of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola began.

Despite that presence and the successive efforts of
the international community, the results have not been not
sufficient to bring the conflict to an end or to promote
compliance with the 1991 Peace Accord or the 1994
Lusaka Protocol.

In this conflict, the existence and abundance of
natural resources, and of diamonds in particular, have
played a significant role in perpetuating the conflict by
fostering war, facilitating the purchase of weapons, fuels
and even of political support. The strategic value of
diamonds was recognized by the Security Council when
in 1998 it incorporated into the sanctions regime a ban on
the sale of diamonds from UNITA sources.
The continued conflict in Angola has no single
origin. However, the presentation of this report, the
attention that it has attracted and the fact that we all have
come to meet here today should be used not only to
promote enhanced implementation of the sanctions but
also to step up political efforts to put an end to the
conflict in Angola.

The report, as we read it, raises many issues that go
beyond identifying violations or attributing blame. I
believe that we need to ask ourselves what we need to do
to ensure that this kind of situation does not recur. In the
area of peacekeeping operations, the concept of "lessons
learned" is a meaningful one. It should be significant also
in the context of sanctions.

This comment serves also to remind us once again
of the need to consider seriously the desirability of
establishing more effective monitoring mechanisms for
sanctions regimes. We wonder what message is sent by a
sanctions regime without effective controls.

Over the last 20 years the international community
has invested considerable sums in the peace process in
Angola. How much in the way of resources, however, has
been allocated to the effective monitoring of these
sanctions? What consequences might there have been for
the Angolan peace process if there had been more
effective monitoring of the sanctions regime?

The Panel's report is a genuine effort to clarify fully
certain relevant issues, such as how the sanctions are
being violated, who is violating them and what measures
can be taken to make sanctions a more effective
instrument in the Angolan peace process. To this end, the
Panel is presenting the Security Council with 39
recommendations and a set of conclusions. In the coming

 

weeks we shall have to study them carefully and act
accordingly.

However, it is noteworthy that in recent days the
information contained in the report has already produced
significant repercussions: many Governments and forums
have started a number of investigations. We encourage
these endeavours and trust that the appropriate corrective
measures will be taken with equal determination.

This report is useful not only for Angola. It should
serve to remind us of all that remains to be done with
respect to other sanctions Committees. In this regard, it
contains a number of elements that we feel might be of use
to the panel of experts on sanctions recently set up by the
Security Council under the leadership of Ambassador
Fowler, and which will be reporting to the Council in a
month's time.

In conclusion, I would like to recall that in 1994 the
non-governmental organization Human Rights Watch
published a lengthy report on the violations of the sanctions
regime then in force in Angola. That report anticipated
some of the conclusions of the current Panel. We hope that
today the international community is better prepared to
react to this kind of information and that we will be able to
take good advantage of this new opportunity. The course of
action we now take depends on each and every one of us.
For our part we hope that a further report in four or five
years time will not find us in the same situation.

