Mr. Bessho (Japan): I appreciate and commend the
leadership of the United States in convening today's
meeting. I would also like to thank Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his impactful remarks.

The three pillars of the United Nations - peace
and security, sustainable development and human
rights - are not independent of each other. That is no
less true with regard to the relationship between human
rights and international peace and security. In fact, the
Security Council has already been discussing and taking
action on human rights in various regional situations,
as well as on many cross-cutting issues. Therefore, we
welcome the fact that the Security Council has rightly
decided to have a briefing under this theme in order
to foster a comprehensive discussion on the nexus
between the two pillars.

The international community has seen many cases
in the past, as in Rwanda and Bosnia, and today in Syria,
where a dire human rights and humanitarian situation
destabilizes the surrounding region. In too many cases,
people face being abused or brutally killed because of
their ethnicity or religious beliefs. The escalation of
such attacks, retaliation and conflicts may even lead to
war crimes or crimes against humanity.

We have also seen the case of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea, where authorities pursue
the development of nuclear weapons and ballistic
missiles at the cost ofthe fundamental human needs and
welfare of the people in its territory. In addition, with
regard to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea,
its abduction of foreign nationals is a grave human
rights violation. At the same time, it undermines the
sovereignty of the countries concerned and threatens
the lives and safety of their citizens.

Such deliberate human rights violations as a method
to threaten international peace and security can also be
seen in other places. The Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and Boko Haram use human rights abuses - such
as abduction, rape and human trafficking - as tactics of
combat. Those examples remind us that the discussion
of serious human rights violations falls within the
mandate of the Security Council as long as they may
affect international peace and security. Whether such
a linkage exists in a particular case or not can also be
discussed in the Council.

Discussions mean nothing unless they lead to a
positive change towards a stabilized world in which
each person's human rights are protected. In that regard,
it is the obligation of the Security Council to make full
use ofthe options that the Council possesses. Currently,
more than half of the United Nations peacekeeping and
political missions have human rights-related mandates.
Since, regrettably, human rights abuses often occur in
unstable contexts and they also become root causes of
destabilization, certain situations compel us to integrate
human rights components into peace operations.

The Security Council could also utilize various
mechanisms outside the Council, especially those
of the Human Rights Council, in order to acquire
sufficient information for making appropriate decisions
related to preventing and ending conflict and atrocity.
With that in mind, Japan joined the appeal of 13 June
2016, entitled "To Put Human Rights at the Heart of
Conflict Prevention", during the thirty-second session
of the Human Rights Council, and we support the
recommendation made therein to intensify the exchange
between the two Councils.

Most of the conflicts that we are facing today are
not classical wars between sovereign States. Most of
them are asymmetrical conflicts driven by non-State
actors. In such cases, the risk that civilians will
become victims of atrocities and atrocious attacks is
significantly higher than in inter-State wars. Today, we
are also facing cases where systematic, widespread and
gross human rights violations have become essential
components of political systems and, though not
comprising active conflicts, such systems pose serious
threats to regional stability.

Under such circumstances, focusing on human
rights aspects is essential to seeing the overall picture
of a threat or conflict. It is the responsibility of the
security Council to decide whether or not certain cases
of human rights violations pose a threat to international
peace and security, and, if so, to decide how the
international community should respond.

