Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Federica
Mogherini, High Representative of the European

Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, for her
detailed briefing.
The Dominican Republic recognizes that
there are challenges are huge and complex in this
millennium, and it is therefore essential to strengthen
the links between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in order to broaden the
scope, make the work more effective and increasingly
ensure international peace and security.

We recognize that cooperation with regional
organizations is essential, as we share the
same commitment to the pursuit of solutions to
global problems.

We understand that such relations are crucial
to stability and security, Many of these regional
organizations serve as natural mediators, and
partnership with them can help to foster the conditions
necessary for finding lasting and sustainable solutions,
on the consistent basis of mutual benefit for States and
the principles of international law, and in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

We welcome the laudable and intensive efforts
of the European Union and its member States in the
promotion of international peace and security. We
acknowledge the ongoing support that the European
Union provides to various countries through various
channels, including good offices, mediation, support
for the development of national capacity and training.

Likewise, under the authority of the Security
Council, the European Union also provides financing
and equipment to peacekeeping operations and supports
institutional development. In that respect, its presence
in the international arena strengthens the scope of
multilateralism, and its contribution promotes the quest
for sustainable peace. That said, we are convinced that
the European security and defence policy is an integral
and complementary part of the architecture of the
multilateral system.

Currently 70 per cent of European Union missions
and operations are carried out in parallel with the
United Nations, reflecting the complementary nature
of the work of both organizations. Thus progress has
been made in the quest for sustainable solutions in the
Balkans by facilitating dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina and reaching an agreement on the integration
of justice, border management and the civil registry.
Most importantly, tangible progress has been made
towards stability and the normalization of relations
between Kosovo and Serbia.

By the same token, the European Union-led
multinational stabilization force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has helped to maintain political and social
stability. In addition, the European Union has been
consistently working to resolve the situation in eastern
Ukraine, providing operational and practical support
such as momentum in the implementation of the
Minsk agreements. Moreover, in Africa the European
Union continues to provide training and support to
the security sector in Somalia, the Central African
Republic and Mali.

The Dominican Republic has taken note with interest
of the painstaking work undertaken by the organization
in conflict zones in promoting and protecting human
rights. My country attaches great importance to the
follow-up and monitoring of human rights in the field.
It is for that reason that we deem it crucial to have in
place early-warning systems and to be able to take
preventive measures. Experience has shown the need
for prevention, as otherwise the highest price will be
paid by the most vulnerable groups, including refugees,
internally displaced persons and migrants.

Our country is part of a region that champions
political dialogue and action at the international level
as a means of progressing towards common, beneficial
goals. We therefore welcome the fact that the European
Union, together with all its members, plays a crucial role
in the resolution of many global challenges, including
the food crisis, climate change and terrorism.

Here we welcome the 2019-2021 strategic
partnership between the European Union and the
United Nations in the fields of peacekeeping and crisis
management. We would highlight in particular efforts
related to the issue of women and peace and security.
We believe in the key role of women and youth in the
prevention and resolution of conflicts, with a view to
finding sustainable solutions.

The Dominican Republic notes with interest the
policies and normative frameworks of the European
Union in the fields of the prevention of and combat
against terrorism. We believe that terrorism constitutes
one of the chief threats to international peace and
security. In addition to its toll on innocent human lives
and on the environment, terrorism represents a threat to
the rule of law, democracy, the peaceful coexistence of
peoples and social and economic development.

Finally, we reiterate our support for the relationship
and cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional organizations. We express our
confidence in the work of the European Union, as we
view it as a key global political and economic player
that contributes to the peaceful resolution of disputes.

As we commend the work of done by the European
Union throughout the world, we urge the international
community and all actors involved to continue to support
the taking of measures before crises erupt and the
preventive diplomatic efforts of regional organizations.

