Mr. Samhan (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you every success.

I wish also to thank the Secretary-General for his
report, which contains invaluable information and
recommendations that will help to protect civilians in
armed conflicts. We would like also to express our
appreciation for the efforts made by humanitarian
agencies.

Despite treaties on international laws and human
rights - first and foremost the 1949 Geneva
Conventions - regional and international events have
shown that military action brought about by conflicts,
acts of aggression, ethnic and religious cleansing and
occupation, in addition to the deterioration of the
economic and social situation in many countries -
particularly the least developed ones - has targeted
civilians, particularly women and children and other
vulnerable segments of society, namely refugees and
displaced persons.

Immoral means are being used by executors of
such military actions to achieve their inhumane goals.
Statistics show that civilians represent more than 75
per cent of the victims of war. Millions of people -
particularly in regions of Africa, Asia and the
Balkans - are, on a daily basis, the victims of murder,
acts of aggression, blockages, ethnic cleansing, forced
displacement and the use of internationally prohibited
weapons. This is a grave violation of international
humanitarian law.

The United Arab Emirates wishes to express its
grave concern at the fact that these violations are
continuing on a regular and flagrant basis. Violations
of human rights are being committed against women
and children in many areas of tension and in the
context of civil and regional wars. We wish to reiterate
the need to deal with these problems on the basis of
international obligations, ensuring that the belligerents
respect the Charter of the United Nations, international
law and human rights. In addition, it is urgent to
provide civilians with medical, humanitarian and relief
assistance. This should take place without any
impediment whatsoever.

At the same time, we wish to reiterate the need to
pursue efforts at the regional and international levels to
address the causes of armed conflict in a radical and
comprehensive manner. This will require the creation
of a culture of peace and tolerance, the implementation
of confidence-building measures, preventive
diplomacy, post-conflict disarmament and peace-
building among former combatants, and the
establishment of the requisite economic and social
environment. Moreover, those responsible for crimes
against civilians must be called to account.

We welcome the recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in his report aimed at improving the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We reiterate
the need to deal with various aspects of this problem,
inter alia, the assumption by the Security Council and
Member States of their political and legal
responsibilities, with a view to resolving existing
conflicts without the use of double standards and on
the basis of the sovereign equality of countries and
peoples, as specified in the Charter of the United
Nations. It is necessary also to respect the specific
features of each individual conflict.

In an effort to maintain peace and security, the
media must play a greater role in disseminating the
truth about conflicts and mass violations of human
rights.

In this context, we wish to express our profound
concern about the ignorance and silence of the
international community, represented by the Security
Council, with respect to the suffering of the
defenceless Palestinian civilians at the hands of the
Israeli occupation, which is committing criminal acts,
blockading and destroying homes and the economic
and social infrastructures. Israeli forces are violating
the rights of civilians and taking hostages, including
children, who are thrown into Israeli prisons, in
addition to building more illegal settlements. All of
those practices on the part of Israel are incompatible
with the most fundamental principles of human rights
and international law.

It is for this reason that we appeal to the Security
Council and to the States concerned to shoulder their
historical responsibilities, through, inter alia, the
implementation of the Council's resolutions and the
urgent dispatch of observer forces. We also call upon
the Israeli Government to abide by the 1949 Fourth
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War.

Lastly, we call for urgent action by the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, and by
other regional and humanitarian organizations, to
peacefully resolve these problems and situations of
occupation, through, inter alia, recourse to the
International Court of Justice, with a view to finding an
international solution to such problems. This would
make it possible to mitigate the dangers threatening
civilians in conflict areas and would also ensure peace
and security at the regional and international levels.
This is what we all are seeking.

