Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): Like other speakers,
I would like to welcome Mr. Pascoe and thank him for
his briefing.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
initiative to deploy the United Nations inter-agency
assessment mission to the Sahel region, as well as for
the comprehensive report (see S/2012/42) that the
mission has submitted. We are encouraged by the fact
that that initiative was widely appreciated and that the
mission found among the civil and political leaders of
the region a remarkable openness to engage on the
challenges confronting them.

The analysis carried out by the mission with
respect to the political, security, humanitarian and
socio-economic implications of the crisis in Libya for
neighbouring countries are illustrative of the need to
strengthen cooperation, including through the
development of a common approach to the Sahel
region. We agree with the mission's View that any
immediate long-term strategy to mitigate the impact of
the Libyan crisis should take into account the root
causes of the problems in the region. The
recommendations of the mission in that regard require
serious consideration.

It is commendable that the countries of the region
have established a number of national and regional
programmes and mechanisms to address the security
concerns in the region. At the same time, as the
mission concluded, most of the countries in the region
cannot overcome threats in isolation. Therefore, the
initiatives undertaken by the Governments of the
countries affected, as well as the efforts of the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States and other relevant organizations, should be
supported by the United Nations and the broader
international community.

Serious attention should be given to appeals from
Sahel countries, which need capacity-building and
funds to counter the threats and address the challenges.
The destabilizing effects on the region of the illicit
proliferation of small arms and light weapons requires
particular consideration, apart from the direct impact
on the security situation in the countries of the Sahel.
Nor should we underestimate the risk of the spread of
weapons beyond the region, with the potential of their
falling into the hands of terrorists and separatists in
other parts of the world.

We would also like to support the mission's
recommendation on the need for inter-community and
inter-religious dialogue, which, in our View, takes on
additional importance against the background of the
efforts being made towards peace, security and
stability in the region.

It is obvious that success will be dependent on
greater coherence among all stakeholders. It is
therefore important and commendable that, in spite of
the varied regional membership, all of the countries are
willing to work in a more coordinated manner.

