Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important discussion today. On behalf of
the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC),
the International Federation of Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies and the national Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, I will share our field perspective of
what we see as the double impact of climate change and
armed conflict. 1 will also address how international
humanitarian law protects the environment.

The double impact of climate shocks and armed
conflict harms people's ability to cope. Climate change
exacerbates vulnerabilities and inequalities, especially
in situations of armed conflict, in which countries,
communities and populations are the least prepared and
the least able to protect themselves and adapt. Conflicts
harm the structures and systems that are necessary to
facilitate adaptation to climate change.

Last week, ICRC President Peter Maurer concluded
an eight-day visit to the Sahel. In that area, armed
conflict, deepening poverty, weakening public services
and disruption of traditional means of survival are
due not only to conflict but also to diminishing usable
land and unpredictable water resources. He saw first-
hand, just as we see in our operations in other regions,
that communities facing those dual challenges are
disproportionately affected. They often face growing
risks of flood or drought and are forced to look for new
livelihoods, change their lifestyle or move away from
their homes.

We also know that in armed conflict the natural
environment or civilian infrastructure is often harmed
or destroyed, which can in turn have environmental
consequences that can contribute to climate change.
While international humanitarian law does not
explicitly address climate change, it does contain rules
that protect the natural environment. For instance,
international humanitarian law sets out protections
for vital natural resources, the exploitation of which
can have implications for climate risk. International
humanitarian law also protects certain natural
resources, such as drinking water or agricultural areas,
as objects that are indispensable to the survival of the
civilian population.

When discussing the impacts of climate-related
disasters on international peace and security, we must
consider how climate change can multiply people's
vulnerability in situations of armed conflict. Indeed,
our own movement's humanitarian response must be
sensitive to that growing challenge and is involving
local actors in disaster risk reduction and adaptation.
This year, with the support of the Red Cross Red
Crescent Climate Centre, we are convening a series of
climate round tables within the International Red Cross
and Red Crescent Movement to address those issues. In
addition, this year the ICRC's legal division is revising
the 1994 ICRC guidelines for military manuals and
instructions on the protection of the environment in
times of armed conflict. We look forward to continued
dialogue with Member States and the United Nations
concerning this critical matter.

