Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): My delegation
would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
statement and for promptly dispatching his Special
Envoy to Myanmar in response to the unfolding crisis.
We particularly commend the efforts of Mr. Ibrahim
Gambari to engage the leadership of Myanmar in
addressing the complex challenges faced by the
country. Naturally, we deeply appreciate his
comprehensive briefing and look forward to further
detailed deliberations on the points he has raised.

In anticipation of such discussion, allow me at
this juncture to share some thoughts, as felt by my
delegation. The decision by the Government of
Myanmar to permit Mr. Gambari's visit is encouraging.
Such a spirit must be constantly promoted. We urge the
Government to recognize the visit of Special Envoy

Gambari for what it was: a window of opportunity to
engage the international community in the resolution of
the various problems that have been left to fester for
too long.

The situation in Myanmar was the focus of
Foreign Ministers of the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) at an informal meeting in
New York last week. On that occasion, Indonesia
joined the rest of ASEAN in expressing concern,
indeed revulsion, over the developments in Myanmar.
We called upon Myanmar to desist from the use of
force and to seek a political resolution. We urged the
authorities to resume national reconciliation with all
parties, working towards a peaceful transition to
democracy, and to release all political detainees,
including Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.

The situation in Myanmar is at stark variance
with the common path on which countries within
ASEAN are currently embarking, namely, the vision of
an ASEAN community, bound together by shared
values that include democracy and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We are currently
working on an ASEAN charter as the legal instrument
of the organization, on the basis of those shared values.

In the exercise of constructing this democratic
vision, Myanmar has not been an outside partner. On
the contrary, it has been working together with the rest
of the ASEAN members. That is what makes the recent
developments in the country all the more difficult for
the other ASEAN members. That is why we encourage
the authorities in Myanmar not to see these values, or
the clamour of their people for them, as an affront, or
as a challenge to be combated.

The tragic events in the country have serious
implications for the credibility and reputation of
ASEAN. We cannot look the other way, because it is
impossible to advance together if a member fails to
honour the values espoused by the group. Since 2003,
our engagement has involved encouraging Myanmar to
make tangible progress in restoring democratic
institutions and pursuing national reconciliation, in
accordance with its own road map to democracy. We
have committed ourselves to supporting Myanmar in
moving forward on this path in a frank, candid and
firm way. Unless seriously addressed, the recent crisis
can only undermine any positive steps that may have
been taken by Myanmar over recent years.
7

Moving forward, it is essential that the Security
Council consistently support the Secretary-General's
good offices, including through the promotion of a
climate conducive to peacefully resolving the current
situation.

Equally, it is important to acknowledge the
importance of Human Rights Council resolution S-5/l,
adopted by consensus on 2 October 2007, at the
Council's fifth special session, on the human rights
situation in Myanmar. We believe that the
implementation of that resolution should complement
and strengthen the good offices of the Secretary-
General vis-a-vis Myanmar.

As to Myanmar itself, we again urge the
Government to exercise restraint and urgently work to
replace the climate of fear with the power of
democratic persuasion and inclusive dialogue. Genuine
inclusive dialogue should take advantage of the
perspectives of all parties, united as one people and
one nation. In this regard, we draw some modest hope
from the latest reports of the offer by the leadership of
Myanmar to meet with Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. We
hope that this is a first step towards national
reconciliation.

My delegation believes that the recent events in
the country should serve as strong impetus for real
progress in the democratization process. As the
Government and the people of Myanmar tackle the
challenges of attaining those noble goals, Indonesia
remains ready to continue to support that country
bilaterally and within ASEAN.

I would like to conclude by reiterating our full
support for the good offices of the Secretary-General in
comprehensively engaging Myanmar, in a manner
complementary to the efforts by ASEAN and other
countries of the region.

