Mr. Widodo (Indonesia): Let me begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
July. We are confident that your diplomatic and
leadership qualities will enable the Council to carry out
the tasks before it expeditiously and efficiently. Our
gratitude also goes to Ambassador Anwarul Karim
Chowdhury of Bangladesh for his able stewardship of
the Council last month.

This meeting of the Security Council is
important, as the Council is considering the future
United Nations presence in East Timor after
independence of the territory. We thank the Secretary-
General for his report and also express our gratitude to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for East Timor, for his
presentation this morning. My delegation is also
pleased to have in our midst Mr. Ramos-Horta.

Allow me to avail myself of this opportunity to
contribute to this debate and share my delegation's
views on the prevailing situation. In the final analysis,
the whole issue revolves around the questions of
maintaining and promoting the security of the territory.
To that end, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) and the East
Timor Transitional Administration (ETTA) have been
working hard to build a civil society through a nation-
building programme.

In this connection, the new Government of
Indonesia remains fully committed to fulfilling its
obligations and responsibilities regarding relevant
international and bilateral agreements on East Timor. In
the same vein, my Government will make efforts to
resolve the residual issues, while at the same time
forging a mutually fruitful bilateral relationship with
the leaders of East Timor for the benefit of the
Indonesian and East Timorese people.

As I have the floor, permit me, on behalf my
Government, to express our sincere gratitude to the
Secretary-General and to all Member countries,
including those represented in this body, for their good
wishes. I also feel honoured to express our heartfelt
thanks for the full support extended to the new
Government of Indonesia in addressing the challenges
ahead. One of its first priorities is to maintain its
national sovereignty, territorial integrity and stability.
Its foreign policy continues to be guided by the
purposes and principles of the Organization.

That being said, we find it unacceptable that the
report justifies the need to maintain a robust United
Nations presence in the border areas and in East Timor
by claiming inaction by the Indonesian Government to
disband militia groups. Nothing can be farther from the
truth. Such claims do not reflect that Indonesia has
indeed disbanded and disarmed what were at that time
called militias.

Undeniably, in any conflict situation, the process
of disarming such groups is a complex and an arduous
one, and its success is reflected in the lack of serious
armed incidents that cause heavy casualties.

We also feel perplexed over the assertion made
regarding the training and the operation of militias;
nothing specific in the form of evidence has been
provided. Similarly, statements about "easy access"
(S/2001/719, para. 50) to modern weaponry, the
strategy of militias of "lying low" (ibid., para. 49) and
"Hard-line elements" (ibia'., para. 50) operating from
West Timor are made without any substantiation by
concrete and detailed information. In this regard,
Indonesia has requested UNTAET time and again to
provide concrete facts concerning militia activity so
that resolute action can be taken. But this has been to
no avail; and suspicious attitudes, negative perceptions
and innuendoes towards Indonesia continue. If the
Organization were to pursue a policy of containment,
rather than of active and peaceful engagement, it
would, we are afraid, create a worsening of the
situation, as demonstrated by the incident of 28 July
2001, when an Indonesian soldier was killed by United
Nations peacekeepers. In this regard, Indonesia has
lodged a formal and strong protest against UNTAET
for shooting into its territory, which resulted in a fatal
casualty.
My Government was astonished when UNTAET
radio recently broadcast news accusing a humanitarian
non-governmental organization, operating under the
name of Yayasan Hati, or the Heart Foundation, of
abducting and providing military training to East
Timorese children in Indonesia so that they could, in
20 years' time, launch military action against East
Timor to retake this territory. The Indonesian
Government categorically rebuts this accusation,
following its investigation of the issue, as not being the
case.

For one, guided by the noble principles stipulated
in the Charter, my delegation would like to assure all
members of the Council that the Government of
Indonesia has never harboured any intentions to engage
in activities that endanger neighbouring countries. Nor
do we bear any ill will towards the East Timorese
people. On the contrary, we aim to develop and to
strengthen ties of amity, friendship and cooperation, as
well as good relations and neighbourliness with East
Timor. In fact, Indonesia, as a Member State of the
United Nations, granted the people of East Timor the
full right to express their wishes on whether to part
with Indonesia or to remain within its fold.

Indonesia is committed to upholding justice,
including in the case of the perpetrators of the
Atambua killings.

Indonesia strongly believes that the establishment
of a robust civil society is a prerequisite to the
maintenance and promotion of peace, security and
harmony in the territory. So also is the promotion of
reconciliation. In this connection, we highly commend
the active role of the United Nations specialized
agencies in supporting capacity-building for civil
society. Moreover, it is imperative to strengthen
programmes in the field of poverty alleviation, health
and education and to promote the establishment of
microfinance banks and the use of traditional
mechanisms to resolve disputes and conflicts.

True reconciliation is also a canditio sine qua non
for the eventual establishment of a thriving civil
society in East Timor. As clearly demonstrated in many
instances of past and recent conflicts between parties, it
is not inconceivable for them to overcome their
hostilities, animosities, bitterness and vengeance and to
agree to put the past to rest for the sake of peace and
harmony for future generations.

Indonesia is open to any suggestion leading to a
final and viable shape for a United Nations presence
after the independence of East Timor, so long as it does
not compromise the legitimate needs and aspirations of
the East Timorese people. But in considering a United
Nations presence, Indonesia will not accept any
justification based on ulterior motives.

