Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, I would
like to congratulate you and the able Brazilian team for
the skilful manner in which you have guided the
Security Council this month. Let me also offer my
felicitations to Ambassador Adechi on the outstanding
Beninese presidency last month and convey my best
wishes in advance to Ambassador Wang of China for a
successful presidency next month.

Africa is sadly, but necessarily, a major
preoccupation of the Security Council. Sir, we
appreciate the thoughtful background paper you have
circulated to facilitate today's discussion. During its
Council presidency in May 2003, Pakistan convened a
wrap-up session on conflicts in Africa, Security
Council missions and United Nations mechanisms to
promote peace and security. In May 2004, Pakistan
organized a thematic debate on complex crises and
United Nations response. Discussions in those two
meetings were summarized and issued as documents of
the Council. I am sure that the ideas and new proposals
emanating from today's meeting will complement the
vast information databank that is already available to
the Council.
It is encouraging that the Security Council is
continuously adapting its approach to the problems of
Africa. Most of the situations in that continent are
complex crises, with interlinking security, political,
social, economic and humanitarian aspects. Many are
also internal conflicts - armed rebellions or civil
wars - although some situations involve outside
interference and have cross-border or regional
implications.

In the context of conflict prevention and

avoidance of relapse, it is important to address the root
causes. The list is long and diverse, but poverty and
underdevelopment seem to be omnipresent. As we have
said before, it is the politics of poverty and scarcity -
or a scramble for resources, in the words of South
Africa's Deputy Foreign Minister - which give rise to
most of Africa's problems.

The Council's response in the conflict-
management phase - peacekeeping - has been quite
good. United Nations multidimensional peacekeeping
operations correspond to the specific needs of complex
situations by bringing together resources in military
and a whole range of civilian fields. The United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone was a crowning
success whose experience is now being emulated in
many other missions across Africa. Pakistan is proud to
have been part of all of those peacekeeping operations.

I would like to say, in the context of certain
current considerations, that in order to be effective,
peacekeeping operations, especially in complex crises,
must be well conceived and well planned, with
competent management. They must be provided with
the necessary human and material resources, a robust
mandate to carry out wide-ranging functions, clear
deployment and rules of engagement. This applies, in
particular, to the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC).
Its forces are operating under difficult circumstances.
They have suffered casualties and have been engaged
in intense firefights. MONUC and its forces require the
full support of the Security Council and its
membership.

The Security Council has just authorized the
establishment of the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS). We welcome that decision, which we
hope will contribute to long-term peace and stability in
that great country. UNMIS will be a big challenge,
considering the scale of the operation and its duration,
besides other complicating factors. In that perspective,
we hope that the Security Council will give serious
thought to the compatibility of a cooperative United
Nations peace operation with the policy of sanctions.

The need for regional or subregional approaches
has also been recognized, due to the cross-cutting
nature of the problems and the desirability of
comprehensive solutions. The increased interaction and
coordination between contiguous peacekeeping
operations is welcome. We are also encouraged by the
growing cooperation of the Security Council with the
African Union and several subregional organizations.
Harmonious and coordinated policies add to the
effectiveness of Security Council decisions and
actions.

In the context of the regional approach, the
Security Council should, in our view, also focus on the
Horn of Africa in a more coherent way, as it has done
in the cases of West and Central Africa.

We cannot fail to mention another test case here:
Somalia, which, over the years, despite being on the
agenda of the Security Council, has not benefited from
the kind of political support that it so desperately needs
and which only the United Nations can provide. In
particular, the recent progress in the Somali peace
process offers yet another opportunity which should be
fully seized. Somali efforts and those of the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development must receive the necessary backing and
support of the United Nations and, in particular, of the
Security Council.

We welcome the intention of the Secretary-
General to appoint a special representative to lead the
expanded United Nations role in Somalia. The Council
should also play its rightful role in that context.

In the case of post-conflict situations, managing
the transition from conflict to long-term development
and preventing relapse into conflict have also gained
greater attention at the United Nations. The recognition
of the inextricable link between peace and
development has opened the window for increased
cooperation and coordination between the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council. We
expect that relationship to develop further in an
institutionalized way.

While Sierra Leone was an example of successful
peacekeeping, Guinea-Bissau, in our view, could be a
reference point - or a test case of the combined efforts
of the Security Council and Economic and Social
Council for peacebuilding. As we know, much more
needs to be done to ensure the success of that
combined effort. For peacebuilding, the key challenge,
among other issues, remains the mobilization of
sustained and adequate international support, including
funding and resources.

The discussion today on the African dimension in
the work of the Security Council has highlighted the
need for a system-wide response, based on greater
coordination and synergy among the principal organs
of the United Nations. In that regard, the proposal of a
peacebuilding commission has evoked considerable
interest within the general United Nations membership.
In its country-specific operations, the proposed
commission would need to embrace Pakistan's concept
of ad hoc composite committees.

While several aspects of the proposal need to be
worked out, we feel that the idea offers a real
opportunity to promote a truly comprehensive
approach to the issues of peace and development. It
should not be merely a mechanism to fill the gap
between conflict and post-conflict situations. We
believe the commission should focus on all stages of
conflict. It should serve as a mechanism for early
engagement of the international community with
situations that risk sliding towards conflict. Good
offices and other mechanisms for pacific settlement
and conflict avoidance could be utilized, as
appropriate, under the framework of the commission. It
should promote development as the best means to
prevent conflict and should address abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights in
order to prevent conflict.

With the concurrence of the Governments
concerned, assistance can be provided in pre-conflict
stages: in the governance, economic and social
recovery, human rights and humanitarian fields. In that
way, the United Nations as a whole can join together in
addressing and overcoming the challenges which face
developing countries of Africa and several other
developing countries at the dawn of the twenty-first
century.

