Mr. Shearer: It is a pleasure to participate in
today's meeting. As I am speaking to the Council
today, one third of the lOO-day extension of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan has already passed.
While this second extension has eased anxiety at least
temporarily, because it maintains the ceasefire, it has
also disillusioned many citizens who feel that more
progress should have been made.

Politics, after all, is all about choices. By choosing
to sign the peace agreement last year, the parties kick-
started a transformative process that has already paid
dividends. The country has witnessed a steep decrease
in civilian injuries, abductions and casualties. While
sexual violence remains a terrible problem, the 295
victims recorded in 2019 are substantially fewer than
the almost 1,300 reported in 2018. Improvements in
security have also prompted at least 645,000 people to
return to their homes. But the choice to twice delay a
transitional Government has dampened initial hopes,
eroded some trust and confidence and caused people
to suspect that the political will between the parties is
waning. The choices that South Sudan's leaders make
now will determine that country's future for generations
to come.

There has been no shortage of outside support
to encourage South Sudan to head along the right
path. In the past three months, Uganda has hosted
and followed up directly on a tripartite meeting, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
has met several times and there have been efforts by
IGAD's Special Envoy for South Sudan and visits by
South Africa's Deputy President. The Sudan itself
has been engaged in the most recent discussions. The
African Union has kept the country under constant
review. Of course, the full 15 members of the Security
Council visited Juba to engage and hear directly from
the parties. What has been most striking is that there
has been a unity of purpose among the international
partners, and I am confident that will continue. The
international engagement, together with Mr. Riek
Machar's presence in Juba over the past week and
during face-to-face meetings with President Kiir, has
led to positive statements from both leaders in the past
24 hours.

There can always be reasons for further delay.
After all, there is no definitive or objective point where
progress on the peace process can be agreed to be
completely sufficient. But if the parties want to fully
implement the agreement and form a new Government
at the end of this 100-day period, they certainly can.
It comes down to political will - the willingness to
make concessions and to ultimately sit around a table
within a transitional Government and make it work for
the people. Again, it is about choices. The first test of
whether that political will exists will be when the 50-
day review is held in early January. At that point, there
has to be measurable progress in several areas.

The first area is the reunification of forces. It is
unlikely that everything will be completed before
the deadline. Today's commitments by the two
leaders have given further impetus to the process, but
substantial progress will give all parties the trust and
confidence they need to continue the reintegration and
reunification process within a transitional Government.
More than 76,000 have already gathered at cantonment

sites, and careful vetting is needed to verify their
status as ex-combatants. Another 12,000 are registered
in Government barracks. So far, however, supplies
to cantonment sites have been patchy, and in many
places combatants have abandoned them to seek food,
shelter and a means of income to support themselves
elsewhere. Inevitably, the concentration of forces
anywhere can also create uncertainty and suspicion
that each side is mobilizing forces for war rather than
preparing for peace. The only way to overcome that
suspicion is to accelerate training and reunification in
order to maintain trust and confidence.

The job of the National Pre-Transitional Committee
is to ensure that resources get where they are needed.
We in the United Nations Mission in South Sudan have
signalled our willingness to provide additional logistical
support on request. Last week, it was reported that
Government funding has been distributed to various
security committees, which is welcome. However, the
exact amounts delivered and how they will be spent
remains opaque. Transparency is needed to quell that
suspicion, a point that has been made by the African
Union, IGAD and the United Nations. This could
take the form of a trust fund or a similar mechanism
to provide independent oversight of finances. The
agreement between the Government and the opposition
reached in the past few hours to establish such a
mechanism is encouraging, and the United Nations will
offer its support to establish it, as it has done in other
conflict settings internationally.

Mr. Riek Machar's presence in Juba over the past
five days for face-to-face discussions has been very
encouraging and is essential to resolving differences,
as we have all noted. As yet, however, there is no
resolution of his uncertain status and he has yet to
be given a South Sudanese passport. However, where
the sides do remain apart is on the second critical
issue, that of states and boundaries, despite the very
determined efforts by South Africa's Deputy President
David Mabuza. This issue has the potential to anger
some and gratify others, depending on the outcome and
the side each party sits on. Because power and access
to resources are heavily vested in the states and in turn
often linked to ethnic groups, this particular issue is
politically charged. Resolving it will require a high
degree of sensitivity, leadership and a willingness to
examine contentious areas with open minds and to
accept a solution that none of the parties may consider
ideal. It needs courage. Deferring this issue to a
referendum will cost millions of dollars and present
immense logistical difficulties, especially with one
third of the South Sudanese population displaced. It
also runs the risk of widening ethnic divisions.
In the past few weeks I have talked to many people
about the peace process during recent visits to the field.
Whether it is in Koch, Lankien, Pibor, Bentiu or Bor,
the message is remarkably similar. No one I spoke to
wants to go back to war. One of those people is Bul
Deng, a 24-year-old man who returned to Lankien
after six years in a United Nations protection-of-
civilians site because he believes peace is coming. He
told me that he wants people to be a peaceful family
and to live freely across the whole land, that peace is
what everybody wants. However, some people admit
privately that they would take up arms if ordered to by
their leaders. The good news so far is that the ceasefire
has been largely respected. But we must remain vigilant.
A recent spike of intercommunal violence and clashes
has raised tensions and risks spilling over into more
serious political violence. Fighting around Maiwut,
in the north-east of the country, for example, turned
overtly political when the Sudan People's Liberation
Movement/Army in Opposition and Government forces
backed different sides.

Meanwhile, improvements to the humanitarian
situation have been partly negated by flooding, which
has affected 900,000 people, washed away crops,
destroyed homes and contaminated water supplies.
To their credit, the state Governments, humanitarian
agencies and donors have responded quickly. The World
Food Programme's quick response used supplies that
were pre-positioned for 2020, but those stocks will need
to be urgently replenished and transported throughout
the country. And with an estimated 72,000 metric tons
of cereals lost, in addition to animals that have died
and pasture that has been destroyed, the fear is about
longer-term food needs. The flooding compounded
pre-existing needs. The recently released humanitarian
response plan for 2020 aims to meet the needs of
5.6 million people at an estimated cost of $1.5 billion.
Sadly, the brief respite of the accompanying peace
has been negated largely because of these natural
calamities, and concerns about hunger in many parts of
the country are again rising.

In just two months, leaders will choose whether
to form a transitional Government. Preservation of the
ceasefire, as I said, is absolutely critical. Those choices
will coincide with the dry season, a period historically

associated with increased fighting. The joint meetings
in recent days between President Kiir and Dr. Riek
Machar are encouraging, with both sides recommitting
to the peace process. That has restored some of the
optimism and momentum that were lost with the delays
in the peace agreement. All parties now need to choose
to follow up on their words, and their international
partners should remain resolute in their support, as I
am sure they will. The parties should move towards
a transitional Government that can start planning for
South Sudan's long-term future and ultimately for
elections in the next three years.

