Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for organizing this open briefing of the Council on East
Timor. We would also like warmly to welcome once
again Special Representative Sergio Vieira de Mello
and to thank him for his most enlightening briefing on
the situation in East Timor.

My delegation is pleased that, overall, the United
Nations operation is working quite well and credit must
be given to the leadership of the Special Representative
and the dedication of all those serving the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). Due credit must also be given to the East
Timorese leadership for its commitment to working
with the United Nations in the rebuilding of its
homeland. It deserves the continuing support of the
international community and this Council.

UNTAET has now begun to move beyond the
pressing security aspects of the interim stage to the
challenges and post-conflict reintegration,
reconstruction and development. In this regard, we note
the very positive response of the international
community to the donor's conference held in Lisbon
last week, which surpassed our expectations. We note
that the commitments undertaken in Lisbon will be
followed up. The Lisbon meeting highlighted the fact
that dynamic and interactive cooperation among
Member States, the United Nations and the Bretton
Woods institutions can yield positive results. Malaysia
commends Portugal for its stewardship of that
successful meeting. We believe that the Lisbon meeting
marked a turning point in international assistance for
East Timor, from providing humanitarian assistance to
implementing reconstruction programmes in key
sectors, such as education, health and agriculture. On
its part, as a neighbour, Malaysia will continue to
participate in the various activities of UNTAET and is
ready to support East Timor through its technical
cooperation programme.

We note that the National Consultative Council
has approved a budget of $59.23 million to help rebuild
East Timor. We also note with satisfaction that
UNTAET and the World Bank have signed a $12.7
million grant to help revamp the East Timorese health
sector. This first instalment is part of a three-year
project that is expected to have a total budget of $37
million.
We wish to commend Special Representative
Vieira de Mello for his decision to accelerate the
"Timorization" of the East Timor Administration,
under which East Timorese ministers would serve
together with United Nations officials in a cabinet
expected to begin its work next July. We are pleased
that the East Timorese independence leaders Xanana
Gusmao and Jose Ramos-Horta have reacted positively
to this proposal. We think this decision is a step in the
right direction and that Security Council resolution
1272 (1999) gives the Secretary-General sufficient
latitude to make the necessary changes in East Timor's
Administration. With this change, there will be a real
partnership between the United Nations and the East
Timorese leadership, thereby giving the East Timorese
early hands-on experience in administering their
country.

My delegation also notes with satisfaction the
decision of the Special Representative to expand more
than two-fold the size of the National Consultative
Council and to make it more Timorese. We believe that
this decision represents a positive response by
UNTAET to the increasing expectation of the East
Timorese leaders that they will have greater
involvement in shaping the territory's future in the
lead-up to independence.

We are also pleased with the efforts being made
by the Special Representative to improve and
consolidate relations with East Timor's nearest and
most important neighbour: Indonesia. We commend
President Abdurrahman Wahid for the prompt and
positive steps he has taken towards reconciliation
between his country and East Timor, including his
important visit to Dili and the ongoing contacts
between his Government and UNTAET. We look
forward to even closer and more concrete cooperation
between Indonesia and the United Nations, especially
in respect of the activities of the militias.

We regret the slow pace of the return of refugees
from West Timor. We urge the militias to put the past
behind them, to work towards national reconciliation
and to facilitate the return of up to 100,000 refugees
from West Timor. We recognize that, in the context of
the recent past, this will be a difficult undertaking, but
the future of East Timor can be guaranteed only by the
prospect of early reconciliation between the two sides,
thereby enabling all East Timorese to participate fully
in the political, economic and social life of the country
upon independence. In this regard, we welcome the
establishment of the National Reconciliation Council.
We think that the dissemination of information
has an important role to play, especially in countering
the misinformation and active propaganda that are
circulating in the refugee camps. Like others, we
believe that measures to promote the repatriation of
refugees need to be intensified, including more border
reunion meetings between families. We also hope that
there will be an amicable resolution with the
Indonesian authorities on the question of pensions for
former civil servants in the Indonesian administration
who are no living in West Timorese camps. We believe
that the early resolution of this issue will expedite the
return of the refugees to East Timor.

Finally, we believe that practical measures have
to be worked out to open a corridor between East
Timor and the Oecussi enclave in West Timor. We take
note of the recent proposal by the Indonesian Foreign
Minister relocate up to 10,000 pro-Indonesian militia
members and their families to about 20 kilometres from
the border in an attempt to ease tensions. We wish to
know whether there has been progress in this area.

We deplore the attack that occurred last
Wednesday, presumably by the pro-integration militias,
in which grenades were thrown at an Australian-
manned military post north of Maliana. We are equally
perturbed at the extremely worrisome security
incidents that occurred on 16 and 17 June, all pointing
to a pattern of increased tensions, which prompted
humanitarian agencies to halt their work in Noelbaki
and nearby Tua Pukan and Naibonat camps near
Kupang.

Malaysia also condemns the ransacking of an
East Timor support organization in Jakarta in late May
as a brutal and cowardly act which runs counter to the
efforts towards the normalization of relations between
Indonesia and East Timor. This is a sign of frustration
on the part of the militias, which have been denied
their aim of conducting acts of violence against the
emerging leadership in East Timor during the
transition. We are confident that UNTAET and the
local authorities are capable of dealing with the
incident appropriately.

My delegation acknowledges that there are many
remaining challenges for East Timor, but that
remarkable progress has been achieved in so short a
period. While the process is a gradual one, as it should
be, the progression towards independence, which is
well in sight, has been sure and steady under the
tutelage of the United Nations and with the continuing
support of the international community.
On the question of the timing of independence for
East Timor, Malaysia supports the early granting of
independence, but at a date and time when the East
Timorese are ready and able to assume responsibility
for governing themselves.

