Mr. Syihab (Indonesia): At the outset, on behalf of my delegation, let me once again warmly welcome the presence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger to the Security Council. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Rosine Sori-Coulibaly and Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho for their comprehensive briefings. As stated in the Secretary-General's latest report (S/2020/105), the completion of the electoral cycle in Guinea-Bissau is indeed a critical benchmark. Indonesia welcomes the conduct of the presidential elections, as they took place in a generally peaceful way. We would like to congratulate the people of Guinea-Bissau and express our sincere hope that the process will pave the way towards lasting stability and prosperity in the country. In that regard, I would like to highlight three points. First, it is necessary to resolve the post-election stalemate. We urge all parties to put aside their differences and enable the peaceful transfer of power. We hope that the electoral dispute can swiftly be resolved through peaceful means so as to prevent the country from lapsing into a major political crisis. In a country that has experienced political turmoil since independence, instability has for too long hurt the economy of Guinea-Bissau and has created an environment conducive for organized crime, including drug trafficking. It is high time for all Bissau- Guineans to move away from political uncertainty, so that they can focus their energies on addressing more pressing issues, including constitutional reform and economic development. That leads me to my second point, which is the implementation of multisectoral reform. Once the transfer of power is be completed in a peaceful way, Bissau-Guinean stakeholders will have to overcome immediate challenges, ensuring political stability, the functioning of State institutions and improving the lives of the population. Poverty reduction is one of the areas that needs to be focused on, considering that more than half of the population lives below the poverty line. Another area is combating drug trafficking and organized crime, which continue to threaten the stability of Guinea-Bissau. We are heartened by the progress achieved thus far, including the development of a national action plan on drug trafficking and organized crime, the strengthening of law enforcement capacity and the increased participation by women in the political process. The progress must be sustained and will lay a solid foundation for the future of Guinea-Bissau. We commend the work of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and _ other international partners in that regard. Thirdly, on the drawdown of UNIOGBIS, which we are gradually embarking upon, with the closure of the mission planned for the end of this year, it is important to keep in mind that the country is at a critical on its path forward. Continuous engagement and support from the international community is of crucial importance for the subsequent peacebuilding and reform efforts. We welcome the development of a road map to ensure the seamless transition of the United Nations presence in Guinea-Bissau and commend the PBC for the mobilization of funds to support the United Nations country team. I concur with the Secretary General and the Chair of the PBC country-specific configuration that the transition should not be a United Nations- centred process and that national ownership is key. Lastly, we would like to commend the ongoing efforts of, and sustained support by, regional and international actors, including the Economic Community of West African States, the group of five international partners and the PBC, with a view to restoring peace and stability and ensuring sustainable development in the country. Moving ahead, we must ensure that the many hard-won gains will not be lost and that the international community will continue to support peacebuilding and development in Guinea- Bissau, even after the closure of UNIOGBIS.
