Mr. Rogachev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): In the five years since the Security Council
adopted resolution 1296 (2000), much has been done to
increase the level of protection of civilians, the most
vulnerable population groups in armed conflict, and to
ensure people's right to a peaceful life. This year in
particular, we adopted resolution 1612 (2005) on the
protection of children.

Today, it is important to ensure the effectiveness
of the work done by the monitoring and reporting
mechanism and the objectivity and reliability of the
information it provides . Many other tasks await us as
well. First and foremost, it is important to implement
the existing Security Council instruments on that
problem, of which we have quite a number in our
arsenal, particularly with regard to children and armed
conflict and to women, peace and security. They have
great potential, and the Council could focus on
implementing its own decisions in that area,
identifying and removing obstacles to their
implementation.

Having carefully read the report of the Secretary-
General contained in document S/2005/740, we would
like briefly to focus on a few points. We agree with the
concern expressed about instances of restrictions on
access by humanitarian personnel to populations
caught up in armed conflict. The primary responsibility
in that regard lies with the parties to a conflict.
Member States should undertake a thorough analysis of
initiatives to establish clear conditions for
humanitarian access and the use of framework
agreements in that area.

We cannot fail to mention the important role
played by peacekeeping missions in resolving a whole
set of problems related to the humanitarian component.
The time has come to elaborate clear recommendations
for interaction on these issues between the appropriate
United Nations offices and non-State armed groups,
without any commitment to recognize such groups.
There can be no doubt about the urgency of
increasing the regional approach. One positive example
of that is the unique peacekeeping role played by the
African Union.

A prompt response by the United Nations to
incidents of violence against civilians during armed
conflict and combating sexual violence as a means of
waging war are very important in dealing with crisis
situations. We must consider the possibility of having
peacekeeping missions protect civilian populations
from physical and sexual violence. Fighting impunity
and bringing to justice those guilty of such crimes are
key factors in preventing violence.

It is appropriate in this context to stress the role
played by the International Criminal Court and to
recall the as-yet-untapped potential of the Fact-Finding
Commission created in accordance with article 90 of
the first Protocol Additional to the 1949 Geneva
Conventions on protecting victims of war.

We were struck by the report's findings with
regard to the responsibility to protect. We believe that
it is clearly premature to advance that concept in
Security Council documents. We all remember well the
complex compromise that was required to reflect that
issue in the 2005 Summit Outcome document. In that
connection - and the outcome document states this -
we need to have a detailed discussion in the General
Assembly of the issue of the responsibility to protect
before we can discuss its implementation.

It is difficult to agree that it is advisable to
include under the heading of the protection of civilians
such disparate concepts as armed conflict and
terrorism. Clearly, the impact of terrorism on peaceful
populations is an issue that, although somewhat
germane to the subject under discussion today, will
require a separate investigation in the appropriate
forums - perhaps in one of the Security Council's
subsidiary bodies dealing with counter-terrorism.

Mechanisms for early warning and for preventing
war and conflict are of fundamental importance for
ensuring the protection of civilians. The effective
functioning of such mechanisms - which is, of course,
conditioned by the effective participation of States -
should lead to a situation in which the question of
protecting civilians is no longer so prominent on the
international community's agenda.

