Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to express my pleasure and confidence
at seeing you, Mr. President, presiding over the work of
the Council at this very delicate moment in
international relations. I know that your experience,
abilities and fine human qualities will be severely
tested during the next two weeks. I am convinced,
however, that the Council will make the best use of
your capabilities in order to carry its work in the
interests of peace, security and justice throughout the
world. I would also like to pay well-deserved tribute to
Ambassador Stefan Tafrov of Bulgaria, who very
competently presided over the Council's work last
month. Lastly, I would like to convey my appreciation
to the Secretary-General for the clear message
delivered by Ms. Frechette on his behalf. 1 would also
like to express my support for the approach he has
suggested and for the role he would like to see the
Security Council play in resolving the issue under
consideration.

Before commenting on the subject of our meeting
today, I would like, on behalf of the Government of
Algeria, to express my profound grief to those in
Indonesia and elsewhere who have been cruelly struck
in body and soul by the cowardly and horrific terrorist
attack in Bali. I convey to them my condolences and
my sympathy. This attack has brutally reminded us that
terrorism is indeed a global challenge and that it must
be confronted collectively and in solidarity. Terrorism
is a very real and formidable threat that can materialize
at any time. No one is totally immune from it, and no
one can act alone to combat it. The war against
terrorism is a fight on all fronts that requires
continuous and unfailing vigilance and mobilization.
Today more than ever before, the United Nations must
continue to devote all its attention and energy to it.

Like the rest of the international community,
Algeria has followed with great concern the
developments of the last few months regarding Iraq.
We can therefore only be concerned at the grave
dangers that a new conflict in Iraq would pose to
regional and international peace and security.

Iraq demonstrated realism, wisdom and a sense of
responsibility when, on 16 September, it accepted the
unconditional return of United Nations inspectors to its
territory. The same holds true for the agreement it
reached with the Organization at Vienna in early
October concerning the conditions for the return, work
and stay of the inspectors. All of us were therefore
pleased with this important development, which
appeared to make it possible to close the book on the
subject of weapons of mass destruction once and for
all. The total elimination of those weapons is what the
Security Council has been calling for.

We also thought that these developments would
have made it possible for us to avoid the spectre of war.
We had hoped that these decisions by Iraq, which have
been the culmination of friendly and timely efforts by a
number of peace-loving and justice-loving countries -
particularly Arab countries - as well as by countries
committed to the incontrovertible role of the United
Nations in the settlement of international disputes,
would have led to the prompt return of inspectors, a
speedy resumption of inspections and, within a
reasonable time frame, the much-hoped-for lifting of
sanctions, which have taken a heavy toll on the people
of Iraq. We had also hoped that that they would have
helped to bring about peace and security in Iraq, in
strict compliance with its sovereignty, unity and
territorial integrity.

Despite those positive developments, the threat of
armed conflict nevertheless continues to weigh on the
region. That threat is also causing major fears about the
very grave consequences that such a conflict would
have in Iraq itself, as well as in other countries of the
region. Those fears are especially legitimate and
justified given the fact that, in that same part of the
world, Israel, intoxicated with its military might and,
unfortunately, guaranteed impunity, is launching an all-
out war against the Palestinian civilian population and
on the infrastructure and symbols of the Palestinian
Authority. Israel is continuing to occupy and colonize
Palestinian and Arab territories, to threaten to bring
down its wrath upon neighbouring countries and to
violate the most basic rules of international
humanitarian law.

In addition to its catastrophic impact on the
people of Iraq - who for over 10 years have been
subjected to largely inhumane sanctions - and the
impact it would have on the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the country, a military operation
against Iraq - let there be no doubt - would also
have very grave consequences on the peace process in
the Middle East, which is already moribund, as well as
on the Israeli-Arab conflict itself. This already battered
region of the world could well experience paroxysms
of unpredictable gravity and magnitude.

In this connection, the international community
expects that the Council, if it wishes to maintain its
authority and credibility - which have been severely
tested by repeated Israeli intransigence - will first
assume all of its responsibilities vis-a-vis the
Palestinian people and demonstrate its determination
and firmness with regard to all those who reject and
show contempt for its resolutions. Contempt is
unfortunately exactly what Israel had shown when the
Council adopted resolution 1435 (2002), regarding the
situation in the occupied territories. The Security
Council must, in short, be consistent and fair. It should
meticulously ensure compliance with its resolutions in
every instance.
With regard to the specific question of Iraq,
Algeria holds out the hope that the issue of weapons of
mass destruction will be resolved in a responsible and
peaceful way and in accordance with the principles of
international law and the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations. The earliest possible
return of inspectors and the resumption of the
inspections mission seem to us to be sufficient to meet
the requirements of the Council and of the international
community with regard to the elimination of all
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq and, we hope, in
every country of this very volatile part of the world.

Iraq has made a clear and unambiguous
commitment to cooperate fully with the United Nations
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission
(UNMOVIC), and the international community should
give them a chance to do so. At the same time, we
would expect that Iraq would scrupulously respect its
commitments and all of its obligations. If it turns out
that UMMOVIC inspectors have been prevented from
doing their job and if their chief or the Executive
Director of the International Atomic Energy Agency
can establish that in a sure and irrefutable way and so
notify the Security Council, only then should the
Council decide on a position to adopt in the face of
such a situation.

It is Algeria's hope that the Security Council -
which has a daunting mandate of watching over the
preservation of international peace and security and
which is thus the central pillar of the collective security
system established at the end of the second world war
and therefore the only body authorized to decide on
recourse to force - will be able to assume its
responsibilities in keeping with the provisions of the
Charter and international legality, so that Iraq and the
entire Middle East will be spared the scourge of war.

At the Beirut Summit, which cemented
reconciliation between Kuwait and Iraq, we called on
the parties to work to resolve their outstanding
disputes. And during the last session of the Council of
Ministers of the League of Arab States, the Arab States
said that they were firmly opposed to any military
operation against any Arab State. It is therefore our
most fervent hope that this position will be duly taken
into account during the Council's deliberations and that
for a logic of war which is developing today we
substitute a momentum for peace in the obvious
interest of all people of the Middle East, and for peace
and security in the region and throughout the world.

