Prince Zeid Raad Zeid Al-Hussein (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express our joy at
seeing you, Sir, preside over the Council and your
brotherly nation lead the work of the Council this
month. We are confident of your wisdom and your
talents, and we are sure that we will be able to achieve
our objectives.

(spoke in English)

It has been almost a year since I assumed my role
as Chairman of the Liberia configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and, after three
visits there and countless discussions here, as well as
in Washington, DC, and in Brussels, and numerous
meetings attended via video teleconference with
colleagues in Monrovia, I wish to share my thoughts
about the prospects for a non-return to the sort of
violence that has marked so much of Liberia's recent
history.

In other words, given what we know about the
state of the State of Liberia now and the security and
justice needs that remain extant, what are the prospects
that Liberia will survive peacefully and flourish once
the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) has
departed? Or, ultimately, will the time and effort
invested by the United Nations peacekeepers, currently
led by a remarkable and talented Special
Representative of the Secretary-General operating
according to mandates established by the Council, be
in the end for something or for nothing?

To answer bluntly, I believe that if we as
Governments had the same confidence the world of the
private sector possesses, given the latter's recent
preparedness to invest in the range of $16 billion in
Liberia over the next two decades or so - with almost
two-thirds of the investing companies coming from
eight countries presently represented on the Security
Council - then Liberia will succeed, and it will
succeed very well.

The Liberians have the talent and the desire to
retire their country from war, not temporarily this time,
but permanently. The true question for Liberia, it
would seem to me, lies not entirely with them, but to
some extent with us. Do we, as the representatives of
Governments, acting individually or collectively here
at the United Nations, have the same confidence in
Liberia that is shown by the private sector globally?

The test will come soon enough in the form of
money, of course. The Peacebuilding Fund (PBF),
whose top donor is also a member of the Council, will
finance the first of the justice and security hubs in its
entirety - that located in Gbarnga. We expect to have
the entire compound ready, with buildings completed
by the end of the year, and we are working with
specific partners in the international community to
explore the possibility of having key technical
personnel trained to be able to provide a creditable
service out of the hub to the peoples of Bong, Lofa and
Nimba.

The four other hubs and their specific locations
are just being finalized now. They will be financed by
the PBF at the level of $2 million each - roughly half
their cost - with the PBC mobilizing funds outside of
the PBF to foot the balance. This money must be found
soon if our endeavours in Liberia are to prove
successful.

And that is not all. The Liberia Peacebuilding
Programme contains a number of other important
projects of a critical nature to the judiciary, the police
and national reconciliation, agreed to by all the
partners - the Liberian Government, the donor
community and the United Nations - and, after some
painstaking negotiations, now has a total value of
almost $72 million. Once the Government has finalized
the levels of expenditure on security and justice, and
knowing how much we will expect from the
Peacebuilding Fund - an initial contribution of close
to $21 million - we expect to have to raise
approximately $30 to $50 million. Some part of this
may be offset by donor allocations already approved to
some of the very sectors covered by the Liberia
Peacebuilding Programme.

The early signs from exploratory contacts with
some Member States are not promising, however,
where the PBC slice is concerned. The remaining
money for the hubs and indeed the Peacebuilding
Programme may indeed be hard to come by.

Yet, in the meantime, it was clear to all members
of the PBC delegation visiting Liberia from 12 to
17 June - and here I am very grateful to my
colleagues from the United States, the United
Kingdom, Nigeria and the Ukraine for their
commitment - that the Liberian National Police,

notwithstanding some very notable improvements in
training and infrastructure, will not be ready any time
soon to cope with either a possible increase in the
levels of organized crime or any sudden spasms of
widespread violence unless it is more robustly
supported. And, once again, we face this rather bizarre
situation of having sufficient money to pay for our
peacekeepers, but once our peacekeepers are
withdrawn, not even a small percentage of what was
previously spent on them can then be redirected to the
National Police as they assume virtually all the security
tasks hitherto carried out by the United Nations.

To present this point perhaps more graphically,
there is something remarkable happening to common
sense when we, the PBC, weave our way through the
middle of Liberia, from one police station to another,
in a 13-vehicle United Nations convoy carrying us, the
delegation, senior Liberian officials, our colleagues
from UNMIL and our security, only to discover time
and again that each police station visited had barely
enough fuel, if any, to keep even one vehicle on the
road.

The deficit separating what the United Nations
can accomplish in such critical areas as transportation
and what it would hope the Liberian National Police
will soon accomplish in all areas, including not only
transportation but in stemming the growth of
transnational organized crime, remains numbing. That
we must therefore invest more in them directly and
urgently is all the more obvious to those who spend
time in Liberia.

Naturally, not everything needed in the three
areas falling within the PBC's portfolio - rule of law,
security sector reform and national reconciliation -
ought to come in the form of money. Liberia's
judiciary, for example, requires a court management
system, with oversight to ensure the efficient conduct
of trials, and the Liberians are attempting
commendably to do this on their own. But here the
Member States could do much to help them simply by
providing some advice.

Similarly, while funding from the international
community was used over the past two years to finance
platforms for dialogue, falling under the general rubric
of national reconciliation, following the PBC's
discussions in June with the senior leadership in
Liberia, including with Her Excellency the
President - and prompted by the acute observations of
Ambassador Marjon Kamara - it was agreed this
would end, for now at least, until a clearer strategy had
been formulated.

Yet these examples of the nimble approach
adopted by the PBC in addressing Liberia's needs do
not vitiate the urgent need for financial support in other
equally important areas. More to the point, if the
investment by us, collectively, both in time and in
money, could be intensified significantly in the several
months following the upcoming elections, particularly
where the hubs and the Liberian National Police are
concerned, we - and, more importantly, they, the
Liberians will be successful. I have no doubt about
this.

 

Should we not be able to pull together the
resources and resolve to do this decisively, including
by urging the Liberian authorities to devote more
funding to their justice and security sectors, the
Council will have had, in UNMIL, a successful
peacekeeping operation, yes, but one that would likely
depart a still very crippled country. The possible,
maybe even probable, onset of widespread organized
crime and the ensuing violence it would bring would
overwhelm Liberia soon enough. In such a scenario,
we would all, but especially the people of Liberia,
bitterly lament the end of UNMIL - a terrible
outcome in view of the extraordinary services rendered
by the tens of thousands of United Nations
peacekeepers who have lived with, and have worked
for, the Liberian people. I sincerely hope that this will
not come to be. It can be avoided.

