Mr. Nazarian (Armenia): We also join previous
speakers in thanking the Secretary-General for his
report (S/2010/579) and his active involvement in
addressing this important subject. Armenia aligns itself
with the statement made earlier on behalf of the
European Union. I would like to make some brief
remarks in my national capacity.

The Council has significantly developed its
thematic work on the protection of civilians since the
last time we held a similar debate (see S/PV.6354). As
we mark the first anniversary of the Council's adoption

of resolution 1894 (2009), it is important and
commendable that this body has continued its practice
of holding annual open debates on the protection of
civilians featuring briefings by the Under-Secretaries-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Peacekeeping
Operations. We were also pleased to hear presentations
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights and the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross offering analysis of the Council's actions in
recent years and touching upon important developments.

With the adoption of resolution 1894 (2009)
exactly a year ago, the Council introduced new
provisions focusing on humanitarian access in the
implementation of protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations. Armenia welcomes the fact
that the Council also took several important decisions
relating to the protection needs of vulnerable groups
during armed conflict, and we are grateful to have had
the opportunity to contribute to the debates on children
and armed conflict, the protection of civilians, and
women and peace and security in June, July and
October, respectively.

Today's debate offers another opportunity for the
Council to evaluate the progress made on key issues,
such as the implementation of resolution 1894 (2009),
and to indicate areas where further focus is needed,
including the enhancement of compliance with
international humanitarian law and the strengthening of
accountability for violations thereof. Ensuring such
accountability and enhancing compliance with the
international legal obligations of parties to conflict
should be viewed as key elements of the Council's
responsibility to maintain international peace and
security. In that context, it is important to improve the
use of established sanctions regimes and to implement
the binding resolutions that call on all States to adopt
national legislation for the prosecution of individuals
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and
war crimes.

In the lessons learned process, this debate should
also enable the Council more effectively to address the
specific concerns related to the protection of civilian
populations. The Council has to send a clear message
to all parties to armed conflict, reminding them of their
obligations and condemning violations of international
humanitarian law.

The concept of the protection of civilians is
founded on the universally accepted rules of
humanitarian and human rights law, which are set
down in a range of international legal instruments. For
that reason, we believe that the Council could more
effectively seek thorough compliance by all parties
with the norms of international humanitarian law.

The frequency with which the Security Council
addresses this issue signifies the urgency of the matter
and the need for the international community to fulfil
its commitment to protecting civilians. We therefore
share the views expressed by Council members and
other speakers calling for more systematic attention to
be paid to protection. We strongly believe that
increased efforts to fight impunity at the national and
international levels are essential.

Armenia therefore welcomes the initiative of the
United Kingdom to hold this debate, and is committed
to working with the Council and other Members on
addressing the challenges to the Council's work on the
protection of civilians.

