Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States of America): Today we gather to discuss the wave of
change that has swept the Middle East and North
Africa. While each country's experience has been
unique, all of those democratic movements have
sprung from a common desire for rights, freedom,
economic hope and human dignity. Those universal
aspirations are enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and in the Charter of the United
Nations, and they are fundamental to my country's
identity and history and to those of many countries.
Those principles and the people who struggle to realize
them in their own societies deserve and demand our
collective support. We are inspired by the courage of
the people of the region, as they have shown their
determination to move forward, and we believe that
their efforts should be supported.

Now I approach these conversations with a
healthy dose of humility, because we know that those
revolutions are not ours. They are not by us, for us or
against us. But we also know that as the international
community, we have the resources and capabilities to
support those who seek peaceful, meaningful
democratic change. We must also have the will.

Of course, change is unfolding in different ways
and in different places, and in each unique case our
tools have to be matched with the circumstances. Here
at the Security Council, three cases in particular
demand our attention today. Let me start with Libya
and the encouraging vote this morning (see S/PV.6733)
to renew and update the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. Last year the Council, backed by the
Arab League and countries around the world, acted to
support the Libyan people at the hour of their greatest
need. Today's vote reflects our continued commitment
to Libya and its transitional Government, which has
made tremendous strides. It also reflects the
recognition that our work is not yet done.

We will continue to aid UNSMIL's efforts to
support the Libyan Government as it reintegrates those
who took up arms in the name of change into a
professional national army and a peaceful society. We
will continue helping Libya secure its borders against
proliferation, trafficking and extremism, while treating
refugees and migrants humanely. After so much
courage and sacrifice from the Libyan people, we are
proud to help Libya build a new foundation for the rule
of law and respect for human rights.

Just last week, Prime Minister El-Keib was here
in the Security Council (see S/PV.6731), where he
forcefully and eloquently defended the Security
Council's assistance on behalf of the aspirations of the
Libyan people to chart their own futures.

I do not think there is any additional comment that
any of us need to add to the record as to the appropriate
measures taken by the Security Council in furtherance
of the resolutions authorizing action. We also met with
Prime Minister El-Keib in Washington, DC, where we
discussed Libya's progress in paving the way for fair
and free elections, as well as our work together on
security, student exchanges, civil society and medical
care for Libya's war-wounded. Ultimate success for
Libya will not be the death of a dictator, but the birth
of a successful, stable and free nation.

The second case is Yemen. As Yemen unravelled
into violence last year, the Security Council stood
behind the efforts of the Gulf Cooperation Council and
Yemeni stakeholders to find a peaceful solution. In the
face of setbacks, we held firm.

Many challenges lie ahead. But last month's
successful presidential election and inauguration were
promising steps on the path towards a new democratic
chapter in Yemen's history. As Yemen continues its
multi-year transition, reforms its Constitution,
convenes a national dialogue and continues to grapple
with its security and humanitarian challenges, we must
remain engaged and supportive.

The third case is Syria. Five weeks ago, the
Council was unable to stand united against the horrific
campaign of violence that has shocked the conscience
of the world - one that continues unabated as we
meet. We were blocked from even condemning the
violence and endorsing a peaceful plan developed by
Syria's own neighbours.

The United States believes firmly in the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of all Member
States. But we do not believe that sovereignty demands
that the Council stand silent when Governments
massacre their own people, threatening regional peace
and security in the process. We reject any equivalence
between premeditated murders by a Government's
military regime and the actions of civilians under siege
who have been driven to self-defence. How cynical it
was to see that even as Al-Assad was receiving former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the Syrian army was
conducting a fresh assault on Idlib and continuing its
aggression in Hamah, Horns and Rastan.

We took note of the fact that this past weekend, in
Cairo, the Arab League and Russian Foreign Minister
Lavrov agreed on the need for an end of violence, for
full, unimpeded humanitarian access and for a political
process led by Kofi Annan and based on the terms of
the Arab League and General Assembly resolutions.

We believe that now is the time for all nations,
even those that have previously blocked our efforts, to
stand behind the humanitarian and political approach
spelled out by the Arab League. The international
community should say with one voice, without
hesitation or caveat, that the killings of innocent
Syrians must stop and a political transition must begin.
The Syrian people deserve the same opportunity to
shape their future that the Tunisians, Egyptians,
Libyans and Yemenis now enjoy. Our work here in the
Security Council is just one part of what the
international community must do to assist democratic
transitions all across the Middle East and North Africa.

We must support calls from within the region to
strengthen each of the building blocks of stable,
thriving societies: a responsive, accountable
Government, an energetic, effective economy and a
vibrant civil society. Politically, many countries,
including a number seated at this table, have unique,
first-hand expertise in how to build durable
democracies. And I appreciate the comments of the
Foreign Minister of Guatemala. Those are lessons we
can and should share.

Where countries are making gradual reforms, we
should offer our support and everywhere we must
safeguard, in word and action, the basic principles of
democracy and universal human rights.

I know that today there are those who question
whether Islamist politics can really be compatible with
democratic and universal principles and rights. The
people of the Arab Spring have a chance to answer that
question. Our policy is to focus less on what names
parties call themselves by and more on what they
choose to do. All political parties, religious and secular
alike, have a responsibility to their people to abide by
the basic tenets upon which this body is founded: to
reject violence; to uphold the rule of law; to respect the
freedoms of speech, association and assembly; to
safeguard religious freedom and tolerance; to protect
the rights of women and minorities; to establish
independent judiciaries; to promote a free press; to
surrender power if defeated at the polls; and to avoid
inciting conflicts that pull societies apart. Those are
standards against which we should all be measured,
and we need to commit to upholding them together.

Our experience elsewhere in the world has taught
us that successful political transitions are those that
quickly deliver economic results, especially job
opportunities and the hope for a better future. To
succeed, the Arab political awakening must also be an
economic awakening.
Governments across the region that share those
priorities will need to keep making the sometimes
difficult policy choices required to build a foundation
for inclusive, private sector-led growth.

As President of this year's Group of Eight,
America is continuing the work of the Deauville
Partnership, which was started by France, to promote
regional integration, economic participation, job
creation and stabilization.

The last of these is especially pressing. The
international community must provide strong support
for the International Monetary Fund so as to quickly
conclude an economic reform and stabilization
programme with Egypt. We call on Egypt's friends in
the region and around the world to be prepared to use
bilateral assistance to reinforce an IMF programme
with Egypt. Those efforts, both economic and political,
must, of course, include women. I thank the Secretary-
General for making that one of the five points he cited.
No transition can succeed with half of the population
left behind.

Durable democracy depends on civil society, and
we are proud to support individuals and organizations
seeking to improve their own societies.

Again, I know that there are those who say that
the concept of civil society is a Western imposition.
But after 2011, how can anyone honestly say that civil
society is not indigenous to the Middle East and North
Africa and, I would add, everywhere. We know that
lasting change comes from within. Societies must be
the authors of their own futures. But the international
community can provide tools that will help societies
reach those goals.

As new elected legislatures abolish old laws
intended to control civil liberties, we should continue
our collective support for measures that will protect
and nurture civil society, consistent with the
international human rights norms of free association,
assembly and expression. No one in the region is
exempt from the demands for change we have seen.
When a country like Iran claims to champion those
principles in the region and then brutally suppresses its
own people and supports suppression in Syria and
other places, its hypocrisy is clear to all.

President Obama and I have been consistent in
our belief that the Palestinian people, like their Arab
neighbours, Israelis and all people, deserve dignity,
liberty and the right to decide their own future. They
deserve a viable, independent Palestine alongside a
secure Israel. We know from decades in the diplomatic
trenches that the only way to get there is through a
negotiated peace, one that cannot be dictated from
outside and one that we will continue to pursue through
every productive avenue, including a Quartet
consultation this morning.

Let me also condemn in the strongest terms the
rocket fire from Gaza into southern Israel, which
continued over the weekend. We call on those
responsible to take immediate action to stop those
attacks. We call on both sides - all sides - to make
every effort to restore calm.

Finally and crucially, we have to recognize that
the most consequential choices are the ones that will be
faced in the months ahead. It is up to the people and
leaders of the region to resist the calls of demagogues,
to compromise and build coalitions, to keep faith in
their system even when they lose at the polls, and to
protect the principles and institutions that ultimately
will protect them. Every democracy has to guard
against those who would hijack its freedoms for their
own ignoble ends. Building prosperous democratic
societies is not the job of a day, a week or even a year.
It is a continuous commitment and one we share. We as
a community of nations must help the people of the
Middle East and North Africa to make the most of the
rights and freedoms for which they have risked so
much.

