The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

I was going to lead off with exactly what the
German Ambassador has said, but I will come back to
that later, if I may, because I think that there may have
been an important confusion as to what international
humanitarian law really means.

I wanted to start by thanking the Special Envoy and
Ms. Sabah Al Hallak for their briefings. As others have
said, what they have achieved with the Constitutional
Committee is extremely welcome. It is a very positive
tone and could be a very important first step towards
stability in Syria. Of course, we all know the amount
of effort now required, but we would use today's debate
to urge all the parties to seize this opportunity and
make full use of the help that he and his team are ready
to provide.

We are also incredibly grateful to Ms. Al Hallak
for joining us today and her reminder that the political
process goes a long way beyond the Constitution. It is
critical that all elements of resolution 2254 (2015) make
progress in tandem. Others have referred to the release
of detainees, refugee returns and preparations for free
and transparent elections open to all Syrians, including
the diaspora.

I want to take this opportunity to add the British
voice to that of the United States, France and Germany
that there will be no reconstruction assistance for Syria
without such a credible political process, and it goes
beyond at the Constitution.

We welcomed hearing Ms. Al Hallak's views on
the situation of women. It is not just about percentages
or about how many women are formally involved; it is
about how genuinely their voices and the voices of civil
society are included in the political process. But we
recognize her tireless efforts and those of other women
to overcome the barriers to being heard. I was in Geneva
in 2012 and saw the efforts made there by the women of
Syria to obtain a seat at the table, so it is incredibly good
news that the Special Envoy and she and her colleagues
have been able to achieve that. If there are reports of
any intimidation of the Constitutional Committee, we

hope that the United Nations will deal with those as an
urgent priority.

Turning to the situation on the ground, as I said, the
German Ambassador made many of the points I wanted
to make. But I did not really like the confusion between
international humanitarian law and humanitarian
issues. International humanitarian law is not solely
about humanitarian assistance. It is about such things
as attacking civilians, bombing hospitals and using
weapons of mass destruction against civilians, and it
is about being able to protect civilians on the ground.

I think that looked at in that light, it is not the track
record of the West that is lacking. It is the track record
of the Syrian Arab Republic and its ally, the Russian
Federation. I want to say again in this Chamber that
attacks on the West and attempts to portray us as
harbouring terrorists or somehow on the side of
terrorists really need to cease. We are trying hard to
assist the United Nations in bringing peace to Syria. We
are giving money on the humanitarian side to that end.
We do not deserve - nor are the attacks in the Chamber
warranted - to have it said that "we are fighting on the
side of terrorists". If that were to be repeated outside
the Chamber in an individual capacity, legal action
would taken on that statement. I hope that we will hear
no more about it. It is a calumny and it is untrue, like
so many of the other things that have been said about
the situation in Syria by the two countries represented
to my right.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

