Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): Let me begin
by thanking the Russian delegation for introducing the
draft resolution that the Security Council has adopted
unanimously today as resolution 2043 (2012). It is a
significant step in the Council's collective support for
the efforts of the Joint Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan.

It is a matter for satisfaction that Mr. Annan's
efforts over the past seven weeks have resulted in an
improvement in the situation in Syria. Although there
have been reports of violations, the ceasefire that came
into force on 12 April has been observed by all parties
in a large part of Syria. Obviously, there is a need to
sustain the gains made so far. That should be facilitated
by the expeditious deployment of the United Nations
Supervision Mission in Syria (UNSMIS), authorized by
today's resolution.

That resolution is also an appeal to all parties to
walk back from violence, so that impartial supervision
and monitoring of the ceasefire can contribute to the
parties' observing and upholding their commitment. We
voted in favour of resolution 2043 (2012) with the
expectation that UNSMIS will implement its mandate
impartially, objectively and fairly, and will help the
Syrian parties build on the ceasefire and begin an
inclusive, Syrian-led political process that will meet the
legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people. For the
Annan plan to succeed, all parties must implement their
respective commitments under the six-point proposal.
We note that the preliminary understanding signed on
19 April by the Syrian Government and the United
Nations sets out clear conditions that have to be met by
the Government and the armed opposition groups. We
hope that all parties, including the opposition, will
abide by those conditions.

While the Syrian parties cooperate with UNSMIS
and the Joint Special Envoy, it is also essential that all
countries interested in securing peace and stability in
Syria lend their full support to Mr. Annan and
UNSMIS, and that they refrain from any action that
might cause further bloodshed. This will help to
expeditiously resolve the Syrian crisis, as well as to
ensure that it does not spill beyond Syria's borders.

