Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Croatia aligns itself
with the statement that has just been delivered by the
observer of the European Union (EU). I shall make
some additional remarks in my national capacity.

Let me start by welcoming the High Representative,
Mr. Valentin Inzko, and thanking him for his report and
briefing today.

It has been said often during our debates on this
important topic but has to be emphasized once again
that as a signatory to the Dayton Peace Agreement,
Croatia bears a special responsibility for the stability
and well-being of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it
reiterates its unequivocal commitment to the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a sovereign and
united country. Its integration into the European Union
and NATO remains our strategic goal.

The Prime Minister of Croatia has Visited Bosnia
and Herzegovina seven times in the past 12 months.
In addition, we held a joint session of the Government
of Croatia and the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the beginning of July. This speaks
volumes as to how high Bosnia and Herzegovina is on
the list of Croatia's priorities.

For Croatia, neighbouring Bosnia and Herzegovina
is much more than a trading partner and the 1,000
kilometres of land border that we share. A stable,
peaceful and united Bosnia and Herzegovina, based on
the genuine institutional equality of its three constituent
peoples and all citizens, is a generator of stability in
South-East Europe and beyond.

Croatia will continue to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in its EU membership ambition and to
extend its full political support and technical assistance
and expertise. Advancement in this process is of the
highest importance and is not only the best investment
in the country's future but also a way to help overcome
the difficult burdens of the past.

In this regard, Croatia would like to echo the
European Parliament's resolutions on the progress of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2015 and 2016, which state
out that the country will not be a successful candidate
for EU membership until the appropriate institutional
conditions have been established, on the basis of
the principles of federalism, decentralization and
legitimate representation.

The entry into force of the Stabilization and
Association Agreement on 1 June 2015 was a ground-
breaking step in the country's process of European
integration, providing Bosnia and Herzegovina with a
contractual relationship with the EU. Two years later,
in spite of the initial implementation of the reform
agenda, much remains to be done. At this juncture,
providing comprehensive, high-quality answers to all
questions contained in the European Commission's
opinion questionnaire, essential for presenting Bosnia
and Herzegovina with EU candidate country status,
seems to be the most important next step.

What Bosnia and Herzegovina needs today is far
less inflammatory rhetoric and many more reforms
aimed at the strengthening of institutions in general
and of the judiciary in particular, fewer divisions and a
more consolidated approach to present challenges: less
past and more future.

Reform of the election law remains essential,
especially against the background of the upcoming
parliamentary elections, in 2018. The improvement of
the electoral framework should be approached with a
sense of urgency, as requested by the decision of the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
Ljubie case and its decision on the city of Mostar. It
should enable the full implementation of the principle of
the equality ofthe three constituent peoples - Bosniaks,
Croats and Serbs - and their right to legitimate
representation. That is the basic precondition for faster
progress towards a fully functional country that is
focused on its future rather than its past.

Croatia is concerned that the ruling coalition may no
longer be able to push any legislation, such as the vital
amendments to the election law, through the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Parliament. That is why we should not shy
away from encouraging all political options in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to make serious efforts to address this
extremely important issue.

Some in Bosnia and Herzegovina expect that
the Central Election Commission of Bosnia and
Herzegovina will solve the problem. However, the
Commission is solely administrative in its scope and
nature, and finding solutions to political questions is too
great a burden for a body with no adequate legitimacy
for that particular purpose. Some are also hoping that
the international community might impose a solution,
as it has done in the past, but that is not the right
way forward. Instead, we are interested in seeing the
political ability and administrative capacity of Bosnia
and Herzegovina institutions to deal with challenges
and come up with appropriate and effective solutions.

While fully cherishing the principle of the
independence of the judiciary, we cannot remain silent
regarding some of the recent conclusions of the High
Judicial and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. To allow for the possibility of dismissing
judges or prosecutors without any prior independent
investigation or disciplinary procedure would be
tantamount to trampling on the basic principle of the
independence and impartiality of judiciary.

The secessionist statements and divisive actions
on the part of Republika Srpska politicians are not
only endangering the very stability and integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but are also derailing the
country off the track towards much-needed reforms.
In addition, they are moving Bosnia and Herzegovina
farther away from its NATO Partnership for Peace
path, to which Republika Srpska representatives
committed themselves in 2005, through the Republika
Srpska National Assembly conclusions, and to which
Bosnia and Herzegovina committed itself in October
2009 by formally requesting activation of the NATO
membership action plan.

On the other hand, it is utterly wrong to try to
compare the secessionist rhetoric and actions of
Republika Srpska leaders and institutions with the
Croats' efforts to obtain genuine equality with the
two other constituent peoples. The Croats of Bosnia
and Herzegovina have so far demonstrated the highest
level of support for their country and its Euro-Atlantic
ambitions. This fact is often overlooked and certainly
not valued enough by those whose duty it is to objectively
analyse the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Before concluding, I would like to make a brief
comment regarding the High Representative's report,
in particular the part titled "Glorification of war
criminals". Considering all the words and deeds of
Bosnia and Herzegovina's politicians in the past six
months, it is surprising, to say the least, that the High
Representative chose a particular situation in Mostar as
the most significant, and the only one, to be reported
under the aforesaid title.

We note with satisfaction the gradual improvement
of the economic situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Croatia's main trade partner. Last year, the total
commodity exchange between Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina amounted to €1.8 billion. One-fifth of
Croatia's overall foreign direct investments is flowing
to our neighbour and has already surpassed €1 billion,
making Croatia one of the top three investors in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Although the economy of Bosnia and
Herzegovina is still falling short of the expectations of
its citizens, the positive trends must be followed and
expanded. For its part, Croatia will continue with its
assistance in this domain as well.
Croatia continues to support the executive mandate
of the European Union-led peacekeeping force Althea.
Its presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is equally
important for the maintenance of a safe and secure
environment, as it is vital for capacity-building and
training. However, this mission was not meant to
last forever.

In conclusion, we sincerely hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will find the strength and prudence to
overcome the present political impasse and proceed
more efficiently on the path of EU and NATO
integration. Croatia advocates, and will continue to
advocate, for a strong and permanent focus on Bosnia
and Herzegovina at the European and international
level. It can never be emphasized enough - Bosnia and
Herzegovina deserves our full and constant attention,
and we should spare no effort to untap its vast, yet
underused, potential.

