Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): On behalf
of the entire Senegalese delegation, it is my pleasure to
convey, through you, to the Government of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela our warmest congratulations on
a very rich and productive presidency of the Security
Council during this, the shortest month of the year,
February. It was rich and productive in terms of the
number of open meetings and closed consultations, the
diversity of the issues debated and the results achieved.

The positive report that you, Sir, havejust presented
means that I shall not need to touch on a good number
of questions. I shall limit myself to recalling the
numerous presidential statements, elements to the press
and resolutions, which are testimony to our work under
your presidency.

Under the presidency of Venezuela, the Security
Council has been able to focus its attention on very
urgent matters such as the situations in Syria and Yemen
and the Korean nuclear issue, but above all we were able
to cast light on long-standing but key conflicts such as
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the tragic situation
in Palestine.

Mr. President, through the skilful use of the
procedures and the agenda of the Security Council,
you were able to raise such important issues as the
question of the sanctions regime, the role of the Council
in improving the peacebuilding architecture and the
methods of work of the Security Council. African
issues also received attention: Somalia, the Sudan,
South Sudan, Mali and the Central African Republic,
as well as the situation in Guinea-Bissau, on which our
Council has just unanimously adopted resolution 2267
(2016).

Mr. President, you were able, through recourse
to the values and cultural wealth of your country, to
organize a concert by the Venezuelan philharmonic
orchestra, showing that the Security Council is made
up of States and peoples with shared values.

Coming back to the statement by our friend Matthew
of the United Kingdom on the issue of interactivity,
transparency and results-oriented actions, I believe
that the many other topics that were raised yesterday
when we discussed the North Korean nuclear issue
and the appointment of the prosecutor of the Residual
Mechanism are examples of transparency.

Senegal welcomes the reasserted commitment
of the Security Council to support the countries
neighbouring Senegal, including, Guinea Bissau, in
terms of reconstruction and peacebuilding.

The third lesson that I would like to underscore is
that the work we have undertaken this month shows the
importance of a strong and ongoing commitment by
the Security Council to taking bold initiatives in many
crises and encouraging positive momentum with a View
to resolving them. It is under your presidency, Sir, that
the Council decided to visit West Africa, which will
take place next week with a visit to Mali, a neighbouring
country of Senegalm to Guinea-Bissau and to Senegal
to take account of things with the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Office of the Secretary-General
and the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Sahel.

Once again, on behalf of the delegation of Senegal,
I would like to reiterate our congratulations to you,
Mr. President, and take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the leadership that you, Sir, have demonstrated, and
which honours your country. I would like to take this
opportunity to also wish good luck to the delegation of
Angola, which will take the helm in March. I assure it
the full support of the Senegalese delegation.

