Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I would
like to thank Ambassador Osorio for his briefing today
and for his active and effective leadership of this critical
committee.

Iran's nuclear programme continues to threaten
regional and international security. The latest news
from Vienna on Iran's nuclear progress underscores
that threat. According to the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Iran
completed installation of all centrifuges at the Fordow
site, its previously covert hardened underground
facility. That will significantly expand Iran's ability to
enrich uranium.

Meanwhile, Iran continues its efforts to sanitize the
Parchin site, which the IAEA has associated with high-
explosives testing. Director General Amano underscores
that Iran's actions have seriously undermined the
IAEA's ability to conduct effective verification. He has
also said that no concrete results have been achieved to
resolve the outstanding issues. Iran's actions continue
to contravene multiple resolutions of the Security
Council and the IAEA, and demonstrate Iran's ongoing
defiance of the international community.

We welcome recent dialogue between Iran and
the IAEA, but those talks must produce results. IAEA
officials are meeting today on a structured approach
to resolving the outstanding questions regarding Iran's
nuclear programme. We hope that Iran will finally
be forthcoming. But whether or not an agreement is
reached, given Iran's existing legal obligations there
are no excuses for it not to cooperate immediately with
the IAEA on the substance of the Agency's concerns.
Iran cannot continue its approach of denial, deception
and distraction. Now is the time to demand Iran's full
cooperation, full compliance and full commitment
to resolve outstanding questions about its nuclear
programme.

Given Iran's ongoing breach of its obligations,
the international community must make good on our
commitment to fully and aggressively enforce the
sanctions that the Security Council has imposed. The
full implementation of those measures will reduce
Iran's ability to advance its nuclear programme, support
terrorism and destabilize the region, thereby creating
more time and space to pursue a comprehensive and
negotiated solution through diplomacy.

We urge the Committee and the Panel of Experts
to accelerate their critical work in 2013 and to assist
Member States as much as possible in fulfilling their
obligations to implement the sanctions. We further
encourage the Committee and the Panel to investigate
thoroughly and respond vigorously to any report of
sanctions violations. We also must all be mindful of our
responsibility as Member States to share information
with both the Committee and the Panel to facilitate their
work. Furthermore, we reiterate that the Committee
should implement the recommendations contained
in the Panel's final report of June 2012 (S/2012/395, annex), including the imposition of targeted sanctions
on individuals and companies that facilitate Iran's
evasion of sanctions.

Iran's flagrant proliferation of conventional
arms constitutes a growing threat and makes the
Committee's work all the more urgent. In recent
weeks, Iranian officials have publically acknowledged
exporting military equipment in blatant violation
of resolution 1747 (2007), which prohibits all arms
exports from Iran. Despite the sanctions in place, Iran
continues its well documented pattern of arms exports
to the Al-Assad regime in Syria, which uses them to
slaughter the Syrian people, and to militants in Gaza,
who use them to terrorize Israeli civilians, as we saw
just a few weeks ago.

The Committee and the Panel should intensify
their focus on Iranian arms smuggling and find ways
to stem the flow. The States in the region must also
do their part. Two years ago, the Council included in
resolution 1929 (2010) new provisions for States to
inspect suspicious cargo on their territories and to seize
and dispose of banned items. Every State is obligated to
stop Iran's arms smuggle across its territory, whether
trans-shipment occurs by land, sea or air. To comply
with their international obligations, Iran's neighbours
should increase the number of cargo inspections and
deny overflight requests by aircraft suspected of
carrying illicit cargo in violation of United Nations
resolutions. Iran's consistent refusal to meet its
obligations and build international confidence in its
nuclear activities constitutes one of the most serious
threats to international peace and security today.

Our first priority remains to prevent Iran from
acquiring a nuclear weapon. The United States,
working with our partners in the group made up of the
five permanent members of the Security Council and
Germany (P5+1), is fully committed to achieving that
goal through a comprehensive approach of pressure and
engagement. We have not given up on diplomacy, but
Iran's repeated obfuscations means that the international
community will continue to apply increasing pressure
aimed at changing the regime's calculus. A durable
solution must roll back Iran's most alarming nuclear
activities, including its enrichment and stockpiling of
uranium to 20 per cent and continued activity at the
Fordo site. In exchange, the P5+l is willing to take
reciprocal steps to address Iran's expressed concerns.
We want, and are working toward, a negotiated solution,
but the choice to engage constructively lies with the
Iranian regime.

Its failure to respond to the offers of the P5+1
would be a setback for Iran, the region and the wider
world. Working together, the international community
must convince Iran to choose engagement not isolation,
transparency not secrecy, and stability not discord.

