Mr. Fulci (Italy): Over the past six months I have had
various opportunities to express my anguish and that of my
country at the fate of several thousand persons unaccounted
for in Srebrenica and Zepa, anguish increased by the tragic
news of possible mass graves, according to the
photographic documentation provided to the Council by
Ambassador Albright. The Secretary-General's report of
27 November is equally alarming. It adds a dramatic picture
of new, appalling violations of humanitarian law that have
taken place more recently in the Banja Luka region: a
large-scale resumption of "ethnic cleansing"; new cases of
persons unaccounted for; and chilling evidence, discovered
in Sanski Most, of mass executions.

Confronted by these atrocities in Bosnia, the Security
Council could not remain indifferent or passive. Thus, I
wish to thank our colleagues from France and Germany for
having taken the initiative of drafting the present resolution,
a process with which we readily associated ourselves, along
with other countries, by becoming a sponsor. The resolution
condemns in the strongest possible terms the episodes
denounced in the Secretary-General's report, and reaffirms
the Council's demand that the Bosnian Serb party give
immediate and unimpeded access to persons detained or
reported missing, and to the areas in question. It also
underlines the need for all the parties to cooperate fully
with the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia,
a commitment provided for by the Peace Agreement signed
in Paris.

The extreme gravity of the episodes denounced in the
Secretary-General's report does not in any way condone
other deeds that may be less grave but that are also
deserving of our condemnation. This is why the resolution
condemns the widespread looting and destruction of houses
and other property, in particular by HVO forces, and
demands that all sides refrain from laying mines, in
particular in those areas which under the Peace Agreement
will be transferred to another party.

The Bosnian Serb authorities have only one way to get
out of the predicament into which they have put
themselves: immediately to allow the requested access to
detained persons and to the places where the mass graves
are allegedly located, and to cooperate fully with the
International Tribunal for the punishment of those
responsible for the very serious crimes denounced in the
report. Any attempt to distort the facts, or to attribute
responsibility to other parties is totally unacceptable, and
will not be accepted by the Security Council.

Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina can be
consolidated only by overcoming the legacy of a
merciless conflict that has lasted far too long. But to
overcome such a legacy, it is imperative that full light be
cast on tragedies reminiscent of the darkest moments in
European history, and that the perpetrators of these
atrocities be brought to justice.

