Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): It is with grave concern that we in Russia are
monitoring reports from Lebanon about the escalation of
military actions by Israel. The barrage of bombardments
along the Lebanese coast and in Lebanese villages and
towns, including parts of Beirut,as well as in the Bekaa
Valley, and other large-scale military operations have
wrought destruction and have taken many victims among
the civilian population. Refugees are now fleeing.

The Israeli command confirms that attacks are being
carried out on the bases of the militarized organization
Hezbollah as revenge for strikes against northern Israel.

Russia consistently and strongly condemns anti-Israeli
terrorist raids; it just as consistently rejects the terrorist
methods of certain extremist groups, which will undermine
efforts to make progress in the peace process. However,
like other members of the Security Council, we ask
ourselves the logical question: to what extent are strikes by
the Israeli army in proportion to the actions of extremists?
We believe that Israel's military operations are an
inappropriate reaction to these actions.

We find it necessary to emphasize once again the
inadmissibility of the infringement of the territorial
integrity and the violation of the sovereignty of Lebanon,
which threatens the very statehood of that country. Russia
expresses the gravest concern over the fact that this
hotbed of tension in southern Lebanon may have a long-
term negative impact on the Middle East peace process as
a whole.

The critical situation that has developed demands
urgent measures. First of all, it is necessary to halt
immediately the military operations by Israel in Lebanon
and the armed acts initiated from Lebanese territory
against Israel. All parties involved in the violent fighting
on the Lebanese-Israeli border should show restraint and
avoid further escalation of hostilities and violence.

The humanitarian consequences of the present
escalation of violence in Lebanon are also of growing
concern.

The mass media report that among the civilian
population the number of victims is increasing and that
women and children are dying.

Disturbing reports have reached the Security Council
that many civilians in southern Lebanon who were trying
to flee their homes were not able to do so because of the
intensity of the firing. There is thus a new wave of people
moving away from southern Lebanon, which may be a
prelude to an emergency humanitarian situation.

It is absolutely inadmissible that there should be
firing in the area where the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) is deployed.

The Russian Federation has always called, and calls
now, on all parties involved to show moderation. We
believe that breaking the vicious cycle of confrontation
can be done only through political methods.

As a sponsor of the peace process, Russia strongly
insists that Israel and Lebanon should proceed
immediately to a peaceful settlement on the basis of
Security Council resolution 425 (1978), which provides
for the withdrawal of Israeli troops from southern
Lebanon and would ensure the security of both countries.

