The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation concerning
Western Sahara (S/ 1995/240).

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council notes the report of the
Secretary-General dated 30 March 1995 (S/ 1995/240).
It welcomes progress achieved so far in the
identification and registration process, in particular the
acceleration in the rate of identification, and
emphasizes the need to continue that acceleration. It
endorses the Secretary-General's goal of achieving a
rate of at least 25,000 per month. However, the
Council regrets that progress was not sufficient to
enable the Secretary-General to recommend
1 June 1995 as the date for the commencement of the
transitional period.

"The Security Council also notes with concern
the delays resulting from the failure to ensure the
continuous presence at the identification centres of the
necessary sub-fraction representatives. It welcomes
the agreement on a method for choosing alternative
sub-fraction representatives when necessary and it
expresses the hope that this will contribute to further
acceleration of the process with a view to holding
the referendum in January 1996. The Council
supports the Secretary-General's call upon both
parties to cooperate fully with the Identification
Commission in the performance of its work, in
particular by abandoning their insistence on strict
reciprocity in the number of centres and on the
linkage of a centre on one side with a specific centre
on the other.
"The Security Council expresses its concern
about the slow progress on the other aspects which
are relevant to the fulfilment of the Settlement Plan
and must be implemented before the referendum can
take place. It calls upon both parties to cooperate
fully with the Secretary-General, with his Deputy
Special Representative, with the United Nations
Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
(MINURSO), and to coordinate such cooperation to
ensure prompt and full implementation of all aspects
of the Settlement Plan.

"The Security Council hopes to see continuous
and rapid progress by the time of the Secretary-
General's next report, in May 1995, which would
enable it to consider favourably the possible
extension of MINURSO's mandate."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/l995/l7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 7.45 p.m.
