Mr. Matjila (South Africa): We take the floor to
explain our vote.

South Africa made clear its position on the situation
in Venezuela when we addressed the Security Council
two days ago (see S/PV.8472). We reiterate our view
that inclusive political dialogue is necessary to resolve
the political crisis in Venezuela. We remain concerned
about the serious humanitarian situation in the
country and support United Nations efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance to alleviate the hardships
experienced by the people of Venezuela.

South Africa is concerned at the irregular procedure
in presenting the draft resolution before us. The
dispensing of the 48-hour practice for the consideration
of the draft resolution undermines due process and
our ability to meaningfully engage on the text to reach
consensus. We have before us two divergent draft
resolutions on the situation in Venezuela (S/ZOl9/l86 and S/2019/190). This is unfortunate, as South Africa
believes that the Council should be unified in its
approach to supporting the people of Venezuela in
finding a solution to the crisis. We must speak with
one voice when assisting the Venezuelan people in
weathering the humanitarian challenges faced as a
result of the political and economic difficulties in
their country.

However, instead of bringing the Council and the
people of Venezuela together, the draft resolutions serve
to illustrate how far the Council is from contributing to
dealing with the crisis. The lack of unity of the Council
on this matter widens divisions and undermines
the credibility of the Council to make a meaningful
contribution to resolving the situation in Venezuela.
Ideally, the Council should adopt a draft resolution that
would facilitate internal, inclusive political dialogue
among the people in determining their own way out of
their political and economic difficulties.

Furthermore, a Council resolution should facilitate
the provision of international assistance based on the
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
based on a thorough and accurate needs assessment.
Therefore, the provision of aid should be depoliticized
and must meet the needs of the people of Venezuelan.

While the draft resolution presented by the United
States (S/2019/186) calls for a peaceful political process,
it is prescriptive on the outcome of that process,
thereby infringing on the sovereignty of Venezuela.
Internal political processes should remain the national
prerogative of Member States. From the outside, we
can encourage parties to engage in political dialogue,
but we cannot dictate outcomes such as the holding of
elections. Furthermore, the context of the crisis, set out
in the United States draft resolution, does not reflect
a balanced understanding of the underpinnings of the
crisis in Venezuela.

There are three elements in the United States
draft resolution that are antithetical to the principles
and values that underpin South Africa's democratic
dispensation and our foreign policy.

First, in the fourth preambular paragraph, regarding
the authority of the National Assembly to release
political prisoners and grant amnesty, South Africa
views this as tantamount to a violation of the principle
of the separation of powers, on which the South African
Constitution is predicated. Therefore, South Africa
cannot support, at the international level, the violation
of this universal, sacrosanct and inviolable principle
that underpins the governance of the modern State.

Secondly, South Africa also cannot support
paragraph 1, which expresses deep concern that the
presidential elections of 20 May 2018 were neither free
nor fair. President Nicolas Maduro was elected for a
second six-year term in the presidential elections on
20 May according to the National Electoral Council
(NEC) of Venezuela. President Maduro was re-elected
by a wide margin, garnering over 5.8 million votes,
according to Ms. Tibisay Lucena, President of the NEC.
His closest challenger, Mr. Henri Falcon, received
approximately 1.8 million ballots, while the third-place
candidate, Mr. Javier Bertucci, received 925,042 votes.
Over 8.6 million Venezuelans went to the polls, putting
voter turnout at 46.01 per cent. The announcement was
made when the NEC had counted more than 92 per
cent of ballots. South Africa respects the authority of
the NEC as the constitutionally mandated body that is
charged with the management of the electoral process
in Venezuela - like in all of our countries. That
body declared President Maduro the winner, and that
should be respected as we respect all other electoral
processes elsewhere in the world. That is the basis
on which President Maduro enjoys legitimacy and
international recognition.

Thirdly, and finally, South Africa believes that
paragraph 4 is partisan and biased, as it stresses
the importance of ensuring only the security of the
members of the National Assembly and members of
the political opposition. A Council resolution cannot
stress the security of a certain sector to the exclusion of
others. As an impartial body, the United Nations should
insist on the security of all Venezuelans. South Africa
was therefore not in a position to support the United
States draft resolution.

