Mr. Serrano: Let me thank you, Sir, for inviting
the European Union (EU) to this timely and important
debate. I also thank His Excellency Mr. Abdurahman
Ibrahim, First Deputy Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government (TFG) of Somalia,
for his important statement. He can rest assured of the
EU's continued commitment to assisting Somalia. I
also offer many thanks to African Union Commissioner
Lamamra and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, for
their presentations and very valuable work.

The candidate countries Croatia, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey' the
countries of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this declaration.

In the interest of brevity, let me summarize the
main points of the written statement that has just been
circulated. The continued deadly attacks against the
Somalia peace process, the TFG and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) are wreaking havoc on
the lives of Somalia's population. A comprehensive
approach that incorporates reconciliation and outreach,
security and development, human rights and cohesive
governance is essential for tackling the challenges
facing Somalia. The international community must
therefore remain actively engaged.

In 2009, the European Union enhanced its
comprehensive approach to the region by adopting the
European Union Horn of Africa policy. In pursuit of
this policy, the European Union is now stepping up its
engagement in support of the stabilization and
development of Somalia. High Representative Ashton
will shortly visit the region to reaffirm the European
Union's commitment to the fight against piracy and to
explore the prospect of deepened cooperation with the
countries of the region.

The European Union welcomes recent efforts of
the TFG and partners within Somalia to join together in
ensuring broad-based stabilization and recovery at the
federal, regional and local levels. The agreement
between the TFG and Ahlu Sunna Wal Jama'a, signed
in Addis Ababa on 15 March 2010, is particularly
significant. The implementation of such commitments
could be the stepping stone towards the completion of
the outstanding transitional federal tasks pursuant to
the transitional federal charter and the Djibouti
Agreement of 2008. The international community
should stand ready to support this process.

Meanwhile, it is important that the TFG continue
its outreach efforts in the framework of the Djibouti
Agreement to enlarge the political base of the
Government. The Transitional Federal Institutions
should continue to work constructively to address the
enormous challenges ahead. As the International
Contact Group has underlined, it is also important to
increase financial transparency and accountability.

I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of the United
Nations and the African Union and their respective
Special Representatives, Ambassador Ould Abdallah
and Ambassador Diarra, to bring peace to Somalia. The
European Union has provided about €90 million to the
African Union Mission in Somalia since its
establishment in 2007. Uganda and Burundi are
playing an essential role in implementing that mission.
Hopefully other countries will join forces with them in
contributing to AMISOM.

On 7 April 2010 the European Union launched a
military training mission in Somalia. The objective of
this initiative, in line with resolution 1872 (2009), is to
support the Transitional Federal Institutions of Somalia
through the training of 2,000 Somali recruits. This
contribution to the sustainable development of the
Somali security sector should help provide a more
secure living environment for ordinary Somalis.
Operating in close cooperation and coordination with
international partners, particularly the United Nations
and the African Union, this training mission will be
carried out in Uganda, where Somali forces are already
undergoing instruction. I would like to thank the
Ugandan Government for its active assistance to the
European Union in this regard. I would also like to
acknowledge the valuable support provided by the
United States in key areas.

The European Union is aware that the fight
against piracy off the coast of Somalia requires
continued and comprehensive engagement. The
European Union welcomes the work of the Contact
Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia. The
European Union naval operation, Operation Atalanta,
launched in accordance with relevant Security Council
resolutions, is producing positive results, and its
mandate has recently been extended. The forthcoming
General Assembly debate on piracy will provide an
occasion to discuss these initiatives further. Atalanta's
Operational Commander, Admiral Peter Hudson, will
be one of the speakers. Effective means of bringing
suspected pirates to justice are essential to a
comprehensive approach, and neighbouring countries
are to be commended for the assistance they have
provided in this regard.

It is important that the international approach to
Somalia remain strategic, looking beyond urgent
support to the security sector to also address longer-
term development needs. The European Union has
committed €215 million to development aid for the
period 2008 to 2013, making the EU - together with
its member States - the biggest donor to Somalia.
Particular attention is being paid to governance,
security and support to civil society, education, the
productive sectors and rural development. In addition,
the European Union will provide €35 million in
humanitarian aid to Somalia in 2010.

The international Conference on Somalia to be
held in Istanbul at the end of May will offer us a fresh
opportunity to address the various aspects of this crisis.
It should give renewed impetus to international
engagement in Somalia in the political, economic and
social fields. The European Commissioner for
Development, Mr. Andris Piebalgs, is planning to
participate in the Conference. As I said at the
beginning, the Council and Somalia can rest assured of
the European Union's flrm engagement in Somalia.

