Mr. Savua (Fiji): Madam President, my
delegation congratulates you and your delegation on
your assumption of the presidency and for the
consecutive open debates on small arms and light
weapons yesterday and on children and armed conflict
today.

We would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General and Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Mr. Olara
Otunnu, and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Ms. Carol
Bellamy, for their briefings.

Both issues - small arms and light weapons, and
children in armed conflict - complement the broader
question of women and peace and security. These
concerns are of key importance to this body, reflecting
the Council's maturity and wisdom and its desire to
"look behind the veil" of international peace and
security. This trend is aiding the Council to consolidate
its mandate, as stated in the Charter of the United
Nations, resolutely partnering in its actions with the
General Assembly, with the ultimate goal finally to
make a difference in the lives of people.

When the Council's deliberations on these
subjects empower vulnerable citizens and give voice to
the weak, these outcomes become the measure of its
success. The Secretary-General's report on the mandate
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Children and Armed Conflict shows a genuine
change in attitudes and political commitments as to
how children fare in armed conflict. The improved
understanding of the political economy of armed
conflicts, particularly their impact on children, is also
cause for celebration. We also note that more work
remains.

We draw courage from the regional strategy of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
However, my delegation believes that, while
Commonwealth efforts will eventually filter down to
its constituent subregions, the Pacific Islands Forum
region needs to be flagged in the Special
Representative's calendar in his agenda for action. This
would work well in conjunction with the regional
security efforts taking shape within the Biketawa
Declaration and also promote the effectiveness of the
cooperation between the United Nations and the Pacific
Islands Forum.

Part of the success of the Organization's mandate
on the subject is due to the recognition, in the
elaboration of international norms, of the impact of
armed conflict on children. We heard directly from
children from war-torn regions or from those coming
out of prolonged conflicts during the special session of
the General Assembly on children. They spoke with a
maturity and clarity that are often associated only with
adult experiences. No doubt, many more children have
been exposed to those kinds of experiences.

"Marie in the Shadow of a Lion" is a remarkable
compilation of real testimonies by children who have
undergone such experiences. We therefore support the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to use it in a pilot programme and to include it
in educational curricula in this future era of
application. Existing mechanisms can be reconfigured
to support those efforts and obviate the need to
reinvent the wheel. As national human rights
institutions gain greater knowledge and expertise, they
can assist Governments and regional organizations in
incorporating the appropriate knowledge into national
educational systems and programmes.

This fourth open debate should serve to recall
Graca Machel's plea to humankind to respect
childhood as inviolate and to consider children as
zones of peace. Today, unfortunately, the recruitment of
children continues unabated, and the abuse of children
occurs with alarming frequency, making it incumbent
on the Security Council to show results from - or at
least create mechanisms for the realization of - the
provisions of its resolutions. The Council needs, for
instance, to keep its focus current and dynamic.

Yearly updates of its child soldiers list, such as
the ones included in annexes I and II to the Secretary-
General's report, represent a practical instrument for
monitoring the situation. However, those lists need to
reflect feedback from the parties on the list every year.
The Council may offer its expertise to those other
parties that need help in formulating and implementing
action plans. Member States, especially those that are
parties to the Optional Protocol, need a facility that
will enable them regularly to report on their
compliance in a less cumbersome format. Yesterday we
all heard calls to end the flow of weapons, a
phenomenon that is instrumental in the recruitment and
abuse of children.

Smart sanctions or bans of other targeted
measures may be invoked by the Council as
expressions of its distaste for a phenomenon that, sadly,
has characterized our lifetime. We hope that this stage
of human civilization will go down in history as one of
heightened respect for human dignity, and
consciousness of, and sensitivity to, human rights. The
scourge of children in armed conflict taints the
enlightenment that has been achieved. We have to
consolidate our gains and forge ahead, in a holistic
manner, in the era of application, with the advocacy,
interventions, campaigns and other creative measures
which the Secretary-General has devised.

