Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola voted in favour of
resolution 2327 (2016), renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
keeping the Security Council's commitment to the
country and its people. In fact, the situation in South
Sudan has been, over the years, a matter of great
concern for the Security Council, which authorized
the deployment of a peacekeeping mission, operating
in a very difficult and challenging environment. We
welcome the commitment of the Mission staff and pay
tribute to those who have paid the ultimate sacrifice
in trying to bring peace and stability to South Sudan.
Angola reiterates its full support for the Mission, its
leadership and staff.

Angola supported the resolution, although we
would like to raise a number of concerns. The main
purpose was to renew the mandate of the peacekeeping
mission for another 12 months, incorporating the
Regional Protection Force. The inclusion of provisions
pertaining to sanctions regimes and the management of
the hybrid court to be established by the African Union,
among other issues, remain an issue of contention
among Council members.

The Intergovernmental Authority on Development
met recently at the level of Heads of State and
Government and underscored that

"[an] arms embargo or sanctions on South Sudan will
not provide the solution being sought for permanent
peace and stability in the country, stressing that
what is required is dialogue, reconciliation, and
commitment by all South Sudanese parties to fully
implement the peace agreement".

Angola believes that the current situation in
South Sudan must be addressed through a meaningful
political dialogue, leading to the implementation of
the Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan as the primary focus of the
Mission's mandate, including a permanent ceasefire
and provisions to address accountability and the root
causes of the conflict, leading to sustainable peace in
South Sudan.

Lastly, we call on all South Sudanese parties to
cease hostilities, take the necessary actions to protect
the civilian population and engage in good faith in
political negotiations to address their disputes. That is
the only path to fulfil the aspirations of the people of
South Sudan for peace and development.

