Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): We are always
encouraged, Mr. President, to see your great country at
the forefront of international efforts to support the
cause of peace and security, whether in Palestine or
elsewhere in the world. Speaking personally, I should
like to say that it is always good to see you taking your
job very seriously - you are presiding over this
meeting with a very constructive approach -
reflecting the commitment of your country to
facilitating the resolution of problems such as that of
Palestine.

I should also like to avail myself of this
opportunity to compliment Ambassador Wang Yingfan
of the People's Republic of China for providing very
effective and constructive stewardship of the Council
during the preceding month.

It has been five months since we last discussed
the situation in Palestine in a public meeting in this
Chamber. It has been twice that long since this body
passed a resolution on the matter before us. During that
period, we have seen the situation in the occupied
territories deteriorate day by day. The already alarming
conditions on the ground have become explosive.
Violence has escalated with the intensification of
coercive measures against the Palestinian people.

The international community is rapidly running
out of time and options. This meeting comes at an
appropriate moment. But the question is: What do we
expect from this meeting? Where do we go from here?
Would another resolution make any difference? Has the
Security Council implemented its earlier resolutions?
What is the fate of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973)? Is the Council ready to genuinely play the role
assigned to it by the Charter?

As we seek answers to these questions, there is no
end to the tragedy in Palestine. Many innocent lives
have been lost in the past 15 days alone. The symbols
of Palestinian sovereignty and nationhood have been
blatantly violated and seized. In stark disregard of all
humanitarian and legal norms, further targeted
assassinations have been threatened. These methods
are, indeed, typical of all those situations where a
people living under foreign occupation are not only
denied their inalienable rights but also subjected to
repression and coercion through military force. While
provocation and repressive tactics multiply, any
attempt at resistance is branded as terrorism.

When oppressed people struggle for their rights,
an effort is made to describe their just struggle as
terrorism - that is a story that we have heard before.
But when occupying States use massive force and
violence to deny a people their inalienable rights and
indulge in State terrorism, the world watches silently.
What other name could be given to the repression of
the peoples living under foreign occupation? How can
we deny the legitimacy and glory of subjugated
people's struggles for freedom and against injustice?

We are all aware that the fire in Palestine has the
potential to engulf the whole region. The psychological
impact of violent coercion is even more far-reaching,
and freedom struggles have shown that oppression only
strengthens the resolve of the oppressed. History has
taught us that peace cannot be established through
subjugation. It can be achieved only through the
realization of the legitimate, inalienable right of self-
determination. No attempt can crush the will of a
people, whether in Palestine or elsewhere, struggling in
such conditions against occupation and repression.

The volatile situation in Palestine warrants urgent
measures. The international community must take
immediate steps not only to facilitate resumption of the
peace process but also to bring an immediate end to the
violence, heavy-handedness and coercion in the
occupied territories. Such provocative measures
constitute serious breaches of the Oslo peace accord.
They are also contrary to the assurances given to the
brokers of Middle East peace in 1993 not to hamper the
activities of the Palestinian institutions.

A durable peace cannot be established by binding
a weaker party to agreements while allowing the
stronger one a free hand. The disproportionate use of
force against the Palestinian people and the unabated
settlement activities undermine the prospects of peace.
The present situation in Palestine demands active
intervention on the part of the international community
to reverse this dangerous trend and oversee the
implementation of the commitments made and
agreements signed.

As in the case of other people under foreign
occupation, Pakistan has been a firm supporter of the
just struggle of the Palestinian people for their
inalienable rights. We reaffirm our solidarity with
them. We respect and honour their wishes, reflected in
the draft resolution presented to this Council. We
support the full implementation of the
recommendations of the Mitchell report. The Security
Council could also deploy a United Nations protection
observer force in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including Jerusalem. Such a measure would help to
cool down the situation and facilitate the resumption of
the peace process. The international community must
also ensure full respect for the Fourth Geneva
Convention with regard to the occupied territories.

The status of Al-Quds Al-Sharif remains central
to any comprehensive settlement of the Arab-Israeli
conflict. No lasting peace in the region will be possible
without the realization of the legitimate rights of the
Palestinian people. These include their right to
establish their independent State with Jerusalem as its
capital and the exercise of full sovereignty over Al-
Haram Al-Sharif.

This time last year, you will recall, Sir, we stood
close to realizing the dream of peace in the Middle
East. Although the peace process has been derailed, we
must not lose hope or the will to put it back on track.
What is required is political will rather than political
expediency, complete rather than selective
implementation of Security Council resolutions and
decisions, and concerted action rather than empty
debate.

We have seen the end of one century and the
beginning of another. Unfortunately, some of the
chapters of the last century that were written in the
blood of innocent people have yet to be closed. It is
time now for the international community to enable
this Council to uphold its moral and legal obligations
under the Charter. Those who have the power and the
responsibility to maintain international peace must act
now to revive the process of negotiations and the hopes
of peace in the Middle East.

