Mr. Fedotov (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) to brief the Security Council on the
impact of organized crime on security, stability and
development in West Africa and the Sahel region.
Indeed, those transnational challenges in the region
have evolved from social and criminal problems into
threats to security, stability and development.

(spoke in English)

The West African transit route feeds the European
cocaine market, which has in recent years grown
fourfold, reaching an amount almost equal to the United
States market. We estimate that cocaine trafficking in
West and Central Africa generates some $800 million
annually. South American drug cartels are exploiting
regional vulnerabilities in West Africa - poverty,
unemployment, lack of border control, weakness of law
enforcement structures and endemic corruption. For
those criminals, West Africa represents not only the
shortest but also the most cost-effective channel for
trafficking illicit drugs to Europe. In doing so, they use
a range of different transportation methods - second-
hand aircraft, large and small ships, and container
shipments.

West Africa is not only a cocaine transit area. The
local consumption market is growing fast, and drug use
is increasing across the region. There are up to
2.5 million drug users in West and Central Africa.

We also need to understand the extent to which
drug trafficking in the region may be linked to piracy
off the coast of West Africa. However, piracy and drugs
are not West Africa's only concern. Trafficking in
human beings, arms and counterfeit medicines have
also been reported. The smuggling of migrants and
other illegal activities are also growing.

In the face of those transnational issues,
UNODC's approach has been strategic and tactical. It
represents a multidimensional effort that acknowledges
the multifaceted nature of those challenges. Our
approach recognizes that while the problems in West
Africa are local in nature, the solutions are often
global. In promoting an inter-agency approach, for
example with the United Nations Office for West
Africa and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), we try to deliver practical action through
regional programmes, while also designing activities
that complement each other across different regions.

Our overall goal is to support and strengthen
local institutions and to encourage partnerships among
States and regional organizations, such as the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS). All our activities are based on the
principle of shared responsibility.

On that subject, I add my voice to the need to
renew the ECOWAS Praia Political Declaration and
Regional Action Plan beyond 2011, as one of the best
means of uniting local and international responses. I
also welcome the initiatives of Member States,
particularly, the work of Togo, which has adopted a
national strategy under the ECOWAS Praia Political
Declaration and Regional Action Plan. UNODC stands
ready to support activities of the Peacebuilding
Commission to mainstream transnational organized
crime into the peace and security agendas.

The West Africa Coast Initiative (WACI),
operating under the umbrella of UNODC's West Africa
programme and in partnership with DPKO, the

Department of Political Affairs (DPA) and INTERPOL,
supports the ECOWAS Regional Action Plan. That
Initiative builds upon national and regional ownership
and focuses on inter-agency cooperation and the rule of
law. WACI will soon be extended to the Republic of
Guinea and C6te d'Ivoire and will help sustain regional
reforms.

I thank our partners for their financial support of
WACI. Both UNODC and the United Nations system in
general are at the disposal of Member States.

We are working to introduce best practices to the
region based on our worldwide experience. Our Central
American Network of Prosecutors against Organized
Crime and Drug Trafficking, which has been active in
Central America since 2011, is an example of how we
are strengthening the criminal justice chain through
exchanges in information and best practices. Now we
have the necessary funding to introduce a similar
network of organized crime prosecutors in West Africa.
Through such activities we can promote regional
connectivity and later ensure that those networks work
together across the Atlantic Ocean. That will be an
excellent example of South-South cooperation.

Other important initiatives include the Global
Container Control Programme operating on both sides
of the Atlantic and complemented by a similar
programme, AIRCOP, for both regions' airports. Those
programmes are helping to build capacities across land,
sea and air.

UNODC's development of transnational crime
units also provides a role model for the future. Such
units have been established in Sierra Leone, Liberia
and Guinea Bissau. The units in Sierra Leone and
Guinea Bissau have both reported seizures. However,
our work can not be effective, if it is not based on a
clear understanding of the nature and scope of existing
challenges. A new threat assessment in the region is
being undertaken by UNODC and will be completed
soon. It will be focused on the trafficking routes across
the Atlantic Ocean.

In November 2011 a United Nations inter-agency
mission to Benin and Nigeria, co-led by DPA and
UNODC, defined the incidence of piracy in the Gulf of
Guinea as a major threat to the peace, security and
economic interests of States in the region. The
mission's report recommended better coordination
among the regional bodies and noted that the United
Nations is well placed to achieve that coordination.
Working with its partners, UNODC plans to use its
West African programme to translate the report's
recommendations into firm action.

In the Sahel region, where concerns remain about
the security situation, UNODC is assisting with the
implementation of a regional initiative on judicial
cooperation, including Mali, Mauritania, Niger and
Burkina Faso. At the national level, UNODC is
supporting Mali and Mauritania in the implementation
of national integrated programmes and working with
the European Union on projects in Nigeria.

To conclude, I stress the need for continued
political commitment. I also commend the countries in
the region for the efforts they are undertaking to
combat these threats. However, additional resources
are needed if we are to sustain reforms in the long term
and contribute to security sector reform.

