The threat posed by the Israeli occupation to the security and stability of the Middle East region, and to international peace and security as a whole, bespeaks the decades-long failure of the Security Council to assume its responsibility by maintaining international peace and security and addressing the causes of tension and conflict in the region and beyond. Since 1967, Israel has occupied large and cherished swathes of the territory of Arab States in Palestine, Lebanon and my own country, the Syrian Arab Republic. The inhabitants of the occupied Syrian Golan continue to languish under the occupation, whose criminal, repressive practices show flagrant contempt for the Charter of the United Nations, the rules of international law and the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly. Those of our people who have been compelled by the Zionist occupation forces to leave their land and sources of livelihood continue to look forward to the day when they will return to their land, homes and property. The Israeli occupation would not be able to keep defying the international community and the resolutions of the United Nations were it not backed by several Western Governments that have granted immunity to the Israeli occupation and its representatives and prevented their being held accountable or punished for war crimes, crimes against humanity or grave human rights violations. The United States has a history of using the veto to stymie any draft resolution aimed at putting a stop to the crimes and acts of aggression of the Israeli occupation. That history highlights the double standards espoused by successive American administrations. It also demonstrates their blind bias in favour of the occupation - a bias that has reached an unprecedented degree with the current American administration, which has taken provocative and illegal unilateral measures in an attempt to change the political and legal situation of the occupied Arab territories, firstly by declaring occupied Jerusalem to be the capital of Israel, then by announcing its so-called recognition of Israeli sovereignty over the occupied Syrian Golan, which paved the way for attempts by the occupation authorities to annex parts of the West Bank. The Syrian Arab Republic, along with the overwhelming majority of Member States, strongly condemns the decisions taken by America and its supporters and considers them to be a merely unilateral act performed by a party that has neither the standing nor the political, legal or moral capacity to decide the fate of the peoples of the world or to dispose of lands that are an integral part of the territories of the Syrian Arab Republic and occupied Palestine. Syria reiterates its support for the right of the Palestinian people to self- determination, the establishment of an independent State over all of its national territory, with Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of refugees to return to their homes in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III). Any decisions, measures or deals that are inconsistent with the relevant United Nations resolutions or fail to safeguard the established rights of the Palestinians are not remotely viable and should be rejected in form and substance. My country insists once again that Palestine must be allowed to become a full-fledged Member of the United Nations. One might well wonder for how long the Security Council will remain silent while Israel persists with its systematic and grave violations of human rights and international humanitarian law in the Syrian Golan, which has been occupied since 1967. Such violations include settlement activities, racial discrimination, arbitrary detention, torture and the theft of the Golan's natural resources. In recent years, the Israeli occupation authorities have also been supporting terrorists and have repeatedly attacked Syrian territory. My country has diligently informed the Security Council and the Secretariat of the occupation authorities' repeated violations and acts of aggression in the Golan. For instance, the occupation authorities have forced the population of the occupied Syrian Golan to register their land in the Israeli real estate register. They have stolen land owned by the inhabitants of the occupied Syrian Golan in order to develop a wind farm to generate electricity. They have also endeavoured to Judaize the Golan, doubled the number of settlers and imposed artificial local councils. Those alarming developments have not been mentioned in any of the briefings given by the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, Nickolay Mladenov. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic therefore once again expresses its strong objection to the continuation of Mr. Mladenov's current approach in those briefings and his deliberate failure to mention the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan, developments related to the continuing aggressive and criminal practices of the Israeli occupation authorities, or recent decisions of the United States Administration that flagrantly violate international law, the Charter of the United Nations and the resolutions of the Security Council and the General Assembly on the Syrian Arab Golan and the other occupied Arab territories, particularly resolution 497 (1981), which was adopted unanimously and states that the decision of the occupation authorities to impose their jurisdiction on the Golan is null and void and has no legal effect whatsoever. It would be a serious mistake to think that the difficult situation in my country, Syria, will change the fact that the Golan is, always has been and will continue to be Syrian territory. We will keep up the struggle until it has been fully recovered up to the border of 4 June 1967. That right cannot be waived or bargained away, and it will never lapse. Lastly, the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms that, in order to ensure stability in the Middle East and preserve the credibility of the United Nations, measures must be taken to implement all international resolutions aimed at ending the Israeli occupation of Arab territories, including the Syrian Arab Golan, and compelling Israel to withdraw to the line of 4 June 1967, in accordance with the relevant United Nations resolutions, including, in particular, Security Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497 (1981) and 2334 (2016).
