Mr. Schulz (Germany): I would first like to
thank our briefers, Mr. Kafando and Ambassadors
Mohammed and Lauber, for their excellent and
comprehensive presentations. I have five points that I
would like to make.

First of all, Burundi's unresolved political crisis
and volatile security situation, and the consequent
regional tensions, are deeply concerning. The threat
to regional peace and stability is particularly visible in
the increased tensions and alarming troop movements
in North and South Kivu and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, a clear demonstration of the cross-
border nature of Burundi's political crisis. We call
on all stakeholders to refrain from violence and from
engaging in any kind of proxy war in the region.

Secondly, we believe firmly that the most promising
solution to Burundi's crisis lies within the region. We
commend former President Mkapa's relentless efforts
in support of the inter-Burundian dialogue and in

producing a report and road map. We have taken note
of the summit of the East African Community (EAC)
held earlier this month. It is now up to the EAC to lead
the inter-Burundian dialogue on a successful path. We
trust in the commitment and diligence of East Africa's
leaders in that regard, especially those of Uganda,
Kenya and Tanzania. We encourage the African Union
to explore the possibilities for further assisting the
EAC in the process. All efforts should be aimed at
creating new momentum for continued negotiations
and dialogue.

Thirdly, the announcement by President Nkurunziza
of Burundi that he will not seek re-election in 2020 is
a positive step, but further serious commitment on the
part of the national authorities will be essential if they
are to ensure free, inclusive and fair elections in 2020,
which are crucial to long-term stability and to building
trust among the people. We call on Burundi to open up
the political space to different candidates and parties,
as well as to ensure the independence of the National
Electoral Commission. The registration of the Congres
national pour la Liberte party last week was a very
encouraging step in that regard.

Fourthly, in the light of Germany's strategic focus
on prevention and stabilization, we welcome the efforts
ofthe Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in the Burundi
country configuration. The connection between the
PBC and the Security Council is important, and it is not
a one-way street. Jiirg Lauber's briefing is an excellent
example of the added value of the advisory work of the
Peacebuilding Commission.

Germany fully respects the sovereignty of
Burundi. However, we take this opportunity to express
our deep concern about the persistently dire human
rights situation in Burundi over the past weeks and
months, which was also reflected in the most recent
report of the Secretary-General of November 2018
(S/2018/1028). Long-term political stability cannot be
achieved without respect for human rights, which are
also an important part of peacebuilding efforts. That
is why we are deeply worried about the closure of the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Bujumbura as a sign of the lack of
interest in cooperation with internationally agreed
mechanisms. We also followed the suspension of
international non-governmental organizations with
serious concern. A significant number of those NGOs
have not re-registered and many of them plan to leave
the country. That will make it increasingly difficult to
effectively monitor the human rights situation on the
ground and will further limit the space for political
actors, media and civil society.
In that regard, we welcome the monitoring through
the African Union human rights observer mission
and emphasize their important function and role. We
also value the investigative work of the Commission
of Inquiry on Burundi of the Human Rights Council
and look forward to their update next month. We call
on the Government of Burundi to collaborate with the
Commission of Inquiry.

Fifthly, and lastly, Mr. Lauber talked about the
underfunding for humanitarian purposes. Let me just
say that that is also very important to us. Germany
increased its humanitarian assistance in Burundi
to €15 million in 2018, with a focus on support to
internally displaced people and refugees. Development
assistance is similarly important to protect the Burundi
population from further destabilization. Germany
contributed €24 million in 2018 to ensure the provision
of basic services, including health and sanitation.

