Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council is meeting today to approve the
operational aspects of the creation of a transitional
administration encompassing a transitional peace-keeping
force in accordance with the provisions of the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja
and Western Sirmium of 12 November 1995. We are also
meeting to renew the mandate of the United Nations
military observers in the Prevlaka peninsula.

Let me begin by saying that my delegation will vote
in favour of both draft resolutions.

As to the first question before the Council, I wish to
reaffirm Egypt's full support for this historic Agreement,
which will ensure the peaceful integration of Eastern
Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium into Croatia. It
also serves a number of important objectives, including
the return of displaced persons to their homes and the
elimination of one obstacle to mutual recognition between
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro).

My delegation has carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General on the establishment of the United
Nations Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) and his
proposals relating to a peace-keeping force within the
Transitional Administration. We have also heard the
report of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
General Klein, who referred to the intention of all parties
to implement the Basic Agreement in good faith. These
are all encouraging signs for the establishment of the
Transitional Administration in accordance with draft
resolution S/l996/23.

My delegation wishes, however, to stress a number
of points. The first is the need to show the utmost
flexibility in implementing the provisions of the draft
resolution, particularly when determining the size of the

 

military component of the United Nations Transitional
Administration, by giving the Transitional Administrator the
opportunity to propose an increase in the size of that
component when he reports to the Secretary-General in the
framework of paragraph 4 of the draft resolution, or in any
subsequent report.

It is important to interpret paragraph 14 of draft
resolution S/1996/23 as encompassing, inter alia,
intervention by the multinational Implementation Force
authorized by the Security Council in its resolution 1031
(1995) to defend UNTAES should the Administration so
request.

With respect to paragraph 21 of the draft resolution,
cooperation between UNTAES and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia should be
comprehensive, with a View to arresting those indicted by
the Tribunal and handing them over for trial through
official channels and in accordance with international legal
11011118.

The success of UNTAES in carrying out the mission
defined in today's draft resolution will depend on the
commitment of all parties to implementing in good faith the
Basic Agreement - and implementing in good faith the
provisions of the draft resolution, which will facilitate the
establishment of UNTAES and the commencement of its
operations to restore stability and security in the region as
soon as possible.

The United Nations will bear a major responsibility
under this draft resolution: the creation of the military
component of UNTAES. We note that States have thus far
been hesitant about contributing troops to that component.
The Secretary-General and the Transitional Administrator
should therefore make further efforts to urge States to
contribute troops to this most important peace-keeping
operation so as to make it possible to begin the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the draft
resolution as soon as possible, particularly the provisions
relating to demilitarization.

In this context, Egypt stresses the need to achieve the
greatest possible balance between participation in the
UNTAES military component by States members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) on the one
hand and non-NATO States on the other. This would
authenticate the international nature of the force.

Let me note an error in the Arabic text of this draft
resolution: the words "initial deployment" are missing from
paragraph 10 in the Arabic text. I trust that this error will
be rectified.

I turn now to draft resolution S/1996/24, the
technical draft resolution on the renewal of the mandate
of United Nations military observers in the Prevlaka
peninsula to monitor the demilitarization of that peninsula.
We look forward to negotiations between the parties
yielding an agreement on a peaceful settlement, so that
the Security Council will not be obliged to renew the
mandate of the observers once again or to entrust the
monitoring mission to another international organization.
My delegation hopes that the Security Council will meet
soon to adopt an agreement that will settle this problem
and will join the series of other agreements towards peace
and stability in the Balkans that are now being
implemented.

