Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation echoes the expression of sympathy
and condolences that the representative of France
offered at the beginning of his statement.

My delegation welcomes the holding ofthis briefing
on the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We thank
Mr. J ean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations, for his comprehensive
presentation of the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/866) on the latest developments in the political,
security and humanitarian situation in Mali.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomed the peaceful holding of
the presidential elections on 29 July and 12 August in
Mali, which saw the re-election of the President, His
Excellency Mr. Ibrahim Boubacar Keita. As rightly
pointed out in the Secretary-General's report, those
elections have demonstrated the profound aspirations
of the Malian people for peace, as well as the coming
of age of the political class throughout each stage
of the electoral process. C6te d'Ivoire notes with
satisfaction that the much-feared Violence by armed
groups was avoided and did not affect the inclusivity
or credibility of the elections, particularly in the north
and centre of the country. We note the decision of the
Malian authorities, together with the Malian political
class, to postpone the legislative elections, which were
initially scheduled for late 2018, and we encourage
them to ensure the holding of those elections as soon as
possible so as to complete the electoral process, which
will ensure peace and stability.

In order to maintain the positive momentum, Cote
d'Ivoire once again urges the Malian Government and
all political actors to work more effectively, while
overlooking their differences, to preserve peace and
stability in Mali. In that regard, my country welcomes
the 15 October signing of the pact for peace between
the Government of Mali and the United Nations, in
accordance with resolution 2423 (2018). The pact
aims to give a new impetus to the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
Paragraph 7 of the pact stipulates that decisions
reached through international mediation are binding,
thereby strengthening the role of international actors,
including the United Nations. In that regard, my
country encourages the international actors to pursue
their multifaceted assistance so as to achieve peace and
stability in Mali despite persistent difficulties.

Cote d'Ivoire also commends the efforts of the
Government of Mali with regard to the political and
institutional measures undertaken, including the
re-establishment of the Malian Administration. Those
efforts were realized through the appointment of
interim authorities in 21 districts of the five northern
regions, the progressive operationalization of the mixed
units of the Operational Coordination Mechanism in
the regions of Kidal and Timbuktu, and the adoption
of the national security-sector reform strategy. My
delegation also calls for the finalization ofthe Vision for
the reconstitution of a new army and of the territorial
police, with a view to ensuring the improved protection
of the civilian population in the north and centre of
the country.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with concern, however, the
Secretary-General's observations concerning the
persistence of security incidents in central Mali. My
country believes that it is urgent to respond expeditiously
and appropriately to intercommunal violence and
allegations of abuse attributed to members of the
Malian armed forces. To that end, the implementation
of the integrated security plan for the central regions
should be supported by multifaceted initiatives aimed
at strengthening governance, development and, above
all, reconciliation among communities.

To date, MINUSMA is a key pillar of the current
security apparatus in Mali and the region. Working in
complementarity with the various forces on the ground,
namely, the Malian armed forces, Operation Barkhane,
the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) and the European missions, provides an added
value in combating insecurity and terrorism in Mali.
It is therefore imperative to strengthen the operational
capabilities of MINUSMA in order to enable it to react
and even predict attacks effectively on its civilian
and military personnel and to continue to support the
Malian armed forces.

The worrying spread of terrorist attacks into
certain neighbouring countries is a stark reminder that
combating terrorism and organized cross-border crime
is a regional security issue that requires the coordinated
efforts of all regional and international actors. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore welcomes the unity of the Council
and the international community's consistent support
for MINUSMA and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. It
also welcomes the commitment of all bilateral and
multilateral partners that are working tirelessly to
restore and consolidate peace and stability in Mali and
the subregion.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call
on the parties concerned to work towards providing
basic social services and the operationalization of
programmes to combat poverty and unemployment,
particularly in the northern part of Mali and the Sahel,
which are recruitment and breeding grounds for
terrorist movements.

