Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): One of the strongest and
most frightening memories I have from any journey I have
made is from a small church about an hour's drive from
Kigali, the capital of Rwanda. I arrived there early one
evening last year and was brought into a small room that
had only one table in it. On that table, put together in a
large pile, were the naked craniums from thousands of men,
women and children. You could see on the skulls how these
people had been killed - not by an explosion, not by
bullets, but by knives and machetes in the hands of their
own neighbours. I will never forget the sight of those
remains from the genocide four years ago in Rwanda. And
the more one learns about what happened during that brief
period when up to 1 million people were killed, the more
one wonders what the rest of us, outside Rwanda, were
doing to prevent it or to stop it. That must never be allowed
to happen again.

As the Secretary-General has underlined, the
responsibility for the future of Africa rests primarily, of
course, with the African people and their leaders. But the
international community must also maintain and strengthen
its commitment to Africa. As the example of Rwanda
shows, that commitment has not always been evident.
Unfortunately, there are even more recent examples - like
eastern Zaire and Congo (Brazzaville). I think that deep
inside us we all know what is needed. There is no lack of
knowledge or information. Almost every aspect of
prevention, peacekeeping and conflict resolution has been
explored in theory. But unless we can give an adequate
response through action when confronted with a concrete
crisis, unless we manifest the political will and release the
required financial resources, that knowledge means virtually
nothing.

Today in Africa there is a trend towards democracy,
regional cooperation, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and sustainable development. And that trend is gaining
momentum as patterns of the past are broken. Our
commitment should be to support this African quest for
peace and prosperity. What happens in Africa will affect
us all in one way or another.

True security begins with the individual. This is the
approach taken by the Secretary-General in his report.
While recognizing the full scope of measures needed to
address the root causes of conflicts and not merely the
symptoms, the report never loses sight of what the
Secretary-General refers to as human security. We wish
to congratulate him for his systematic and most
challenging analysis. His recommendations should be
followed up by the entire international system. My
Government is committed to work actively in all relevant
forums to help implement them.

Creating stable societies is probably the most
compelling and also most difficult task in the prevention
of conflicts. Poverty, oppression, poor economic policies
and human rights abuses must be fought as a matter of
priority. They should be specifically targeted in a renewed
policy of partnership with Africa. That, and a focus on
each country's responsibility for its own development, are
cornerstones of Swedish Government policy towards
Africa. Trying to do its share, Sweden is increasing
substantially its budget for development cooperation with
Africa, with a view to assisting in addressing the root
causes of conflict.

Another considerable contribution to the prevention
of conflicts would be to stop the proliferation of arms.
We welcome the efforts to introduce a moratorium on the
production and transfer of small arms in West Africa, as
initiated by the President of Mali. The international
community ought to give its full support to this and
similar regional initiatives. Furthermore, all African States
should be encouraged to participate in the United Nations
Register of Conventional Arms. We believe that the
elaboration of confidence-building measures should be
stimulated and supported. Some important experience that
could be drawn upon has been gained within the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The fact that people are fleeing strife or armed
conflicts represents an immense tragedy for the
individuals concerned. Very often it also constitutes a
serious threat to stability. We support the proposal of the
Secretary-General to establish an international mechanism

 

to assist host Governments in maintaining the security and
neutrality of refugee camps and settlements.

When early warning signals of conflict are received,
they must also be transformed into early action. Diplomatic
efforts are at the core of these actions, but eventually the
swift build-up of other means may be necessary. The
conflict-prevention mechanism of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) deserves full support. At the same
time, the Security Council cannot renounce its primary
responsibility for maintaining peace and security. The
capacity to establish rapidly an international presence is
crucial in order to prevent and contain conflicts. Promising
developments are under way, and we should all look into
ways and means of making the United Nations standby
arrangement system an efficient instrument for deployment
at short notice.

The Security Council, and the United Nations as a
whole, has the potential to respond quickly to the demands
of mediation, good offices, observer missions and other
preventive measures, including peacekeeping missions.
Actually, we may never have had a better opportunity to
build truly common security. But this has often been
inhibited by budgetary restrictions. And we find it
deplorable that there is a lack of political will to provide
the necessary resources for the United Nations to be able to
fully perform such tasks when they are most needed.

Conflicts continue to erupt, and others are still
unresolved. We welcome the growing African involvement
in conflict resolution. The political reaction of Africa to the
overthrow of the legitimate Government in Sierra Leone
was, hopefully, a sign that military takeovers and abuses of
human rights will not be condoned. This trend should be
encouraged. Sweden stands ready to support further African
peacekeeping capacity.

An appalling practice of targeting civilians in armed
conflicts has been spreading across the world. This is a
moral and ethical tragedy. A consolidated effort must be
brought about to re-establish respect for universal
humanitarian norms in armed conflicts. This requires
dissemination of international humanitarian law and related
principles, monitoring of their application, investigation of
abuses and actions against impunity. The idea raised in the
report of the Secretary-General to hold combatants
financially liable to their victims in these cases is certainly
worth exploring.

Protection of children in armed conflict is of particular
concern. It is absolutely intolerable to see 10-year-old boys
and girls, with guns almost too heavy for them to carry,
thrown into combat or terrorizing their neighbours - and
to know that they and many of their generation are being
deprived of a normal childhood. The use of children as
soldiers simply has to end.

In several African conflict situations an essential task
ahead is to focus on the transition from peacekeeping to
peace-building. Far too often the international community
has pulled out of engagements before enduring solutions
or lasting support for long-term stability have been set up.

We support the recommendation of the Secretary-
General that post-conflict peace-building structures should
be established and that recommendations for the phase
following the immediate conflict should be included in
the mandate for peacekeeping missions. Particular
attention should be given to issues regarding democratic
institutions and respect for human rights, as well as
reconciliation measures. In the aftermath of conflict,
efforts for reconciliation are paramount. That requires
justice and the establishment of facts, but also a vision of
tolerance and future cooperation among former enemies.
Deploring the executions that took place in Rwanda this
morning, we believe that the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda should play an essential role in
national reconciliation there. In order for that Tribunal to
render expeditious justice, it needs to be strengthened by
the addition of a third Trial Chamber. It is our hope that
the Security Council will soon take a decision to that
effect.

The Secretary-General wants his report to mark a
new beginning in the relationship between the United
Nations and Africa. He has challenged us to make that
new beginning, and he has shown us the way. All of us,
Africans and non-Africans alike, the Security Council as
well as the United Nations system as a whole, must now
seize the momentum and accept that challenge.

