Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would
like to thank your delegation, Madam President, for
convening today's briefing. We are especially honoured
to have you presiding over today's meeting. We would
also like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Office to the African Union, Ms. Sahle-Work Zewde,
and the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Sma'i'l Chergui, for their briefings.

It is sheer coincidence that today's meeting is being
held as we mark the centennial of Nelson Mandela's
birth. As we remember him, we run no risk of placing
him on an unattainable pedestal. We must never forget
that Nelson Mandela was a man of flesh and blood. He
was a revolutionary. He was always ready to change the
structures of an unjust regime such as that of apartheid.
However, he had a global vision with regard to how we
should build a more just and human world.

My delegation would also like to join in
commending and congratulating the important efforts
being undertaken by Ethiopia and Eritrea for mutual
support. That is an example not just for the African
continent, but for the entire world as to how we can
resolve our problems and disputes through dialogue,
negotiation and peaceful means.

Bolivia underscores the importance of continuing
to improve the cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union. It is necessary to highlight
the responsibility of the international community
to implement this relationship in order to facilitate a
common understanding of the root causes of conflict
and the promotion of consensus in decision-making.
It is also necessary to deepen the integration of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities, strengthen
and improve dialogue and cooperation and coordination
mechanisms through the Joint United Nations-African
Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in Peace
and Security in order to address the challenges to peace
and security between the two organizations, including
joint strategies related to demobilization, disarmament
and reintegration, conflict prevention, and the
prioritization of the leadership and participation of
women and youth on peace and security issues.

Along those lines, we welcome the signing of the
African Union-United Nations Framework for the
Implementation ongenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. That agreement will enable a
systematic, predictable and strategic partnership to be
developed, based on the principles of mutual respect
and comparative advantage. Similarly, we commend
the fact that both organizations have initiated the
preparation of a memorandum of understanding
that will enhance capacities to combat terrorism and
prevent Violent extremism, which continue to hinder
the consolidation of peace and development in Africa.

With regard to cooperation and coordination
mechanisms, a notable example is the deployment of
joint operations, which are a key instrument in the
constant quest to strengthen peace and security. They
are also a useful tool for addressing obstacles and
threats, such as terrorism and humanitarian crises.
That is the case in the region of the Lake Chad basin,
where the United Nations, the African Union and
other international partners support the work of the
Multinational Joint Task Force to combat Boko Haram.
Bolivia encourages those initiatives, including the full
deployment and operationalization of the Group of
Five for the Sahel Joint Force, which together with the
African Union Mission in Somalia, represents one of
the most successful examples of partnership between
the United Nations and the African Union, without
forgetting the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, a mission that is an example of
how the African Union and the United Nations can
develop ajoint vision with regard to the priorities based
on the reality on the ground and the needs of the area.

We also commend the initiatives put forward
by subregional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of West African States and those under
way within the framework of the Nouakchott process, in
particular those aimed at identifying the root causes of
the conflicts in Mali and the Sahel region, which should
be in line with the United Nations integrated strategy
for the Sahel and the support plan for that region.

Bolivia underscores the growing level of strategic
partnership between the Security Council of the United
Nations and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union and their commitment to developing a
structured and equitable relationship. That partnership
must be strengthened on the basis of mutual support and
ongoing technical assistance, both for political issues
and peacekeeping operations. We therefore welcome the
recent briefings by special representatives and envoys
ofthe African Union in the Security Council. Similarly,
we support the option of having both Councils conduct
joint field missions. Furthermore, we believe that
efforts should be made to continue exploring different
modalities for support and assistance to the African
Union peacekeeping operations pursuant to resolution
2320 (2016). In that context, Bolivia supports the
requests made by the African Union for a predictable
and flexible budget and for economic support for peace
and security operations.

However, not all experiences have been positive.
We cannot forget the weakening or breakdown in trust
with regional organizations. For example, that has been
the case with South Sudan and the political process
that the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) is conducting as mediator. We regret that the
Security Council ignored IGAD's express request that
targeted sanctions and an arms embargo not be imposed
at a time when headway was being made in the dialogue
in South Sudan. Bolivia once again reaffirms its full
support for the regional and subregional architecture
as a useful tool for conflict resolution in Africa. It is
essential to take into account the African perspective
and African recommendations, as they are more aware
of the reality on the ground.

In conclusion, Bolivia believes that it is crucial to
grant a greater leadership role to the African Union
in decision-making on matters that concern it, with
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all the countries that make up the African
Union, in the interest of the peace that we so long for.

