Mr. Christian (Ghana): Permit me, at the outset,
to commend the Permanent Representative of Turkey
for successfully steering the affairs of this Council
during this month and for organizing this meeting,
given the close link between the theme and the
Council's fundamental responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security. Let me also thank
Under-Secretaries-General Alain Le Roy and Susana
Malcorra for their eloquent presentations, which not
only focused on the status of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, but elucidated the strategies
to surmount challenges posed by the multidimensional
facet of United Nations peacekeeping operations. 1
would also wish to express my delegation's gratitude
and honour for the invitation to participate in this
important meeting.

It is without doubt that United Nations
peacekeeping operations have contributed immensely
towards our Organization's efforts in attaining its
fundamental goal of maintaining international peace
and security, as well as the promotion of sustainable
development and human rights. Its accomplishment,
widely acknowledged as one of the indisputable
hallmarks of the Organization, has also raised
expectations, even as it takes on complex and
multidimensional mandates in more challenging
environments. Indeed, the ever-growing demand for
United Nations peacekeeping operations is affirmed by
the confidence and respect that the Blue Helmets enjoy
worldwide, despite the inherent constraints and
weaknesses, as well as some regrettable shortcomings.

Unquestionably, it would have been more
difficult for the United Nations to discharge that
onerous responsibility creditably without the
appropriate reforms, starting with those outlined in the
Brahimi report (S/2000/809). Although my delegation
applauds the great strides that have been made to
strengthen United Nations peacekeeping operations, we
also acknowledge that much remains to be done if we
are to attain the ultimate goal.

The ability of the United Nations to surmount
current and emerging challenges, and also to bridge the
gaps between United Nations capacities and the
expectations of the world community, depends largely,
but not exclusively, on the adoption of unambiguous,
realistic and achievable mandates and exit strategies in
tandem with a parallel and inclusive peace process.
With the ever-evolving nature and scope of
peacekeeping operations, it is incumbent on the
Council, within the purview of its responsibility, to
consider refining mission mandates to account for the
envisaged challenges of the field, including by
adjusting the rules of engagement for field personnel as
and when the need arises, practical deployment
timelines and increased authority for field operations.

As a mandate is not an end in itself, its objective
can only be realized through the provision of the
requisite human and financial as well as logistical
resources. Logistics difficulties confronting most
troop-contributing countries (TCCs) and police-
contributing countries (PCCs) in mission areas have
been identified as a major impediment to prompt and
effective deployment.

We consider Security Council resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001), dealing with cooperation and
consultations among TCCs and PCCs and the Council
and the Secretariat, as critical to the ultimate outcome
of peacekeeping operations. While we welcome the
deepening of that trilateral framework, we are
convinced that that could further be enhanced to ensure
the attainment of the optimal goal. TCCs and PCCs
should be involved early and fully in all stages and
aspects of mission planning, since that would
contribute to a more inclusive decision-making
process.

It therefore behoves the Council to critically
examine the current working methods, with the aim of
eliciting the views of potential TCCs and PCCs before
its consideration and adoption of mission mandates, as
well as prior to the renewal or review of existing
mandates. Another important factor to that end is the
extension of political support and commitment to
missions by Member States. History has
unambiguously demonstrated that the existence or
absence of that element determines the success or
failure of peacekeeping operations.

In the wake of the surge in demand and
complexity of peacekeeping operations, it is an
irrefutable fact that regional and subregional
organizations can play a vital role in ensuring a more
effective and comprehensive response to conflict
situations in the world. The proximity of the member
States of regional organizations to conflict areas gives
them a better understanding of the complexity of the
issues. It also enables them to respond to crises in a
timely manner. We should bear in mind, however, that
regional actors can sometimes complicate the
resolution of conflicts. The Council should therefore,
as a matter of urgency, consider further strengthening
cooperation with those bodies within the framework of
Chapter VIII in order to make the best use of the
comparative advantages of the United Nations and
regional arrangements, with a view to maximizing the
effectiveness and synergies for peacekeeping

09-3860]
operations. In that regard, we express our support for
the continuing efforts to strengthen African
peacekeeping capacities, and emphasize the importance
of joint action plans to address constraints identified by
African Member States.

The safety and security of peacekeepers is of
paramount concern to my country, and indeed to all
troop and police contributors. The continued fatalities
are regrettable and indefensible, given the selfless
services rendered by peacekeepers. Undoubtedly, in
this current era of intra-State conflict, peacekeepers are
required to operate in precarious security environments
where non-State entities and spoilers act with impunity.
Given that grave atmosphere, it is unrealistic and
incongruous to place the responsibility for the safety
and security of peacekeepers in the hands of host
authorities or signatories to a peace accord. In my
delegation's candid opinion, the United Nations should
assume that responsibility until relative normalcy is
restored to conflict areas.

In that connection, we commend the progress
made so far to address that challenge and encourage
the Secretariat to continue to enhance its capacity,
especially with regard to the gathering of operational
and tactical intelligence, which is essential to
pre-empting potential threats and ensuring the safety
and security of both peacekeepers and civilians. We
owe it as a duty to the gallant men and women who
have paid the ultimate sacrifice in the service of United
Nations operations to strive to reduce fatalities,
especially those resulting from hostile acts.

Regrettably, a critical assessment of current
geopolitical developments indicates that United
Nations peacekeeping activities are not likely to abate
in the coming years. Rather, they could experience an
increase in both scope and nature. The United Nations
can only continue to be a source of hope for the
unfortunate victims of conflict by adapting to the ever-
changing nature of peacekeeping through innovation
and flexibility. Indeed, ongoing reforms will invariably
determine the continued capacity of the United Nations
to sustain its flagship undertaking. It is our collective
responsibility to ensure a favourable outcome to the
process. The Council's critical role cannot be
overemphasized.

