Mr. Al-Mouallimi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would like to say that my
country endorses the statement to be delivered by the
representative of the United Arab Emirates on behalf of
the Group of Arab States.

I would like to thank you, Madam President, for
your valuable initiative in organizing this meeting on
the maintenance of international peace and security
and the particular challenges facing peace and security
in the Middle East.

I likewise thank you, Madam, for the concept note
(S/2019/643, annex) prepared by your delegation, which
raised a number of questions and ideas that deserve
consideration. The note refers to the root causes of the
conflicts in the Middle East. Some believe that these
conflicts are ethnic or religious in nature and stretch
back hundreds, or thousands, of years. In reality that
is not the case at all, especially when it comes to the
two main entities responsible for threatening peace and
security in the region, namely, Israel and Iran.

The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has never been an
ethnic or religious conflict. Indeed, Muslim Arabs have
lived with their Jewish and Christians counterparts in
peace and security throughout the Arab-Islamic rule
in Palestine. That situation changed only when the
Zionist movement, a colonialist and racist one, took
control of Palestinian territories and homes at the
beginning of the twentieth century. After that, Zionist
gangs, such as the Irgun and others, embarked upon
ethnic cleansing that targeted Palestinians, turning
them into refugees and depriving them of their right to
life, dignity and self-determination.

It is not a matter of historical revenge, therefore,
between Palestinians and Jews in Palestine, but rather
basic principles recognized by international law and
United Nations resolutions, starting with the unjust
partition plan presented in resolution 181 (1947),
which insisted on the need to create an independent
Palestinian State, as well as resolutions 242 (1967), 338
(1973), 497 (1981), 672 (1990), 694 (1991), 1860 (2009)
and 2334 (2016), all ofwhich reaffirm the need to create
a Palestinian State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
Jerusalem as its capital.

Although the world has recognized the imperative
need for the two-State solution, Israel continues to
delay and refuses to recognize the historic right of
the Palestinian people to their land. Worse yet, Israel
continues its provocations, most recently its entry
by force into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its aggression
against that sanctuary on Eid Al-Adha. We condemn
that aggression in the strongest terms.

In addition, some speak of a centuries-old
conflict between Shiites and Sunnis and maintain that
disagreements with Iran are an embodiment of that
conflict. That is also completely false. Indeed, although
Shiite doctrine has existed in certain Arab regions
going back nearly 1,200 years, it did not spread to Iran
until the sixteenth century, during the reign of Safavid,
who managed to convert Iran into a Shiite country, but
did not manage to do the same beyond it. That is why to
speak of a historic religious conflict lasting over 1,000
years is an illusion. Shiite Muslims have lived in the
Arab world alongside their brothers from various Sunni
sects in cooperation, peace and security.

The disagreements with Iran surfaced only after
the Iranian revolution, which gave the Shiite doctrine
a decisive, even exclusive, role in certain domains.
The Iranian revolution did not stop there. It called for
exporting the revolution to the Muslim world. Indeed,
the Iranian Constitution stipulates the pursuit of the
revolution within the country and abroad.

Recognizing those historic realities is a starting
point for ensuring international peace and security
in the Middle East. It is imperative to recognize the
Palestinian people's right to self-determination and their
right to create an independent State. Amid the violence,
settlements, displacement and destruction of homes, it
is imperative to recognize the right of the people of
the region to live in peace, free from interference in
internal affairs, free from exported revolutions through
militias, such as the Houthis and Hizbullah, and without
being pitted against their own countrymen.

The Security Council must use every means to
reaffirm the basic principles of international relations
and reject occupation, violence, oppression, sedition
and incitement to violence, of which Israel and Iran are
guilty, and through which they have destabilized the
Middle East region. Recognizing those basic principles
will enable the entire region to dedicate their human,
intellectual and natural resources for cooperation,
development and fighting terrorism and dealing with
causes of its expansion, such as foreign occupation,
marginalization, social injustice and ethnic and religious
discrimination among people of the same country.

My country reaffirms its commitment to the
principles of international law. We support all measures
to ensure peace, stability and security in the region.
We also support development in the region, for we
are convinced that comprehensive development in the
Middle East will usher in stability, eradicate terrorism
and defuse conflicts.

My country is always working to cooperate, discuss
and peacefully settle all conflicts. Nevertheless, we must
reaffirm that calls for dialogue must go hand in hand
with an end to threats and interference in internal affairs,
such as attacks against, and attempted assassinations
of, diplomats and representatives, cyberattacks against
infrastructure, propaganda, sedition and support for,
and sponsoring of, militias and terrorist groups. If
those practices do not practically stop, all calls for
dialogue will be nothing more than talk and will serve
only hegemonic and expansionist aims.

