Mr. Jobe (Gambia): My delegation would like to
take this opportunity to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country's assumption of the presidency
for this month. I think this a happy coincidence, when we
consider the role that your country has played since the
years of independence in monitoring and participating in
not only the independence process of Africa but also all
the cooperation linked to humanitarian moves on the
continent. We are therefore convinced that the delegation
of Sweden will bring much wisdom and experience to
guiding the work of the Council.

We would also like to commend the delegation of
Slovenia for the way in which it steered the activities of
the Council last month.

My delegation would also like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General for his report on Africa in response to
the request of the Council, which was made last
September. We find that the report provides a clear,
candid and balanced analysis of the sources of conflict in
Africa, and that the Secretary-General's surgical analysis

 

of Africa's problems is not only frank but also thought-
provoking; it poses significant challenges for all of us in
our quest to assemble the means to implement its
recommendations.

As Africans, we are deeply saddened by the present
plight of the African continent and its peoples. Africa is
rich in resources and culture, yet, paradoxically, the peoples
of the continent continue to suffer greatly. It has gone from
slavery to colonization and from independence to untold
economic hardship, now exacerbated by civil wars in many
parts. Today, quite a number of African States are victims
of armed conflicts, while the great majority of the African
people languish in abject poverty, desolation, decay and
cruel separation. Over 8 million of its people are refugees,
returnees and internally displaced persons. Over 30 wars
have been fought in the continent since 1970.

My delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that
we, the African people, should not look beyond ourselves
for responsibility for our present situation. However, several
external factors contributed significantly to it. Now that we
are taking stock, we and all those external actors with
whom we are jointly responsible for the present plight of
Africa and its people should acknowledge our joint
responsibility and join hands in our search for an African
renaissance.

In dealing with the complex conflict situations in
Africa, it is not enough to address the symptoms of
conflict. We must tackle the root causes themselves. This
will therefore require a coordinated and comprehensive
approach to the long-term, structural causes of conflict. It
should involve the entire United Nations, and a system of
coordinating all the efforts should be set up so that practical
actions can be taken by the United Nations and its agencies.

The United Nations has registered numerous successes
in Africa of late. The severe failures of the past should not
inhibit us from living up to our responsibilities. The failure
in Somalia was a bitter experience, but inaction in Rwanda
and elsewhere is even worse. The failure to act in the face
of serious threats to peace, security and human lives in
Africa threatens the credibility and legitimacy of the United
Nations, in particular the Security Council itself.

We must not let the Rwandan situation repeat itself
elsewhere. The Council must act where and when it should.
It is no longer justifiable - if it ever was - to use
financial cost, or fear of it, as a guiding principle for
intervention. In order to avert humanitarian catastrophes,
intervention is often necessary. The United Nations should
therefore consider ways of providing the necessary
resources for peacekeeping operations so that they can
take place very rapidly.

The United Nations should enhance its capacity for
early action. It must be capable of responding swiftly to
conflict situations if catastrophes are to be avoided. It is
good to have early warning systems. However, such
systems will be meaningless, if not useless, if they are not
complemented by early action.

The enhancement of African peacekeeping capacity
is a key priority. My delegation welcomes the initiatives
by several States in this regard. We encourage increased
bilateral and multilateral cooperation in peacekeeping,
especially in capacity-building, in order to enhance
African preparedness for conflict prevention and
peacekeeping.

Regional and subregional organizations can play an
important role in the prevention of conflict and in
peacekeeping. The Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS), through its Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), has excelled itself in Liberia and Sierra
Leone. We also recognize the efforts of other subregional
organizations in Africa in this regard. As members know,
ECOWAS was recently involved in the Guinea-Bissau
process, which is continuing.

We therefore look to collaboration between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations
in Africa. This could create a partnership more suitable
for dealing with some conflict situations in Africa. In this
context, we welcome the recent high-level meeting held
in New York between the United Nations and regional
organizations on this issue.
We must, however, emphasize at this point that it is
imperative to avoid relegating responsibility for
peacekeeping from a global level to regional or
subregional levels on a selective basis. The Security
Council cannot subcontract its responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security - not
even by default. Cooperation between the United Nations
and subregional and regional organizations must be in
accordance with Articles 53 and 54 of the Charter.

Economic sanctions may be suitable in some
instances for securing the compliance of States with
international norms. They are, however, a very blunt
instrument - I will return to that issue in my conclusion.
We have seen numerous cases in which they have caused

 

severe humanitarian difficulties. We share the view that
sanctions should now be better targeted, that they should be
designed in a such a way that innocent people - especially
the most vulnerable groups of society, in particular, women
and children - are not adversely affected. Therefore, the
Council should always consider and provide for
humanitarian exemptions.

My colleagues have already spoken about various
issues, including the problems of arms in Africa, the
situation of children in war zones and all that is necessary
to protect refugees. We believe that we cannot
overemphasize - I will not repeat what my colleagues
have said, but my comments can be found in the text of my
statement - the importance of the United Nations and the
leading role that it is playing in the community of nations.
If Africa today depends on the United Nations, and looks
for its cooperation and for a Vibrant relationship with it, it
does so in order to avoid any misunderstandings or any
conflicts between this body and the regional bodies. I
therefore believe that in the quest for solutions to bring
about peace, and to resolve certain economic problems, we
should carefully analyse some of the echoes that come to us
from the regional organizations.

It is for that reason that I would not like us to
underestimate the efforts that have been made by the
United Kingdom and the United States with the Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya to arrive at a modus operandi. If an
agreement has already been made for a third venue, the
human mind is capable of flexibility and understanding. I
do not think that we should be in positions that are fixed.
We should try as one community of nations, this United
Nations, under the same roof, to allow leeway and have
understanding, which can maintain the dignity of all.

It is for this reason that I still believe that great
nations such as the United Kingdom and the United States
can understand the human aspect that the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya is requesting and that those conditions, when
met, will enable us to put the situation right. We will be
able to see all countries join the same community. The
continent of Africa, as well as the Organization of African
Unity, will be very grateful if its conclusions are
understood. It would be disastrous if the Organization were
to take a decision which was binding on its Members and
the Security Council were to take another decision which it
wanted to impose on others. That misunderstanding will
make us go back in time, and I do not feel we have the
right either to erode the responsibilities and the authority of
the Council or, at the same time, to ignore the feelings of
some of our regional brothers.

I therefore appeal once again to Great Britain and to
the United States to reconsider the matter and give some
leeway that will enable us to reach a modus operandi.

In conclusion, the Security Council and the United
Nations are the guarantors of all the hopes and aspirations
for development and progress not only of Africa, but of
all the nations of the world and of humanity as a whole.
That responsibility calls for humanism, understanding and
cooperation.

