Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): On
behalf of the United States, I would like to thank you,
President Mesie, and the Croatian delegation for holding
this important debate highlighting the threat we all face
from terrorism and the efforts of United Nations
counter-terrorism programmes to help overcome it. We
also welcome the presence of the Secretary-General.

I would also like to commend Ambassador Jurica
for the outstanding contribution that he has made as
Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism Committee.

Terrorism in all its forms is one of the greatest
security challenges confronting the international
community. The recent terrorist attacks specifically
targeting civilians in Mumbai, India, serve as a stark
reminder of the threat we all face from terrorism. We
stand in solidarity and partnership with the Indian
people against the terrorists.

No geographic region, country or international
organization is immune. Acts of terrorism threaten all
people and all nations. If we, as Member States, are to
be successful in our common struggle against
terrorism, we must work together in a strategic and
coordinated manner.

Today, I would like to make three points. First,
the United States strongly supports the central role of
the United Nations in the global fight against terrorism
and wants to strengthen the ability and resolve of the
United Nations to play a constructive and effective role
in it. The United Nations must continue to improve

coordination among United Nations counter-terrorism
programmes and identify concrete ways in which the
various parts of the United Nations system can
contribute to the global counter-terrorism campaign,
ensuring that all relevant United Nations bodies and
organs are focused on making practical contributions to
the global effort.

While the Security Council must play a key role,
many others in the United Nations system can and
should make contributions to the broader counter-
terrorism effort, whether through capacity-building,
education, economic development or helping address
the conditions that terrorists and extremists exploit.

Secondly, all Member States need to work
together in close cooperation to create an increasingly
less permissive environment for terrorists. We urge all
Member States to comply with their international
obligations to deny terrorists safe havens and to bring
to justice those who finance, plan, facilitate or
perpetrate terrorist acts. We also urge Member States to
make all efforts to deny terrorists the benefits of any
concessions or financial benefits obtained though
hostage-taking or other illicit activities.

We recognize that there is a need to help some
Member States build the capacity to fulfil their counter-
terrorism obligations and meet international counter-
terrorism standards, with the long-term goal of
increasingly reducing conditions conducive to terrorism.

In 2007, through our Anti-Terrorism Assistance
Program, the United States conducted 266 training
activities that included over 4,500 participants from 64
countries, emphasizing law enforcement under the rule
of law and respect for human rights.

We have offered extensive counter-terrorism
finance capacity-building efforts in 45 countries
through the Counter-terrorist Finance Training Program
to improve countries' abilities to investigate, identify
and interdict the flow of money to terrorist groups. We
have also provided border security training and
capacity-building in 23 countries through the Terrorist
Interdiction Program to help constrain terrorist
mobility and enhance international cooperation on
biometric data collection.

In addition, the United States is also focused on
increasing economic development by helping Member
States tackle poverty, unemployment, weak institutions
and corruption - thus helping stymie terrorists' ability

to exploit these conditions for recruiting and other
purposes.

Finally, the United States welcomes the Security
Council's draft presidential statement on terrorism,
which is to be issued today. The unanimous support for
this statement is a testament to the collective will of
the Council to address the threat posed by terrorists to
international peace and security.

We also welcome the Council's reaffirmation of
the importance of countering radicalization and violent
extremism, and we strongly support United Nations
efforts to better protect young people from
manipulation by violent extremists. The use of suicide
bombings by terrorists is a particularly barbarous act
that indiscriminately targets and often victimizes the
most vulnerable of our citizens, including women,
children and the elderly. We strongly condemn the use
of suicide bombings and hostage-taking as acts of
terrorism that cannot be justified or excused under any
circumstances.

Once again, the United States thanks the Croatian
delegation for holding this debate, and we look forward
to hearing the views of others.

