Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation also would like to welcome the Deputy
Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic. I would like to
thank him for the views and considerations he has
conveyed to the Security Council about the most recent
events in Kosovo.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to extend our support to the work being done by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to try to find and bring to justice the
perpetrators of the attack of 13 August against a group
of young Serbs near the village of Gorazdevac. We
trust their efforts will be successful.

We strongly condemn that crime, which took the
life of one young person and wounded four others. In
addition, it was an attack on the very future of Kosovo
and against the very principle of building a multi-
ethnic society in which there is respect for the rule of
law. I convey my condolences and those of my
Government to the bereaved families who are suffering
from these abhorrent crimes. My delegation regards
those events as part of a series of incidents that
includes the attack also carried out on 13 August
against a Kosovar Albanian woman, as well as later
incidents that clearly signal a trend that must be
stopped.

My delegation would also like to condemn the
killing of Major Satish Menon, a civilian police
member of UNMIK, on 3 August. We wish to convey
our deepest condolences to his family and to the
Government of India.

The fabric of Kosovar society is still very fragile
and susceptible to provocation and a chain of reprisals
and counter-reprisals. We believe that the international
community must pay special attention and exert the
necessary influence on all spheres of authority
involved so that the political leaders of both Serbia and
Montenegro and the province of Kosovo make a
serious and resolute effort to contribute to the
establishment of an understanding that would send a
very clear message to the inhabitants of Kosovo that
they must reject all forms of violence, in particular
ethnic violence. The rejection of violence must then
lead to building a truly multi-ethnic society in which
everyone can live together.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Kosovo, Mr. Harri Holkeri, described as a
tragedy for Kosovo the fact that violence is still
claiming innocent lives four years after the end of the
conflict. He also stated that the fact that violence is
continuing is serving to strengthen his resolve to
establish the rule of law in Kosovo to benefit all of
Kosovo's inhabitants. We are pleased that that is the
intention of the Special Representative, who has just
gone to Kosovo to take up his duties. Mexico supports
the work he is doing. We also agree with his
assessment that establishing the rule of law also
includes combating organized crime and terrorist and
extremist activities, strengthening democratic and
multi-ethnic institutions, promoting dialogue and inter-
communal integration and fostering economic
development, education and culture. Those activities
should continue to be priorities carried out and
promoted by the Mission. My delegation also believes
that that work should be carried out in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999) and the Constitutional
Framework.

However, we would like to emphasize that the
primary responsibility for breathing life into the
process of normalizing Kosovo rests with Kosovars
themselves, both the Albanian majority and the
minorities. Their political representatives and
community leaders should actively promote the hopes
of the people of Kosovo for a multi-ethnic society. The
ongoing political activism of local leaders is required
to establish the rule of law and to combat extremism
and violence. Those leaders must also be firmly
committed to strengthening democratic and multi-
ethnic institutions, reconciliation and inter-communal
dialogue, and the effort for the return of refugees and
displaced persons under conditions that provide real
security.

We believe that part of the return effort includes
the Kosovo Assembly's adoption of a resolution on the
subject of refugees, above all the amendment
specifically including those who left Kosovo after the
conflict. That sends a positive signal that we hope will
be more than a symbolic gesture. Rather, we hope that
it will truly help to create the political and legal
commitment conducive to the ultimate establishment of
a positive and enabling atmosphere for the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their communities.

The efforts being made to achieve disarmament
are also important, as is the need to take advantage of
the amnesty recently announced by UNMIK and for
people to hand over any firearms in their possession
before 30 September. It is clear that the proliferation of
weapons fosters violence, organized crime and
terrorism.

As I indicated earlier, I would like to conclude
my statement by once again emphasizing the
importance of cooperation between Belgrade and
Pristina so that the process of building a multi-ethnic
society can bear fruit. Before the question of Kosovo's
status is resolved it is necessary not only to achieve
certain standards, the rule of law and the establishment
of the institutions necessary for genuinely
representative political life; there must also be
determined dialogue and close communication between
Belgrade and Pristina conducive to establishing the
necessary environment and conditions for reaching the
understandings necessary to knit together the fabric of
Kosovar society and to finally resolve the issue of
status.

In this connection, we are concerned over the
recent adoption by the Serbian Government of a
document on Kosovo, which, in our view, does not help
to establish a conducive atmosphere for the beginning
of dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina.

We wish to make a very strong appeal to the
provisional authorities in the province of Kosovo to
refrain from issuing unilateral pronouncements that
only exacerbate the atmosphere of confrontation and
misunderstanding.

