Mr. Takasu (Japan): I too would like to extend a
warm welcome to you, Madam President, and to thank
you for personally presiding over this important
debate. It is a great pleasure to discuss the issue of
children and armed conflict under your presidency. I
would like to pay special tribute to the Government of
Mexico and its Mission here for very ably chairing the
Security Council's Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict, as well as to Canada for chairing the
Group of Friends of children and armed conflict at the
United Nations. I would also like to express my
gratitude to Ms. Coomaraswamy, Ms. Johnson and
Mr. Khare for their briefings. Most of all, Ms. Manju
Gurung has inspired us all with her courage and her
strong faith in a better future.

The United Nations architecture on children and
armed conflict - including the monitoring and
reporting mechanism, action plans and the Working
Group - have been in place for almost five years now.
During those years, there has been steady progress in
reducing the number of child soldiers in the world.
Some parties to conflict have been de-listed from the
annexes to the Secretary-General's reports, such as
Burundi in the most recent report (S/2010/181). Parties
in the Sudan, Nepal and the Philippines recently signed
action plans. In another welcome move, six Central
African countries adopted the N'Djamena Declaration
last week and committed themselves to taking
measures to protect children according to global
standards.

Meanwhile, however, some new conflict parties
have been listed. The latest report of the Secretary-
General contains a list of 55 conflict parties in 13
countries. Clearly, there still remains a major challenge
in eliminating the scourge of inhuman treatment of
children trapped in armed conflict.

Today I would like to address three issues. The
first is accountability for persistent perpetrators. Japan
is particularly concerned about 16 parties which have
been listed for the past five years. In order to ensure
accountability for those persistent perpetrators, the
Security Council agreed in resolution 1539 (2004) to
consider the possibility of imposing targeted measures
against those groups. But the practice is not necessarily
consistent or even.
To hold persistent perpetrators accountable, the
Security Council should include in its resolutions on
the sanctions committees provisions in respect of
conflict parties who commit serious violations against
children. The Working Group should exchange
information and coordinate closely with the work of
the sanctions committees. The informal briefing given
the other day by Ms. Coomaraswamy to the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was useful, as would be others she could
make in the future. We very much encourage other
sanctions committees to invite her and to consider
similar briefings.

The second issue is rape and other sexual
violence. We welcome the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1882 (2009), the report of the Secretary-
General this year has listed for the first time the parties
responsible for rape and other sexual violence. The
report's indication of a relatively low incidence of
sexual violence against children does not reflect the
reality on the ground or the practice of parties. We
believe that it reflects the difficulty of collecting and
verifying information on sexual violence in conflict
situations. Timely and reliable data are indispensable
for appropriate action. Japan is particularly grateful to
the efforts of UNICEF and peacekeeping operations
personnel on the ground in collecting information and
data on sexual violence. We encourage
Ms. Coomaraswamy to coordinate closely with the
Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict
in the monitoring and reporting of sexual violence
against children.

Third is the issue of attacks against education.
Japan believes that education is the most essential
means of promoting human potential. Achieving
universal primary education is one of the fundamental
pillars of the Millennium Development Goals.
Therefore, we have to express strong condemnation of
the widespread attacks against schools committed by
several armed groups and forces, as reported in the
Secretary-General's report. A new UNESCO report,
"Education under Attack 2010", indicates that the
number of attacks on schools, students and teachers is
growing in conflict situations, and that these attacks on
education appear to be far more severe and systematic
than previously thought. The targeting of girl students
in specific settings is a particular concern.
We call upon all conflict parties to stop and
prevent attacks against schools and other educational
facilities, and against teachers and pupils, including, in
particular, girls, and to fully respect international
humanitarian law. It is our hope that the next report of
the Secretary-General will include full information and
analysis on these attacks, which have a severe long-
term impact on children and sound national
development.

In conflict situations, children are the most
vulnerable. Japan is a strong advocate of the concept of
human security. I am pleased that Japan and Mexico, as
co-chairs of the Friends of Human Security - which is
growing - are jointly promoting the mainstreaming of
this concept in the work of the United Nations. This
human-centred, multisectoral approach, which focuses
not only on protection but on empowerment at the
individual and community levels, is particularly
relevant when we consider children and armed conflict.

Japan has been providing support, through the
United Nations Trust Fund for Human Security, for
projects that address the issue of children and armed
conflict in a comprehensive and multisectoral manner,
in many countries including Timor-Leste, Nepal, the
Philippines, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Uganda. Japan remains committed to strengthening the
protection and empowerment of children affected on
the ground.

