Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): My
delegation fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Czech Republic
on behalf of the European Union (EU). We would like
to make a few observations based on our two years of
experience on the Security Council.

We listened with great interest to the statement
made by Mr. Holmes. He gave us a briefing that very
clearly illustrates that there is still much progress to be
made in the area of the protection of civilians.

International humanitarian law is not observed in
the course of hostilities in numerous conflicts. The
current situation in Gaza is a strikingly tragic
illustration of that. Civilians are forgotten when Hamas
utilizes residential buildings, schools and hospitals to
fire from and uses the civilians around them as human
shields. Civilians are equally forgotten, however, when
the Israeli army places its military goals above strict
adherence to international humanitarian law. The
civilian population is thereby twice victimized. In that
regard, we call for the immediate implementation of
resolution 1860 (2008).

The horrors of numerous wars prompted the
international community to develop humanitarian law
as we know it today, including with regard to the
protection of civilians in conflict situations. Likewise,
the mass atrocities committed against civilian
populations, even in non-conflict situations, have led to
the emergence of the idea of the responsibility to
protect. Belgium cherishes that concept, which was
adopted by the General Assembly in 2005, for it
emphasizes the duty of each State to protect its
population against the clearly identified ultimate
crimes of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

As the body responsible for maintaining
international peace and security, the Security Council
has adopted civilian protection as an objective, as

established by humanitarian law. The Council must
also now integrate fully the notion of the responsibility
to protect into its work. It already does so in a number
of ways: by instituting good offices missions, fighting
impunity, combating the use of child soldiers and
through the Peacebuilding Commission. The Council
did so recently on 22 December in resolution 1857
(2008), which revised the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The Council could have done
so even more resolutely and with greater conviction,
given the extreme gravity of the crimes it seeks to
prevent and that such crimes are firmly identified in
international penal law. My country will continue to
advocate to that end and to encourage our Organization
to establish the early warning instruments and rapid
response mechanisms vital to avoiding more mass
atrocities.

Belgium welcomes today's scheduled adoption of
a presidential statement complemented by an update of
the aide-memoire on the protection of civilians. This
document remains a significant reference point for the
Council's daily work. In this context, we also wish to
welcome the eminent establishment of a group of
experts which, on a relatively informal basis, will
discuss aspects related to protection of civilians in each
mandate up for renewal by the Council. This will
contribute to creating a more systematic approach to
the aspects related to the protection of civilians.

Finally, we believe that combating impunity is a
vital factor of the protection of civilians. The Council
must also make a contribution thereto through its
different instruments, such as its sanctions committees.
The Security Council and its sanctions regimes must do
a better job of shouldering their responsibilities by
punishing such phenomena as sexual violence or the
recruitment of and serious violence done to children.

