President Johnson-Sirleaf (Liberia): It is a great
honour and privilege for me to address this body. My
presence here is in recognition of the critical role
played by the United Nations in restoring Liberia to its
rightful place in the comity of peaceful nations. Allow
me therefore to seize this opportunity to pay a solemn
tribute and to express our deepest gratitude to the
United Nations; to this body, the Security Council; and
to the families of all the peacekeepers who have made
important sacrifices on behalf of my country.

In providing support through its resolutions and
through the statements made by the various Presidents
of the Security Council during our crisis, and in
defining the mandate of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL), the Security Council has earned
itself a laudable place in the history of Liberia. We
shall remain ever grateful for that manifestation of
support for and identification with a founding Member
of the United Nations at its time of greatest need.
The activities of the United Nations in Liberia
over the years have endeared this great Organization
that promotes international peace and security to our
people.

It is for these reasons that we also seize this
opportunity to thank the United Nations and the
Secretary-General, as well as his Special
Representative to Liberia, and all who work under the
umbrella of the United Nations and its agencies, for
helping to stabilize the situation in Liberia and for
giving our people renewed hope for the future.

I also want to express our deepest appreciation
for the concerted efforts of the international
community, beginning with our neighbours in the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) subregion, the African Union, our partners
in the European Union and the European Commission,
as well as our traditional friends, such as the United
States, together with other countries that are
contributing troops and police for the smooth operation
of UNMIL.

My inauguration on 16 January as the
democratically elected President of Liberia opened up
many possibilities, and I believe that this portends a
brighter chapter in our country's history.

However, we also realize that there are
formidable challenges ahead as we set about
consolidating our hard-won peace. But with the
assurances of the United Nations and of other partners,
we are determined to complete the reintegration of our
war-affected population, namely the refugees, the
internally displaced and ex-combatants, and quickly
begin to address the most basic needs of our people.

In order to meet these challenges, we have
elaborated a phased plan of action that defines our
immediate priorities for the first 150 days of my
administration, as a prelude to a national strategy that
will take us forward over the medium term.

Our strategy for peacebuilding is constructed on
four pillars, focusing on security, the rule of law and
governance, economic revitalization and basic services,
and infrastructure. To spearhead and coordinate this
effort, I have established a Liberia Reconstruction and
Development Committee, which I will lead personally.
Our major partners, including the United Nations, are
fully involved in the workings of this Committee.

It is imperative that we provide tangible
assurances to the people of Liberia that democracy will
bring change for the better. They must see early
improvements in health and education and economic
opportunity, starting with jobs. I will need the support
of the United Nations and the international community
to make the changes necessary to achieve these
important national goals. On our part, we commit to
continue collaboration with our international partners
in the implementation of the Governance and
Economic Management Assistance Programme. At the
same time, I intend to ensure the implementation of a
capacity-building programme that would enhance
Liberian ownership of the programme, as well as to
transfer critical skills to Liberians, to strengthen
national capacity on a long-term basis.

At the moment, we are putting in place
mechanisms that will enhance transparency in
governance, consistent with the requirements for the
lifting of timber and diamond sanctions. As a first
measure, I have rendered null and void forestry
concessions, as recommended by the Forestry
Concessions Review Committee. My Government is
meeting most of the requirements for implementing the
Kimberley Process, and I hope that this will lead to an
early lifting of the ban on diamond exports. New
measures have been enacted to enhance national
revenue flows, so that we can depend more on
ourselves in the process of national reconstruction and
development. My Government has also extended the
life of the Governance Reform Commission and
expanded its mandate to, among other things,
spearhead the formulation of a vigorous anti-corruption
action plan, as well as to lead in the implementation of
a code of conduct governing the behaviour of officials
of the three branches of Government. I have already
mandated that all ministers make a public declaration
of personal assets.

I am aware that Liberia, as a nation, must
confront the legacy of the past to enable us to go
forward in the future. The conflict touched virtually
every family and every individual in our land. We are
determined to address issues from our painful past,
including the question of impunity, as well as the
imperatives of national reconciliation, so that the
country can move ahead. For this reason, we have
established a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, as
mandated by the Accra Peace Accord. We have also
reconstituted our Supreme Court to start the long-
needed reform of the judiciary branch of Government.

An issue of major concern to our people and the
nations of the subregion has to do with a case of former
President Charles Taylor, who is presently in exile in
Nigeria. I have asked the President of Nigeria to
consult with colleagues in the subregion and in the
international community on the resolution of this issue,
in conformity with the requirements of the United
Nations and the international community. I have also
asked that, as we bring this matter to closure, we
ensure that in any proceedings there is an environment
that protects the fundamental human rights of all,
including the accused. In rising to all these challenges,
our nation will continue to count on the unstinting
assistance of the United Nations and the international
community.

Liberia is still a fragile State. Our peace remains
fragile. Our armed forces are being reconstituted, and
the restructuring of our police and security forces is not
yet complete. In view of these realities, I urge the
Council to maintain its support for the United Nations
Mission in Liberia. We must consolidate the gains
achieved during the transition of the last two years so
that the enormous investment made by the international
community in the peace and stability of Liberia and the
region is not put at risk. We must be assured that the
United Nations will ensure the safety of our people and
the stability of the State if the African leadership
decides to bring the Taylor matter to successful
closure.

I also seek the urgent contributions of donor
countries and organizations for our recovery and
development agenda, including debt relief. Many
countries have already contributed significantly,
especially in the areas of humanitarian aid and security
sector reform. If we are to achieve the sustainable
development of Liberia that will guarantee continued
peace and stability, it is important that we accelerate
the transition from humanitarian to development
assistance, so that we can tackle the fundamental
problems of reducing poverty and making significant
progress in the achievement of the other Millennium
Development Goals.

Let me conclude by once again thanking the
Security Council for its tremendous support to the
Liberian people. I am convinced that, working closely
together, we shall help Liberia turn its back on a tragic
era and put our country firmly on the path to recovery,
to development and to enduring peace.

