Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Secretary-General for his statement. I also
think the High Representative for her detailed briefing.

When I make a statement on behalf of Spain, I
begin with a formula stating that I fully align myself
with the statement made by the representative of the
European Union, which usually follows those made by
members of the Security Council. On this occasion,
it preceded mine and I would like to say that I align
myself especially closely and enthusiastically with the
statement the High Representative has just made on
this, her first visit to the Security Council of the United
Nations.

The European Union, as the High Representative
said, is a community of values and principles - values
and principles that were reflected some 70 years ago in
the Charter of the United Nations and which we fully
share. Those values and principles are shared by a great
many regional organizations. I would like to say that
the principal value shared by the European Union and
all such regional organizations - and, of course, by
the United Nations - is precisely that of preserving
international peace and security.

The relationship between the United Nations and
European Union is marked by two major milestones:
the first was the Joint Declaration of 2003 and, more
recently, the adoption of presidential statement
S/PRST/2014/4 in 2014. The relationship between
the two organizations could not be more fruitful and
positive. There are many very clear examples of far-
reaching and effective cooperation, but I will limit
myself to two: first, the civil and military missions of
the European Union, and especially those in situations
where joint operations have been carried out; and
secondly, all of those areas in which the European
Union provides training and equipment assistance.
That is all to say that the European Union, the Security
Council and the United Nations constantly strive
to work together, and I would like to underscore the
effective work of the delegation of the European Union
and its team to that end.

Turning to the future, I would focus on two
challenges facing the European Union and United
Nations in theirjoint work. First of all, I believe there is
a need to further fine-tune rapid response mechanisms.
Secondly - and this is absolutely fundamental - is
tripartite cooperation among the European Union, the
United Nations and our African friends in the African
Union.

The High Representative addressed in great
detail the many crises affecting our world today. I
will refer to only a few of them very briefly because
she said everything there is to be said, and I fully
subscribe to what she said. I would simply say that I
agree that the Middle East peace process must succeed
and we therefore support the appointment of a high
representative of the European Union in that regard.
With regard to Iran, I fully agree with her remarks;
we must ensure that Iran can access nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes and that its neighbours in the region
can live fully in peace. Spain chairs the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), and in
my capacity as its Chairman I assure the Council that I
value extremely highly the personal commitment of the
High Representative to the Iranian dossier.

With regard to Libya, as the High Representative
said, this issue constitutes a clear threat to peace and
security in the Mediterranean and the European Union.
Our ultimate aim is for the Libyan people to be able
to live in peace. The principal victims of any crisis in
Libya are our friends the Libyan people. We therefore
welcome the fact that, as the High Representative said,
the European Union will spare no effort in rebuilding
Libya and supporting the political process there, where
we commend the efforts of Bernardino Leon, who has
our unequivocal support.

With regard to Ukraine, above all we must prevent
further suffering for the Ukrainian population. I believe
that there are clear before-and-after scenarios for the
Minsk agreements of 12 February. Subsequently, there
has also been before-and-after scenarios for the Security
Council's endorsement of the Minsk agreements, which
allows the Council to monitor the Ukrainian crisis
closely. Clearly, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe plays an important role with the
support of the European Union.

Iwouldliketo dwell furtheronAfricabecauseAfrica
and Europe really do share common challenges, such
as the fights against terrorism, poverty, radicalization
and piracy. Several of these are shared challenges for
Africans and Europeans alike because Europe cannot
accept an Africa that is in crisis. That is why we always
support, and Spain will always support, development,
peace and prosperity on the African continent. We
support the idea that Africans should always be the
masters of their own destiny when it comes to resolving
crises through the African Union and international
and subregional organizations on the continent. We
therefore welcome in particular the European Union
support for the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, the establishment of the
African Standby Force and the African early-warning
and conflict-prevention mechanisms. The recent joint
meeting of the Ambassadors of the European Union
Political and Security Committee and of the African
Union Peace and Security Council was an excellent
example in this regard.

In conclusion, as perfectly reflected in the
statement of the High Representative, the European
Union, through its Common Security and Defence
Policy, is carrying out tireless work for international
peace and security in the same areas as the Council is.
Our joint cooperation must continue to make progress
and be strengthened on the basis of the fundamental
values that we share: respect for the law, human rights
and egalitarian and comprehensive development for
all persons and nations. Spain, as a member of the
European Union, will defend those principles above all.

