Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to start by
thanking Special Representative Jan Kubis for his
briefing and for his excellent work and able leadership,
and also to welcome Ambassador Tanin to the Council
and thank him for his important contribution. Both
statements offer a clear and comprehensive picture of
the Afghanistan of today, the achievements attained
and the challenges still facing the country.

I will limit myself to some points that Portugal
deems ofparticular importance and, in doing so, I would
like to say that Portugal shares the views reflected in
the statement to be delivered by the observer of the
European Union later on.
Portugal believes that the transition process plays a
central role in the present and future of Afghanistan's
security and stability. By progressively assuming full
responsibility for security, the Afghan authorities are
overcoming significant challenges and cementing
their role within the territory and vis-a-vis the Afghan
population. National leadership and ownership in the
areas of security, governance and development will
allow Afghanistan to assume the role that history and
geography have framed for it and to which the Afghan
people aspire for their country - a land bridge between
East and West, Central and South Asia, in peace with
its neighbours and a factor for peace, security and
prosperity for the entire region.

The international community has a clear stake in the
success of the path the Afghan people have chosen for
their country. International commitment, materialized
in the International Security Assistance Force, the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), and the activity of a significant number of
United Nations agencies, funds, programmes, as well
as through bilateral cooperation and non-governmental
organizations, provides the tangible evidence that
Afghanistan will not be left on its own when the
military presence redeploys and assumes a different
configuration and role. That activity must be free
and unfettered, and the security of its agents must be
guaranteed and actively safeguarded.

The implementation of the multiple frameworks
currently under discussion or already in place will
require essential conditions, which must be guaranteed
in the first place by the Afghan authorities. To that
end, the United Nations and bilateral and multilateral
international stakeholders, such as the European
Union, NATO and others, must strive to do their best
in coordinating their action in order to maximize the
already scarce resources.

The recent developments in efforts at the regional
level, such as the visit of the High Peace Council to
Pakistan, are also noteworthy as a clear example of
Afghan-led reconciliation efforts engaging also the
immediate neighbours. Portugal commends such
efforts and expresses its best wishes for success. As the
Secretary-General notes in his report,

"Long-term consistent engagement is vital to
building a shared understanding and, ultimately,
mutual solutions" (S/2012/907, para 56).

Finally, I turn to the issue of human rights and the
humanitarian situation in Afghanistan, areas in which
significant steps have been taken, but where a great
deal must still be accomplished. I begin by echoing
the statement issued by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights condemning in the
strongest terms the latest murder of a leading women's
rights activist in Afghanistan. Najia Seddiqi, the head of
the women's affairs department in Laghman province,
was shot dead on 10 December. She is the second
female head ofthat department in Laghman to be killed
in just four months. We urge the Afghan authorities to
leave no stone unturned in finding her killers, in order
to show that people responsible for crimes, in particular
those that specifically target women in Afghanistan,
will be brought to justice.

That tragic loss is another sign that the enemies of
the constitutional order embraced by the Afghan people
see women's rights and women's political participation
as a clear threat to their political aims, and target those
who are brave enough to publicly promote and protect
human rights. Their struggle is our struggle. There can
be no compromise in matters of principles and shared
values.

I conclude by reiterating my country's support for
the work of UNAMA and the Special Representative.
Over the past two years, Portugal has witnessed the
beginning and consolidation of the transition and the
holding of summits, such as those in Istanbul, Bonn,
Chicago and Tokyo, that have created or brought new
energy to mutually reinforcing forms of international
cooperation with Afghanistan. We are pleased to also
count the 2010 Lisbon Summit among those summits
where critical decisions for Afghanistan's future were
taken. It is our sincere belief and hope that we will be
able to see Afghanistan's continued stabilization and
growth according to the will of the Afghans themselves
and to the steadfast support of Afghanistan's numerous
friends and allies.

