Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): My delegation welcomes the
opportunity to participate in this open debate on this
important subject and joins the consensus in thanking you,
Sir, for your initiative in convening it. We also express
our appreciation for the work of the Secretary-General's
Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict,
my brother Ambassador Olara Otunnu. His statement this
morning was indeed very inspiring to all of us and his
recommendations, in our view, warrant the Council's
special attention.

The issue of children in armed conflict is of
particular interest to Africa, where there has been an
increase in the number of horror stories about the
atrocities to which children are subject or in which they
participate. It is estimated, as has been said by others, that
some 300,000 children under the age of 18 are currently
involved in armed conflict situations around the world.
For this reason, we shall remain supportive of the
continued efforts of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative to address the plight of such children and

 

we look forward to seeing a positive outcome to his work
in all parts of the world, and particularly in Africa.

I recall that when the Security Council was addressing
the post-conflict peace-building strategy for Liberia in 1997,
it expressed concern about the involvement of children in
armed conflict situations. It further pointed out the
importance of integrating such children into society. For
this reason, we are happy to note that Ambassador
Otunnu's efforts in post-conflict Sierra Leone appear to be
proceeding along similar lines.

We are aware of the existence of armed labour in
parts of the Central African region and are concerned about
the possibility that children could be involved in these
activities. There is the added dimension of the easy
availability of illegal small arms, and both of these
phenomena have the potential to destabilize the whole
region.

Children are our future and we shall continue to
support the work of the Secretary-General and his Special
Representative so that we do not jeopardize the chances of
our most precious investment. It is especially disheartening
to hear about the ongoing exploitation of children, whether
by recruitment into armed groups, sexual abuse, abduction
or forced displacement. In addition to the high risks of
injury, permanent disability or death to which this unique
category of children is exposed, child soldiers are often the
victims of psychological scars if they survive armed
conflicts. My delegation welcomes the existing cooperation
between the office of the Special Representative and the
specialized agencies and programmes of the United Nations
system and hopes that this cooperation will be strengthened
for the sake of the children.

Finally, my delegation calls upon all parties concerned
to strictly comply with their obligations under international
law, in particular their obligations under the Geneva
Conventions of 1949, the Additional Protocols of 1977 and
the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
of 1989. We hope that the existing laws governing the
participation of children in armed conflict will be reviewed
with a view to providing essential protection to this
vulnerable sector of our society.

