Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): | thank you, Mr. President, for gathering us here today. I also thank all those who made this meeting possible. I would also like to thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his briefing, and Ms. Carabali Rodallega for her inspiring account of her efforts to defend the human rights of the Afro-Colombian community in Cauca. I welcome the participation at this meeting of Foreign Minister Blum de Barberi. We recognize the response of the Colombian authorities to the coronavirus disease pandemic and are encouraged by the assurances of the parties that they will continue to implement the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace despite the current situation. We remain very concerned by the persistent high level of violence against human rights defenders, social leaders and former combatants, including from the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities, as Ms. Carabali Rodallega described. By providing support to local non-governmental organizations, Belgium is contributing to the protection of human rights defenders, including in Cauca, who are calling for collective protection measures rather than a purely individual approach. Additional tangible actions are needed to end that violence, and we urge the National Commission on Security Guarantees to convene on a regular basis in order to dismantle illegal armed groups, in partnership with civil society. We await with interest the roll-out of the comprehensive programme for women social leaders and human rights defenders, which is particularly urgent in the context of a marked increase in sexual and gender-based violence resulting from the lockdown measures. We welcome the efforts to reintegrate former combatants - for instance, through the approval of productive projects and their coordination with territorial development programmes. Comprehensive rural reform, in particular with regard to access to land, remains a major challenge for the sustainability of the reintegration process. The precarious situation of children in the conflict is another source of concern for Belgium, which is currently facilitating the Council's findings on that topic in response to the Secretary-General's report (S/2020/603). The recruitment and use of children by illegal armed groups and criminal organizations remain a serious concern. We encourage the National Reintegration Council to reactivate its working group on children. In addition, we are alarmed at recent reports of sexual abuse of minors by members of the Colombian armed forces. We expect in-depth investigations into those cases. Belgium is paying particular attention to the transitional justice process in Colombia and welcomes the progress achieved by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, the Truth Commission and the Unit for the Search for Persons deemed Missing in the Context of and Due to the Armed Conflict. We underscore how important it is for those institutions to be able to work independently. We are in favour of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia playing a part in monitoring adherence to the sanctions imposed by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace. In conclusion, the Council has endorsed the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We hope that his call will also be heeded in Colombia. We urge the armed groups there to refrain from engaging in any form of violence and encourage all the parties to take this opportunity to move towards peace.
