Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I, on behalf of my
delegation, join others in warmly welcoming you here
today, Sir, at the beginning of Norway's presidency of
the Security Council. I would like to assure the
Norwegian presidency of Ireland's full support over the
coming month. I would like also to take this
opportunity to thank Ambassador Aguilar Zinser of
Mexico for his excellent presidency during the month
of February.

Ireland would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, High Representative Petritsch and Special
Representative Klein for their comprehensive
statements this morning. Ireland fully endorses the
statement which High Representative Solana delivered
on behalf of the European Union. I will therefore make
only some brief comments in my national capacity.

My delegation would first like to warmly
commend High Representative Petritsch for his
outstanding contribution to the implementation of the
peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish
him an equally successful final few months as High
Representative. We thank him also for the most recent
report of his activities regarding the implementation of
the peace Agreement.

Ireland welcomes the appointment of Lord
Ashdown as Mr. Petritsch's successor as High
Representative and we look forward to his further
designation as European Union (EU) special
representative in Bosnia. Lord Ashdown can count on
Ireland's full support as he prepares to take up his
mandate.

High Representative Solana has outlined in detail
the European Union's decision to ensure the follow-on
to the United Nations International Police Task Force
(IPTF) as of 1 January 2003, as agreed at the meeting
of the European Union's General Affairs Council on
18 February. Ireland welcomes the acceptance of the
European Union's decision by the Steering Board of
the Peace Implementation Council, on 28 February.
Ireland also welcomes the strong statement of support
that the Security Council intends to give to the
European Union's decision on ensuring the follow-on
Police Mission in the draft resolution that is due for
adoption later today.

The proposed European Union Police Mission, or
EUPM, will be the first mission mounted by the
European Union under the rubric of European security
and defence policy. Therefore, for those of us in the
European Union and beyond, this is an important
development, substantively and symbolically, and one
that my delegation greatly welcomes.

The EUPM. is designed to be an element in the
European Union's broader strategy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to cover the whole range of rule of law
questions as well as institution-building programmes.
The EUPM. will contribute to the overall goals of peace
implementation as outlined by High Representative
Petritsch.

We look forward to the cooperation of all the
relevant authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina as the
transition phase approaches, and we once again urge
those authorities to work with High Representative
Petritsch and with the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) to ensure the full
implementation of the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords and
the development, as we have heard emphasized this
morning, of viable State institutions.
It is also right today to warmly thank Special
Representative Klein and all those in UNMIBH,
including in particular the International Police Task
Force (IPTF), for their achievements to date in
restructuring and reforming the law enforcement
agencies in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Ireland welcomes the appointment by High
Representative Petritsch of the members of the
Electoral Commission as part of preparations for the
first general elections, to be held in October 2002. It is
essential that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina be
able to exercise their democratic rights without
hindrance, and we fully support the work of the
Electoral Commission.

We also welcome the current discussions between
political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina to come to
an agreement regarding the Constituent Peoples
Decision. It is clear that agreement on the
implementation of this and other decisions of the
Constitutional Court must come from the political
leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina itself, so as to
underline the readiness of the country to be admitted to
the Council of Europe. It is important that they address
this task urgently.

Failure to reach rapid agreement on that issue will
have serious consequences for the holding of elections
in October, as well as for Bosnia's integration into
European structures. We hope that satisfactory
resolution of this issue, as well as enhanced
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina's
neighbours, can set the country on a road that leads
towards integration with the European Union. This
itself is in the hands of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Ireland fully supports recent decisions on the
streamlining of the international presence in Bosnia
and Herzegovina based on the task-force model that
has been introduced by High Representative Petritsch,
and especially the extensive consultation process that
has been undertaken with all peace implementation
agencies as well as with the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We look forward to the early
implementation of the process, and welcome the
strengthened effectiveness of the international presence
that will be achieved under that model.

In conclusion, we have many challenges ahead
that will require vigour and determination by the
people of Bosnia: the forthcoming elections,
strengthening civil society, addressing the issue of
reconciliation, developing a strategy for domestic war
crimes prosecutions, the full implementation of the
decisions of the human rights chamber, and respect for
social, economic and gender rights. We have come a
long way on many of these issues, for which my
delegation would like to warmly thank Mr. Petritsch
and Mr. Klein. We greatly appreciate what they have
done in the recent period.

