Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
for your leadership in conducting the Council's work
during your presidency and to congratulate the entire
team that supported you in that endeavour.

We welcome the United Kingdom's initiative in
organizing the visit by Council members to Europe and
Africa during its presidency. In spite of its brevity, that
important mission deserves to be repeated in the future
because, not only did it make it possible to really get a
feeling for the realities on the ground, but it also, above
all, fostered initiatives aimed at finding solutions to
problems that have arisen. That is the Security Council's
mission first and foremost, and the conclusions need
to be drawn up and debated within the Council first,
before being the subject ofa press statement.

Our delegation also notes that the time devoted to
each part of the mission was relatively short, which
did not make it possible for the mission to properly
manage the various meetings. That was the case with
the meetings with the International Criminal Court and
the visits to the missions in Somalia and South Sudan,
and it also was the case with the visit of international
authorities to South Sudan. In future, we suggest that
the Council set aside enough time to organize that sort
of mission.

My delegation appreciates the debate that you,
Mr. President, organized on the prevention of conflicts
(see S/PV.7247), which made it possible to enrich the
discussion on the underlying causes of conflicts, the
warning signs and especially the Security Council's
role in prevention. We noted that all delegations
underscored the Council's lack of rigour and efficiency
in implementing prevention mechanisms.

We also welcome the debate that you, Sir, organized
on the protection of civilians (see S/PV.7244), as well as
the draft resolution that is currently being drawn up on
that topic.

With regard to the situation in Libya, Chad
expresses its concern at the complex situation that our
neighbouring country finds itself in. We call on the
international community to help Libya restore peace
and security. In that connection, we welcome the
Security Council's vote, during your presidency and
through your initiative, on resolution 2174 (2014), on the
situation in Libya. We also commend the initiative of
neighbouring countries, which have met several times
to discuss the situation in Libya in order to contribute
to finding a solution to the crisis in that country.

By the same token, we welcome the Council's
adoption of resolution 2173 (2014), which extends the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur so that it can continue to pursue
its mission of protecting civilians and providing
humanitarian assistance in that region. We think that
a military solution is not viable for that country and
that dialogue should be fostered in the framework of the
Doha agreement and regional initiatives.

With regard to the Central African Republic, we
would like to see the Council accelerate the process
of deploying the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which is planned for 15 September. We
hope that the United States, which will take over the
presidency of the Council from the United Kingdom
next month, will focus attention on the issue ofrefugees.

Finally, Chad welcomes the adoption of the
presidential statement, during your presidency, on
the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel
(S/PRST/2014/17).

In conclusion, we would like to thank the President
of the Council for his insight and leadership in the
Council's work. We would like to also congratulate the
entire United Kingdom team that accompanied him
throughout his work. We take this opportunity to wish
the United States luck when it assumes the presidency
of the Council during the month of September and to
assure it of our full support.

