Mr. Gafoor (Singapore): It is a pleasure to see
the delegation of Malaysia, and to see you, Sir, in
particular, presiding over the Security Council. I thank
Malaysia for convening this open debate. I also endorse
the statement made earlier by the representative of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.
Singapore has no significant nuclear material or
facilities, but we take our international responsibilities
seriously. Singapore regards nuclear proliferation as a
very serious matter. We are concerned that the threat of
nuclear proliferation is being compounded by the threat
of terrorism and illicit activities by non-State actors. In
that regard, I wish to make three points.

First, all countries need to strengthen their
national legislation and internal processes to address
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
particularly to non-State actors. As a global
trans-shipment hub, Singapore is committed to working
with other countries to counter the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and combat illicit
trafficking. In Singapore, we have upgraded radiation
screening technology at our ports and tightened our
export-control regime. We regularly review and update
our export-controls list to ensure that our system
is in line with international practice. Our financial
institutions are regularly subjected to review to ensure
the proper implementation of the controls necessary
to prevent proliferation financing, as part of their
compliance obligations.

Secondly, we have to strengthen intraregional and
interregional cooperation to build capacity and prevent
any loopholes in the international counter-proliferation
framework. In that regard, Singapore participates
actively in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
Regional Forum meetings and other regional seminars
on export controls and non-proliferation. We also
continue to work with the European Union Chemical
Biological Radiological and Nuclear Risk Mitigation
Centres of Excellence Initiative in Southeast Asia.
Singapore also participates at the annual Asian export-
control seminars held in Japan, which is a good platform
for the sharing of experiences in counter-proliferation.

Thirdly, we need to support and strengthen
international efforts aimed at addressing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction. Singapore plays its part
in the Proliferation Security Initiative (PSI). We have
hosted two PSI exercises to date and look forward to
hosting a third exercise in September. We have adopted
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering
recommendations to combat proliferation financing.
Singapore also hosts the INTERPOL Global Complex
for Innovation, which fosters information-sharing
among countries to counter transnational threats and
networks that exploit new technology.

As a responsible member of the United Nations,
Singapore has faithfully taken action to implement
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council
on non-proliferation. We contributed to the open
consultations on the review of resolution 1540 (2004)
in June, and will continue working with all United
Nations States Members to implement the resolution.

Let me conclude by saying that Singapore believes
that the international counter-proliferation regime
is only as strong as its weakest link. It is therefore
essential that we work collectively to create an effective
global framework to counter the threat of nuclear
proliferation. Singapore is fully committed to playing
its part by working closely with other countries at the
regional and global levels.

