The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.

This morning the Security Council is addressing
the use of chemical weapons for the first of two times
today. As we have done previously, the United States
expresses its unequivocal condemnation of the use of
chemical weapons, in Salisbury or anywhere else. We
stand firm in defence of the international norm against
the use of these horrific weapons, and we stand firm
with the British people.

It is easy to express outrage, of course. We do it
every day in this Chamber. What is difficult is finding
solutions. Today our British friends and colleagues
are providing us with a master class on how to stop
the spread of chemical weapons. They are creating
accountability for those who use chemical agents and
are providing vital support for the international norm
against the use of these deadly, illegal weapons. The
British Government is pursuing accountability for
this attack in the only way accountability can truly
be accomplished, that is, in accordance with the rule
of law.

British investigators have conducted a full and
fair investigation of what has been determined to be
the attempted killings of Sergei and Yulia Skripal and
Detective Nick Bailey. The investigators have linked
those crimes with the chemical agent that poisoned
Charlie Rowley and killed Dawn Sturgess. Prime
Minister May went into great detail about each step of
the investigation. Hundreds of detectives have analysed
thousands of hours of closed circuit television (CCTV)
footage and thousands of documents. Some things
we knew already. British investigators had already
concluded that Russia was responsible for the exposure
of hundreds of people to a deadly agent on the streets
of Salisbury. Now, thanks to the careful, methodical
work of the British authorities, no one should have any
doubts. It is actually amazing to see the clarity and
undeniability of the results.

The British Government has identified two Russian
nationals as responsible for the use of the Novichok
nerve agent on British soil and the attempted murder of
a British citizen and his daughter. Critically, the British
have also concluded that the two men are officers of
the Russian Military Intelligence Service. This was
not, as Prime Minister May said, a rogue operation.
It was a highly planned, purposely driven attack. The
British have the suspects on CCTV from their arrival
at Gatwick Airport, to their travel to the vicinity of the
Skripals' house on the day of the attack, and finally
their departure from Heathrow back to Moscow. Every
one of us in the Chamber and listening around the
world should be chilled to the bone by the findings of
this investigation. As for the subsequent poisoning of
Charlie Rowley and the death of Dawn Sturgess, Prime
Minister May said it well:

"Were these two suspects within our jurisdiction,
there would be a clear basis in law for their arrest
for murder."

That is how it is done. That is how individuals who
commit murder and their heinous crimes are exposed.
That is how nations that defy the international norms
that keep us all safe are held to account. That is how the
memories of those injured and killed, and the service of

the first responders who cared for them, are honoured.
It now falls to us to do our part.

Rather than accept responsibility for its actions,
the Russian Government has offered only denials and
counter-accusations, anything to deflect attention
and distract from its guilt. The Russian denials have
followed a familiar script. From Crimea to Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17 to Donbas to the killing of
Litvinenko, the list goes on and on. And the song is
always the same: Russia is somehow never behind these
incidents. But no one is buying it. The most recent
British action will ensure that Russia does not get away
with this brazen attack. In direct response to Russia's
use of chemical weapons in the Salisbury incident,
the United States has announced additional sanctions
against Russia. As we acted together with our NATO
allies and other partners, 153 Russian officials were
expelled around the world in response to the attack on
the Skripals on British soil.

While this incident was in Salisbury, who is to say it
could not have happened in Paris, Amsterdam or Addis
Ababa? We must now help our British friends find the
two Russian suspects they have identified and bring
them to face justice in the United Kingdom. Better yet,
why can the Russian Government not turn those two
murderers over to British authorities? We must fight
and win the broader battle against impunity for the use
of chemical weapons. This is a day for explanations
from Russia, and solidarity with our colleagues in the
United Kingdom.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the United Kingdom has
asked to make a further statement.

