The President: I will now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.

I would like to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan, Ms. Caroline Anstey and Ms. Rebeca
Grynspan for their informative briefings today.
Let me begin by expressing the United Kingdom's
disappointment that the Council was unable to agree
on a presidential statement on this critical issue. I
would like to directly address the concern of a few
Council colleagues that the issue of natural resources
and conflict falls outside the mandate of the Security
Council. That is clearly not true. As almost all
Council members have remarked today, the Council
has frequently had to deal with the ramifications of
poor governance of natural resources, and there are a
significant number of countries on the Council's agenda
where weak management and illegal exploitation of
natural resources have played a role in triggering,
prolonging or escalating a conflict.

Of course, a country endowed with natural
resources will not inevitably succumb to conflict. On
the contrary, an endowment of oil, gas or minerals
creates a genuine opportunity for growth and prosperity.
So the Council must use all of the tools in its toolbox
to support countries in taking advantage of such
opportunities. Effective sanctions regimes and panels
of experts can play an important role in curtailing the
illicit exploitation of natural resources. Where we have
mandated missions in resource-endowed countries,
the United Nations can provide high-level political
advice and support to national Governments on these
issues, help build the capacity of national institutions,
strengthen the rule of law and tackle corruption. In
order to do that effectively, missions must work in close
coordination with the United Nations country teams,
international financial institutions and regional and
international actors.

But United Nations support for national
Governments is only one part of the picture. National
leaders in resource-endowed countries must commit to
building strong, transparent and inclusive institutions
to ensure that their extractive industries do not fall
prey to corruption or become a source of conflict. The
private sector and civil society are crucial partners
in that endeavour. The private sector should ensure
that its operations respect human rights and take into
account the needs of local communities, including
through implementation of the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights and the United Nations
Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights.
And an active and vibrant civil society can shine a light
on corruption, and ensure that companies and national
Governments are held accountable for how they manage
extractive industries.

Yesterday, at the Group of Eight (G-8) Summit,
leaders recognized the potential of natural resources as
a key driver of strong, sustainable growth, if managed
responsibly. They agreed to take action to raise global
standards for extractives' transparency, and to make
progress towards common global reporting standards,
both for countries with significant domestic extractive
industries and for the homes of large multinational
corporations.

In recent years, a number of international initiatives
have helped to entrench an expectation of transparency,
and many of them were endorsed by the G-8 yesterday.
The Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative is
an excellent example of this, and I am proud that the
United Kingdom formally signed up to it this year.
Likewise, since its start 10 years ago, the Kimberley
Process Certification Scheme has made huge progress
in curtailing the flow of diamond revenues to rebel
groups. Conflict diamonds are now estimated to
represent a fraction of one percent of the international
trade in diamonds. In addition, the OECD's Due
Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains
of Minerals from Conflict-affected and High-Risk
Areas - of which the United Kingdom is a leading
advocate - helps to build transparent supply chains,
which in turn helps companies to respect human rights.

A number of countries on the Council's agenda
have adopted those initiatives, and we should make
sure that United Nations missions are equipped to
implement them. The United Kingdom is doing
its part. For example, we are providing support to
Sierra Leone and Afghanistan to help them develop
appropriate legislation for their mining sectors, build
their capacity to negotiate contracts with the private
sector and establish independent audit functions. We
will use our chairmanship of the Voluntary Principles
on Security and Human Rights in March 2014 to
improve transparency and accountability in their
implementation.

A natural resource endowment brings with it
enormous stakes. It can bring considerable risks,
especially in countries affected by conflict. The
Security Council should be prepared to act when those
risks threaten peace and security. But we should also
see natural resources as an opportunity for countries
emerging from conflict. Managed well, they can hold
the key to prosperity, growth and self-sufficiency. We
must do all we can to help countries achieve this.

I resume my function as President of the Security
Council.

I should like to thank Mr. Annan for his contribution
to, and his participation in, today's debate.
I wish to remind all speakers to limit their statements
to not more than four minutes in order to allow the
Council to carry out its work expeditiously. Delegations
with lengthy statements are kindly requested to circulate
their texts in writing and to deliver a condensed version
when speaking in the Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Denmark.

