Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): First of all, I would
like to welcome Mr. Zalmai Rassoul, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and to thank him for
his insightful statement. We are also grateful to Special
Representative Jan Kubis for his briefing, as well as
to the Secretary-General for his report on the situation
in Afghanistan and its implications for international
peace and security (S/2012/703).

Today's debate provides us with an excellent
opportunity to take stock ofrecent political and security
developments in Afghanistan, as well as of related
regional and international processes. The Government
of Afghanistan continues to make substantial progress
towards the stabilization and development of the
country. It is of paramount importance to maintain the
steady pace of progress attained so far, which requires
equal levels of continued commitment on the part of
both Afghanistan and its international partners.

Although the overall security situation in the
country remains precarious - with ongoing armed
clashes, assassinations and suicide attacks by insurgents,
which pose a serious threat to the overall peace and
stabilization effort in Afghanistan - the reporting
period marked a continued quantitative decrease in
security-related incidents. We take positive note of the
progress made in the process of transferring security
responsibilities to the Afghan National Security Forces
and in the stability that prevails in the areas under their
control.

The Council has called consistently on all parties
in Afghanistan to take measures to minimize civilian
casualties, which, along with causing human suffering,
also seriously undermine national and international
efforts towards peace and reconciliation. In that sense,
we welcome steps taken by the Government, including
the establishment of a civilian casualty mitigation
team in the Afghan National Army, to ensure timely
investigation and accurate incident tracking.

In the political realm, the continued efforts of the
High Peace Council to reinvigorate the activities aimed
at creating conditions conducive to a durable peace
process - in particular its practical initiatives to reach
out to a wider spectrum of Afghan society and its close
interaction with regional partners - are commendable.
The same assessment can be made of the implementation
of the Afghanistan Peace and Reintegration Programme.
The continued support of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan to both the Programme and the
High Peace Council is indispensable in taking forward
a broad and inclusive Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
peace process, which in turn constitutes the basis of
overall stabilization and durable peace in the country.

Afghanistan's stronger political dialogue and
cooperation with its immediate neighbours and other
regional counterparts on a wide range ofissues based on
common vision and mutual confidence are imperatives
for a peaceful and stable future of the country and
the region. We welcome the ongoing efforts and
achievements of Afghanistan and its regional partners
in that regard. We stress the particular importance of
the outcomes of the follow-up Heart of Asia Ministerial
Conference held in Kabul on 14 June.

As part of the Istanbul process, my country
participates in a number of confidence-building
measures and has assumed a co-leadership role in
implementing such measures in the fields of counter-
narcotics and regional infrastructure. We look forward
to fruitful discussions at the next senior officials
meeting scheduled for 24 September in New York.

As the transition period continues towards the
eventual withdrawal of international military forces
and the assumption of overall security responsibility by
the Afghan authorities by the end of2014, the scope and
gravity of the security and development tasks that the
Government Afghanistan has to deal with are growing,
and the need for the international community's
enhanced support to the Government of Afghanistan is
becoming even more vital.

Proceeding from that viewpoint, we consider the
Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan held on 8 July as
the major milestone event during the reported period,
complementing and further solidifying the mutual long-
term commitments of Afghanistan and the international
community undertaken at the Afghanistan Conference
in Bonn and the NATO Summit in Chicago. The fact
of the international community's pledge of significant
financial support in Tokyo attests to the confidence
placed in the Afghan Government's strong dedication
to building a sustainable, self-reliable and prosperous
Afghanistan.

Proceeding from the principle of the indivisibility
of security and of brotherly relations with Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan has for many years actively contributed
to international efforts in the country. We have
participated in the International Security Assistance
Force almost from its beginning and have steadily
increased our military contribution to it. We believe
that capacity-building for Afghan institutions must
remain at the heart of international assistance in order
to enable the Government of Afghanistan to exercise its
sovereign authority in all its functions. For that reason,
Azerbaijan has consistently expanded its contribution,
both financially and by providing capacity-building
assistance in non-military spheres in Afghanistan.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm my
Government's full support for Afghanistan's
sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity, and I reiterate
our determination to remain an active contributor to
collective efforts in Afghanistan.

