Mr. Duque Estrada Meyer (Brazil): I thank the
United States delegation for convening this debate.

The role of peacekeeping operations has evolved
dramatically over the years. High expectations, coupled
with greater resource constraints, have accentuated
the difficulties that missions face and have sometimes
created frustration regarding the ability of peacekeeping
operations to achieve their objectives.

Brazil continues to believe in the capacity of
United Nations peacekeeping operations to contribute
significantly to the successful resolution of conflicts.
However, changes are required in several aspects of
peacekeeping operations, including the manner in
which we deal with the performance of the mission
as a whole. We therefore welcome the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, launched by the Secretary-
General, to renew the commitment of Member States to
peacekeeping operations. We look forward to working
in the year to come to transform the commitments of
the declaration into reality. I am pleased to announce
on this occasion that Brazil endorses the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. We particularly welcome the
inclusiveness of the initiative, which recognizes that
peacekeeping is a collective endeavour that depends
upon the partnership among the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Secretariat, troop and police
contributors and host Governments.

Brazil welcomes the Secretary-General's efforts
to address the increasing number of fatalities in
peacekeeping operations. We also take note of the
recommendations of the report prepared by Lieutenant
General Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled
Improving Security of United Nations Peacekeepers",
and of its conclusion that a sense of shared responsibility
is required in the field. Civilian leadership and personnel
also need to play a more active role in taking the
necessary preventive measures to avoid casualties. The
safety and security ofpeacekeepers must be placed at the
top of the list ofUnited Nations priorities. Peacekeepers
must be provided with adequate resources, equipment
and training. Moreover, providing United Nations
peacekeeping personnel with intensive and extensive
predeployment and in-mission training is instrumental
to addressing sexual abuse and exploitation, and
enhancing performance. The United Nations zero-
tolerance-policy must combine preventive and punitive
measures, and be provided with the appropriate funding
and tailor-made training to suit the realities faced by
troop-contributing countries and every mission. At the
same time, it is essential to underline that the issue of
casualties cannot be considered in isolation. It relates
to the specific political conditions of every individual
mission and to the political decisions embodied in
individual mandates crafted by the Security Council.

Brazil has a long and distinguished history
of contributing to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, having taken part in more than 40 missions
since 1947. Currently, Brazil leads the Maritime Task
Force of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon,
while the military component of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is led by a Brazilian Lieutenant
General. The Brazilian perception of improving the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is informed
in particular by our experience as the main troop
contributor to the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the work of which was crucial
to the stabilization of Haiti and the establishment of a
safer and more secure environment. That successful
experience was made possible in particular by a focus
on mission effectiveness at all stages, from troop
selection and training to providing adequate equipment
and materiel, as well as effective logistical support. It
also included sharing lessons learned and the constant
development of mission doctrine. But improvements to
any mission's effectiveness cannot be pursued through
military and operational approaches alone. For any
peacekeeping mission to succeed, it is essential to build
and maintain the trust of local communities.

In addition, it must be borne in mind that, in most
conflict situations, political dialogue and economic
developmentareanecessaryconditionforpeacebuilding.
The experience of MINUSTAH once again comes to
mind. The implementation of quick-impact projects
proved to be an essential tool for the stabilization
process and acted as a bridge for medium- and long-term
development efforts. Protecting civilians in conflict
situations does not equate with blanket mandates
with regard to the use of force. Rather, that ultimately
requires the primacy of politics and a people-centred
approach, including through engagement with local
actors and those affected by conflict. More robust and
flexible mandates can often prove counterproductive to
achieving a mission's objectives and compromise the
United Nations credibility in the eyes of local society.

In our effort to improve peacekeeping, we must not
fail to recognize the important results achieved through
such a tool. The recent downsizing and closing of
missions, such as in the cases ofHaiti, Cote d'Ivoire and
Liberia, where missions created conditions conducive to
peace and security, show the positive effect that United
Nations operations continue to have, while bringing
hope for a better future to millions of people.

