Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation wishes to thank the Secretary-
General for his end of mandate report on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
(S/2005/310). I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his briefing.

In a few days, the Government and the people of
Timor-Leste will celebrate the third anniversary of
their independence. Over the past three years, with the
help of the international community, the people of
Timor-Leste have overcome every difficulty and have
taken encouraging initial steps in various areas of
nation-building. Timor-Leste recently conducted a
number of local elections and dealt appropriately with
domestic difficulties and problems. Its relations with
neighbouring countries have been improving and are
developing. We share with the Government and the
people of Timor-Leste a deep sense of achievement in
connection with those accomplishments. We firmly
believe that an independent and free Timor-Leste will
continue to demonstrate vigour and vitality as it moves
down the path of peaceful nation-building.

It must be noted that those achievements reflect
the hard work and the contribution of UNMISET over
the past three years. UNMISET has lived up to its
mandate and accompanied the new-born country in
weathering all the vicissitudes inherent in nation-
building. It has completed its mandate in an excellent
manner. It has earned credibility for the United Nations
and has been commended by the people of Timor-Leste
and from all sides. In that connection, I would like to
express gratitude and pay tribute to all the members of
UNMISET and to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his predecessors.

Although the mandate of UNMISET is about to
end, the United Nations and the international
community at large will continue to assist Timor-Leste.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2005/310), the next steps towards institution-
building can be pursued through robust capacity-
building activities. We hope that, from the outset, the
United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL),
which is soon to be established, will be clear about its
direction and will focus on transferring management
experience and other skills to ensure that a fully
independent professional Timorese management team
is in place at an early date.

The Government and the people of Timor-Leste
have repeatedly stated that, in the interest of long-term
stability, they will forge good-neighbourly cooperative
relations with neighbouring countries and will properly
address pending issues. That will truly be in the
interest of the Government and the people of Timor-
Leste, and it will also help foster stability and
development in the region. The international
community must respect and support that decision by
the Timor-Leste Government.

I wish in conclusion to call upon the international
community to continue to lend its attention and support
to Timor-Leste to help it make progress in peaceful
nation-building.

