Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I would like to join previous speakers in
warmly welcoming to the Chamber Mr. Audronius
AZubalis, Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Lithuania. I would like
to thank him for his detailed briefing, which outlines
the priorities of the OSCE under his country's
chairmanship. I would like to address two issues
among the priorities of the Lithuanian chairmanship,
namely, the resolution of protracted conflicts and
strengthening the OSCE's response to transnational
threats.

On the subject of the settlement of protracted
conflicts, my delegation shares the view of the Chair of
the OSCE, which is to move towards resolving those
conflicts, on the one hand so as to prevent their
protraction from contributing to instability and on the
other hand to reduce the costs associated with their
continuation. Along those lines, we welcome the
efforts of the OSCE to re-launch the 5-1-2 format
negotiations in order to resolve the conflict in
Transdniestria in Moldova while respecting the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Moldova.

Strengthening regional organizations with a view
to making them more operational and more able to
confront various crises should remain among our top
priorities. That is why we are pleased that the OSCE
has taken that concern into account through its bodies,
mechanisms and specialized institutions. Moreover, we
believe that an early warning system to detect the early
signs of potential conflict is part of a better way to
prevent conflicts with untold human, material and
financial consequences. We also agree with the
Lithuanian chairmanship that an early warning system
should be based on clear capacity and will to act
promptly.
Accordingly, the mechanisms set up by some
regional organizations, such as the Economic
Community of Central African States, to prevent
conflicts - particularly the Central African Early
Warning System and the Peace and Security Council of
Central Africa - would all benefit from the wealth of
experience of the OSCE. Likewise, the African
Standby Force, with its different components based in
the five subregions of the continent, could in its
operations rely on the expertise of the OSCE. We are
encouraged by the commitment of the Lithuanian
chairmanship to continue strengthening the cooperation
of the OSCE and regional organizations of other
regions of the world, such as the African Union.

The contribution of the OSCE to the efforts of the
United Nations in promoting international peace and
cooperation in its theatre of operations speaks for
itself. The same is true for its commitment in Kosovo,
Georgia and Afghanistan, to cite only those few
examples. We welcome the focus of the Lithuanian
chairmanship on continuing and strengthening its
cooperation with the United Nations in combating
other challenges to international peace and security,
such as terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, organized crime and drug trafficking. In
conclusion, we reiterate our support for the activities of
the OSCE and the road map set forth by the Lithuanian
chairmanship.

