Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this informative quarterly
briefing and are grateful for the comprehensive
presentation provided by Mr. Zahir Tanin on the
situation in Kosovo and the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We took note of the statements made and
information provided by the Deputy Prime Minister of
Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and Ms. Vlora Citaku.

Peru acknowledges the progress made in building
stability and economic development in Kosovo, which
reflects the commitment of the parties to a process
that is supported by the international community,
particularly by the Security Council. In this vein, we
support the renewed dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, facilitated by the European Union, as well
as the implementation of the Brussels agreements.
We believe that the parties should continue making
progress in this respect in the interests of the peoples
concerned and the Balkans region.

We also encourage greater participation of women
and young people in political life, especially given the
final results of the recent municipal elections. Like
others, we deplore and condemn the recent assassination
of Serbian leader Oliver Ivanovic'. We deem it urgent
to identify those responsible and bring them to justice,
and to ensure the security of vulnerable groups in the
northern part of the Kosovo territory.

We are concerned at reports of abuse and arbitrary
detentions by Kosovo police. Measures to safeguard the
rights of minorities and internally displaced persons
must continue to be implemented, and we hope that the
community/association of Serb-majority municipalities
will soon be established, in accordance with what was
agreed in 2013. We deem it vital that there be full
cooperation between the Kosovo authorities and the
Specialist Chambers in The Hague responsible for
atrocities committed by former members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army. Impurity for these crimes cannot
be tolerated.
We believe it is important to establish a truth
and reconciliation commission. Intercommunal
reconciliation that is based on full respect for different
identities and customs is a key element for internal
cohesion, diversity and cultural wealth. We also
commend the initiatives that are being developed with
the support of UN-Women to incorporate a gender
perspective into various aspects of the Kosovo process.

My delegation wishes to highlight the role being
played by UNMIK in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999). We believe that efforts to respond to the
persistent challenges to the implementation of key
aspects of the Brussels agreement must continue to be
supported. Nonetheless, so long as the situation remains
stable and progress continues to be made in terms of
sustainable peacebuilding in Kosovo, the Council must
ensure that at the right time, when conditions so allow,
an orderly transition takes place from UNMIK to other
United Nations entities present in the country.

