Mr. Liu Zhenmin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
We welcome this open meeting of the Security
Council. We also wish to thank Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his briefing.

On 16 December 2008, the Security Council held
a ministerial-level meeting on the question of the
Middle East (6045th meeting) and adopted resolution
1850 (2008), demonstrating its support for political
talks between Palestine and Israel and their efforts to
achieve lasting peace in the Middle East. The meeting
also indicated the international community's
expectations for the peaceful coexistence of two States,
Palestine and Israel.

However, just 11 days following the adoption of
the resolution, the situation in the Middle East
experienced precipitous changes. Beginning on
27 December, Israel carried out military actions against
the Gaza Strip that lasted more than 20 days and
resulted in heavy casualties among Palestinian civilians
and enormous loss of property. The Middle East peace
process was thus severely tested and suffered a major
setback. China wishes to reaffirm that we oppose any
attempt to solve disputes through military means, as
well as any act of violence targeting civilians.

The current situation in the Middle East remains
tense and fragile. The Palestinian and Israeli sides have
not yet reached a lasting ceasefire agreement, and
hostilities and acts of violence still occur. The
humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip is a cause for
concern. The reconstruction process is beset by
difficulties. The plight of the Palestinian people on the
West Bank of the Jordan River is also worrisome.

There are still multiple uncertain factors vis-a-vis
the resumption of talks between Palestine and Israel.
We appeal to the parties concerned to exercise
maximum restraint, renounce violence and military
means and refrain from any action that may exacerbate
the tension. We urge Israel, the occupying Power, to
open the border crossings, stop building settlements on
the West Bank and allow the Palestinian people to
enjoy normal and dignified lives. We are concerned
about the plight of the Palestinian people and appeal to
the international community to continue to provide
humanitarian, development, technical and other kinds
of assistance to Palestine.

We believe that, given the tense and fragile
Middle East situation, the international community
should focus its efforts on the following four areas.

First, the security situation should be
consolidated in order to push for a durable ceasefire.
The parties concerned should fully implement in good
faith resolution 1860 (2009), adopted on 8 January, so
as to reach a comprehensive and durable ceasefire
arrangement as soon as possible. In this context, the
international community must support the efforts
undertaken by Egypt and other countries.

Secondly, the commitments for assistance for the
reconstruction of the Gaza strip must be honoured in
order to alleviate the humanitarian situation on the
ground. We welcome the positive outcome of the
pledging conference held at Sharm el-Sheikh on
2 March and we appeal to the international community
to translate the commitments made into concrete
actions. Israel must open the border crossings and
ensure unimpeded access for humanitarian assistance
and the materials necessary for reconstruction. At the
same time, we expect the Board of Inquiry established
by the Secretary-General to give a timely report to the
Security Council on the findings of its investigations.

Thirdly, there must be a push for intra-Palestinian
reconciliation. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is of
critical importance to safeguard the Palestinian
people's interests and the resumption of the Middle
East peace process. We appeal to the various
Palestinian factions to engage in sincere talks and
resolve their differences.

Fourthly, there must be an expeditious
resumption of the Middle East peace process. We have
always maintained that political talks are the only
correct avenue leading to durable peace in the Middle
East. The Security Council should support the
Palestinian-Israeli negotiation process in a more
proactive manner, and in particular ensure that the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council are
respected and implemented. We hope that the Quartet
will play an even greater role and push for a
resumption of political talks between Palestine and
Israel on the basis of the principle of land for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Road Map, so as to
fulfil as soon as possible the vision of two States,
Palestine and Israel, coexisting in peace.

China stands ready to work with the international
community and will continue to play a constructive
role in favour of an early proper settlement of the
Middle East question and the attainment of a
comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.

