Mr. Bermudez Alvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): As we did with the delegation of France in
October, we commend you, Mr. President, on your
decision to hold this meeting as an open briefing.
We encourage other Council members and the new
members that will join the Security Council next year
to continue with this practice.

As we do every month, we would like to thank
Special Envoy Mr. Staffan de Mistura for the
information he has provided us and for all the work that
he does in the intervals between the Council meetings
and the rounds of negotiations in Geneva and Astana.
He and his team continue to work to achieve a political
solution to the crisis in Syria. His unshakable optimism
and determination to achieve a political solution to the
Syrian crisis by implementing the road map provided
for in resolution 2254 (2015) is genuinely praiseworthy.
Once again, we express to him our gratitude for his
excellent work and that of his entire team. We hope that
the steadfastness and the single-minded commitment
to achieve the eagerly sought-after goal prevails until
we are all able to celebrate peace in Syria and have
an opportunity to reunite and rebuild the country and
thereby alleviate the suffering of its afflicted people.

We trust in his efforts, but the Council must also live
up to its obligations and responsibilities and support his
work resolutely and must, in particular, unequivocally
and constantly assert that all the actors who have been
involved in the conflict must understand that a solution
to the crisis can be achieved only through a negotiated
political solution with the widest possible participation
of all Syrians.

The situation we see today is very different from
what we saw exactly one year ago in Syria, when the
siege or the liberation of Aleppo, depending on one's
perspective, generated levels of violence, destruction
and death that had rarely been seen before in this long
crisis. We cannot deny that flash points of violence
continue to exist in Syria, but it is clear that the situation
on the ground has changed radically, through the
establishment of de-escalation areas, local ceasefires
and a significant reduction in the levels of fighting and
armed clashes.

We must first and foremost commend the almost
total loss of power and territory on the part of terrorist
groups, in particular of Da'esh, which terrorized Syrians
during the past three years and committed unimaginable
atrocities against civilians in Raqqa, Deir ez-Zor and
other areas. Sooner or later, accountability for those
war crimes and crimes against humanity will have
to become a reality, just as with what is beginning to
happen in Iraq. There is no doubt that in recent months
important events have taken place for the settlement of
this conflict and the achievement of the eagerly awaited
political transition.

Secondly, in addition to the facts already mentioned,
the military upper hand of the Syrian Government over
the dozens of armed groups that it has been fighting
since 2011 is a fact that will make it possible to move to
the next stage, which must be a political and diplomatic
stage and not a military one. A victory, ifit happens, will
be one of the most pyrrhic and sad military victories in
history, since the human, social and economic cost of
this conflict has been, and will continue to be, of titanic
proportions, not only for Syria but for other countries
of the region that have been involved in this conflict.

As in many other cases, this was an avoidable
conflict. It would have been entirely possible, six years
ago, to hold negotiations on elections, constitutional
reforms and other elements that are on the negotiating
table today, yet the influence of the powerful prevented
it. Had that happened, Syria would have avoided
400,000 deaths, its complete destruction and the tragedy
of having to save entire generations from the poverty
and the psychological trauma that Syrian children and
young people are suffering from today.

Uruguay continues to support every effort and
initiative that contributes to ensuring the cessation of
hostilities, humanitarian access and the continuation
of the political process lead by the Special Envoy. We
reiterate that there will be no military solution to this
conflict and that it will be possible to end this horrific
war only through a Syrian-led political transition process
and with United Nations mediation, in accordance with
the road map provided for in resolution 2254 (2015).

We appreciate the recent efforts that have been
made to unite the Syrian opposition under a single bloc
and to ensure the genuine commitment of the Syrian
Government to the Geneva process. We congratulate
Mr. De Mistura on the progress he has achieved in
his visits to Riyadh and Moscow, and in particular
on his insistence on the participation of women in the
delegations representing the opposition. The Astana
process has paved the way for a successful effort to
reduce clashes following the implementation of various
de-escalation of violence areas.

We interpret as a positive sign that the press release
of the three Presidents in Sochi agrees with the Geneva
process that resolution 2254 (2015) should serve as the
ultimate guide and that the goal should be inclusive
general elections under United Nations auspices and
constitutional reform in the country. We call on the
three guarantors of the Sochi process to finalize the
details of the agreement in order to understand the
implications with regard to humanitarian access in the
de-activation areas, the free movement of people and
confidence-building measures, such as the release of
those who have been kidnapped and detained and the
identification of disappeared people, all of which will
lead to improving the conditions for a strengthened
political transition process. The defeat of Da'esh will no
doubt contribute to the acceleration of that momentum.
We emphasize that it is essential that de-escalation
areas have a transitional status so that the unity and
the territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic can
be preserved and new tensions that could lead to new
armed conflict in the future can be avoided.

In conclusion, we are concerned that humanitarian
access continues to encounter serious difficulties, even
under circumstances that are relatively better than
those that we faced months ago, owing essentially to
the reduction in the levels of violence.

We wish Mr. De Mistura every success during the
eighth round of intra-Syrian negotiations, which will
begin tomorrow, and the negotiations that will be held
in December. We hope that they will once and for all
lead to a discussion of substantive issues, especially
with regard to the process on a constitution and the
convening of elections in Syria.

