Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful for the convening of this essential meeting
and the worrying presentations by Assistant Secretary-
General Miroslav Jenea and High Commissioner
Filippo Grandi.

Peru regrets and has been following with deep
concern the situation of Myanmar's Rohingya Muslim
population, which has resulted from the wave of hatred
and violence they have endured in northern Rakhine
state. In the past five months the crisis has brought
more than 700,000 people to Bangladesh and to the
largest refugee camp in the world. While we welcome
Bangladesh's generosity and efforts, we are concerned
about the likelihood that the forthcoming monsoon
season will worsen the situation, bringing the risk of
new disasters and diseases. We are also concerned
about the difficulties and delays in the implementation
of the repatriation agreement signed by both countries
in November, and especially about the lack of the
conditions needed to ensure that the refugees' return of
refugees is voluntary, safe, dignified and sustainable. In
view of the seriousness of the humanitarian situation, I
will focus on two specific points.

First, we believe that the recommendations that
the Annan Advisory Commission made in October
constitute a suitable framework for ensuring the
conditions for return. With the Advisory Commission's
independent support for their implementation, the
Myanmar authorities must act swiftly to make them a
reality. Among other steps, that involves recognizing
the full citizenship of the members of the Rohingya
community and guaranteeing their safety, property
rights, freedom of movement and right to make
an informed choice about their place of return.
Discrimination and hate speech must not be tolerated.
Within the framework of the peace and national
reconciliation process, the country's ethnic, religious
and cultural diversity should be safeguarded, along with
the rights of minorities. Building a sustainable peace
must also include ensuring access to basic services and
generating economic and social development projects.

Secondly, in our view it is essential that Myanmar
and Bangladesh's efforts to end this complex
humanitarian crisis be supported by the international
community, and by the United Nations in particular.
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR) is the competent and best
disposed agency in that regard, and we advocate its full
participation in the return process, from conception
to execution, in line with the Council's November
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/22). We consider
it urgent that the Government of Myanmar ensure
full and unrestricted access for UNHCR and other
humanitarian agencies throughout Rakhine state.
We deem it essential that such assistance pay special
attention to the needs of women and girls, particularly
the survivors of sexual violence.

We consider it crucial that the Human Rights
Council's fact-finding mission, in accordance with
its mandate, investigate the human rights violations
that have been reported in order to determine those
responsible, punish the guilty and prevent such events
from reoccurring.

