Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): At the outset, I would like to congratulate Viet Nam, Estonia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Niger and Tunisia on assuming membership of the Security Council and to wish them success in conducting their mission, which is of the utmost importance and the highest responsibility. Armenia commends the presidency of Viet Nam for the choice of topic for today's debate, on upholding the United Nations Charter to maintain international peace and security. I would like to thank the Secretary- General and Chair of The Elders Mary Robinson for their remarks earlier today highlighting the central role of the Charter as the cornerstone of the international law and multilateralism. The anniversary of the establishment of the United Nations is an opportunity to reiterate the full adherence of Member States to the Charter and to reaffirm the commitment to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war and uphold fundamental human rights and faith in the dignity and worth of the human being. The seventy-fifth anniversary of the Organization is also an occasion to remember and pay tribute to all those who became victims of the atrocities perpetrated during the First and Second World Wars and gave their lives in the struggle for the peaceful future of the world. The Armenian people made a significant contribution to victory in the Second World War, which paved the way for the creation of the United Nations. Almost 600,000 Armenians participated in the war, and more than half of them did not return from the battlefields. The Charter rests upon the objective of developing friendly relations among nations, based on respect for the principles of equal rights and the self-determination of peoples. The right to self-determination is a fundamental principle that has led to a significant increase in the membership of the United Nations since its foundation. The right of people to freely define their future is anchored in the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. In that context, the inalienable right of the people of Nagorno Karabakh to self-determination through the legally binding free expression of their will represents a fundamental principle and basic premise for the peaceful resolution of the conflict, which is recognized by the co-chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Minsk Group - the only internationally mandated mediation format dealing with the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Armenia greatly values the support of the United Nations and the Secretary-General for the efforts of the OSCE Minsk Group co-chairmanship towards the peaceful resolution of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. Today's discussion is all the more relevant in the light of the current developments in Iraq and the wider Middle East. Armenia has expressed its concern about the ongoing situation and the risk of destabilization in its immediate neighbourhood and beyond. We have appealed for the de-escalation of the situation, and we hope that it can be addressed exclusively through dialogue and peaceful means. We believe that the fight against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and Al-Qaida, which perpetrated atrocities in Syria and Iraq, should continue to unite the international community and serve as a basis for consolidating regional peace and security. Despite the major achievements of the United Nations in promoting peace and security in the past 75 years, we continue to face armed conflicts, pervasive poverty, increasing inequality, shrinking democratic space and violence against women and girls, as outlined in the report of the Secretary-General's on the work of the Organization (A/74/1). Violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, which include the right to self-determination, often represent the root causes of conflicts as we continue to witness discrimination, xenophobia, exclusion, State-led policies of hatred and the glorification of hate crimes. As demonstrated many times before, intolerance and the cultivation of hate speech against ethnic and religious groups, if not addressed properly, can lead to mass atrocities and genocide. Armenia has been consistent in supporting multilateral efforts aimed at the prevention of genocide and strengthening the early- warning capacities of the United Nations. Multilateral cooperation, aS ever, remains important in terms of providing platforms for dialogue and action on global challenges. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Armenia's firm commitment to effective multilateralism, in line with the purposes and principles of the Charter.
