Mr. Axworthy (Canada): I would like to thank the
delegation of the Netherlands for convening this meeting on
the situation in Africa and to you, personally, Mr. Prime
Minister, for adding your presence to this very important
debate. I should also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his very thoughtful report and the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and the Ambassador
of Algeria representing the Chairman of OAU, President
Bouteflika, for their important contributions.

As we have heard in the reports that have just been
given here, Africans across the continent are seizing
opportunities to build Vibrant and stable communities.
Democracy is resurgent; civil society is taking hold and
prospects for growth are promising. I think it would be fair
to say that the African renaissance is under way.

(spoke in French)

Economic and social development are, of course,
central to these processes. Canada's commitment to
working with African people towards this end remains
intact. A third of Canada's official development assistance
is allocated to Africa. Canada has forgiven all official
development assistance debt for the poorest African
countries. This year, we helped forge an international
mechanism to expand debt relief for the poorest countries.
We have given great priority to the battle against the
dangers that hit Africans particularly hard, including
HIV/AIDS. We firmly believe that the prosperity of Africa
depends on strong support for its sustainable development.

(spoke in English)

But the freedom from want is closely linked to the
freedom from fear. Societies cannot flourish in conditions
of violence and intimidation. Too many parts of the
continent remain caught in the vicious grip of armed
conflict, and the safety of Africans in these situations is
fragile. Africa's people pay an especially high price in
terms of threats to their personal security. That is why, as
we have heard, Africans are working to confront these
threats to personal security directly.

On a continent where landmines kill and maim more
people than anywhere else, Africans played a leading role
in the campaign to ban anti-personnel landmines.

Many of the hundreds of millions of assault rifles
and other small arms now in circulation have found their
way to African battle zones. The countries of the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
have had enough and have imposed a moratorium on the
arms flows into their region.

Africa's children are the main Victims of the
appalling wars that have ravaged Africa. More are drafted
into the service of violence as child soldiers than on any
other continent. This year, Mozambique gathered Africans
and others to take action on this front.

In particular, Africans recognize that the new war
economies that marry the brutality of warlords with the
avarice of mercenaries and arms dealers and certain
commercial interests exert a terrifying hold on many of
their communities.

Africans have categorically rejected the assumption
of power by force. The decision this year by the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) leaders in Algiers
is a milestone of enormous importance.

Clearly, Africans themselves have made the security
of people an impetus for action. The rest of us should
take care to listen and lend support - even if some
around this table do not share this agenda. Equal
attention, common action and collective resources to
advance Africa's security needs are required. Anything
less, especially from the Security Council, is an
abdication of our shared obligations.

As we have heard this morning, preventing and
resolving conflict are a starting point. Africans are
striving to bring conflicts in Africa to an end: the OAU
in the Ethiopia-Eritrea conflict, the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in Angola and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Arusha
process in Burundi are all very important examples. Peace
is being established in Sierra Leone, largely as a result of
ECOWAS mediation and years of commitment by its
Monitoring Group (ECOMOG).

International support can bolster these efforts and
help build local capacity. That is behind Canada's support
for Commonwealth efforts in Sierra Leone. At the
recently held Moncton Summit, Canada announced a
three-year training programme to strengthen peace and
security skills in countries of La Francophonie. We are
also contributing to strengthening the OAU, especially the
conflict management centre, and are committed to

 
working for still closer consultation and cooperation
between the United Nations, the OAU and the subregional
organizations. We certainly welcome the presence here of
Secretary-General Salim Salim and Ministers speaking on
behalf of these organizations of Africa.

But making peace is not enough. Keeping, building
and consolidating peace are essential. Africans are
increasingly called on to serve as peacekeepers. Canadian
peacekeepers know first-hand the skill and bravery of their
African colleagues. To assist in this area we are helping
build on these talents with further training at the Pearson
Peacekeeping Centres in Nova Scotia and Montreal.

Where conflict has ended, there is a movement away
from a culture of war and towards societies at peace. These
efforts need help from other Governments, from civil
society and from the business community. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of former combatants are
a primary challenge. The plight of war-affected children is
a particular concern. Building on Mali's efforts on small
arms, for example, Canada and Ghana will host a
conference next year to map out an integrated approach to
these peace and security concerns in West Africa. Indeed,
much of Canada's $30-million peace-building initiative is
focused on shoring up these and other efforts with projects
responding to local priorities and needs. Last week, my
Government announced a further contribution of $4.5
million for Sierra Leone to help civilians, particularly
children, who have been deeply affected by that conflict.

Controlling the marketplace of conflict which fuels
local African war machines is also vital in order to prevent
the suffering of individuals. Encouraging more responsible
business and government behaviour is a key. Such efforts
by Canada and others in the Wassenaar group to respect the
ECOWAS moratorium on arms flows is an important, and
I think necessary, demonstration of what must be done.

Business can contribute in other ways. If it wants to
harness Africa's economic potential, it must join efforts to
remove landmines, which not only kill but also impede
access to resources.

I think that it is also very clear that the Security
Council has a responsibility to protect the security of
individual Africans. Contrary to what some suggest, the
Council has the authority and the mandate to take action
against those who profit from misery. It has the competence
to help establish sustainable peace and to intervene in the
face of massive suffering, and it should make full and
forceful use that mandate.

More resolute action to cut off the ways and means
for waging armed conflict and to ensure that these
sanctions work is vital. In Angola this is Canada's
objective in proposing tougher measures to reduce
UNITA's illegal diamond revenues, to limit its access to
the petroleum sources and to curtail its acquisition of
arms and ammunition - all of which make it possible for
UNITA to pursue this murderous war. I am confident that
if the will exists within the Council, these sanctions can
be made to encourage UNITA to return to the negotiating
table. If successful, the lessons learned here could well
have application in other conflict zones.

When there is peace to keep, there is no substitute
for collective Council action. This is no less true, and the
demand no less urgent, in Africa than elsewhere. We may
be faced with the need for robust, comprehensive peace
operations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
possibly in Ethiopia and Eritrea. The risks and the costs
of these operations must be assumed by us all. Making
this solely or even primarily a local responsibility and
simply passing around the hat to see what might be
dropped into it is as shameful as it is inadequate.

In Sierra Leone, ECOMOG has shouldered the
burden long enough. Let us ensure that the mission this
Council agrees to implement peace is coloured blue -
United Nations-authorized, United Nations-managed,
United Nations-funded - and that the United Nations and
the remaining ECOMOG forces are as integrated as
possible.

The bitter experience of the individual Africans who
have suffered most - victims of genocide in Rwanda,
widespread starvation in Somalia, pervasive terror in
Sierra Leone, a generation-long slaughter in Angola,
slave-trading in the Sudan and a senseless war in Ethiopia
and Eritrea - should demand effective intervention by
the Council. Such is the responsibility of this body and no
other.

This humanitarian imperative has been applied, but
elsewhere - in Kosovo and in East Timor but not in
Africa - raising legitimate concern about how evenly
these initiatives are put into practice. The Council needs
to establish common criteria to trigger humanitarian
intervention, apply them consistently in consultations with
regional partners and overcome the reluctance of some to
commit their people and resources to help the victims of
war in far-off lands.

 

The security of Africans should be a matter of concern
for us all. It is for Canadians. That is why Canada is
devoted to African development, the surest way to ensure
sustainable peace. That is why Canadians - judges, police,
teachers and humanitarian workers - serve in Africa. That
is why Canadians were willing to lead a multinational effort
in Zaire to protect the safety of a terrorized refugee
population and why today we continue to play a part in
African peacekeeping operations. Canada is the only
remaining non-African contributor to the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic. Prime Minister
Chretien will reaffirm this commitment when he Visits
Africa later this year.

(spoke in French)

As for the Council, much of its time is already
absorbed by African issues. The focus needs to be more on
both the quality and the effectiveness of the attention it
devotes to its African agenda. To this end, an approach to
Africa's security challenges that takes human security
concerns fully into account makes sense.

(spoke in English)

The Secretary-General has provided us with an
insightful progress report on the causes of conflict in
Africa. The Secretary-General's comments reinforce the
relevance of a human- centred agenda for Africa; his
recommendations underline the need for a comprehensive
approach. It falls to Africans, Council members and the
broader global community to take this agenda forward and
secure peace for the people of the African continent.

