Ms. Rice (United States of America): I should
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing on the deteriorating situation in Syria. The
United States condemns in the strongest possible terms
the abhorrent violence used by the Government of
Syria against its own people. My Government calls on
President Al-Assad to change course now and heed the
calls of his own people. We also call on the
international community to respond to this brutal
crackdown and to hold accountable those who are
perpetrating these gross human rights violations.

The United States has expressed its position to
the Syrian Government, and we are considering a range
of options, including targeted sanctions, to respond to
the outrageous and ongoing use of violence against
peaceful protesters. We are particularly concerned
about continued reports of gratuitous violence against
unarmed demonstrators. I am pleased to note that the
Human Rights Council decided this morning to hold a
special session on the situation of human rights in
Syria on Friday. The United States is one of the many
supporters of this decision and believes the event to be
an important and timely response given the horrific
actions taking place. These brutal acts are those of
neither a responsible Government nor a credible
member of the international community.

Syrian Government actions up until now have not
been serious responses to the demands of its people.
Instead, the Syrian Government's violent repression of
peaceful protesters is continuing. Casting blame on
outsiders instead of addressing its own internal failures
is no way for a Government to respond to legitimate
calls for reform from its people.

Syrian security and military forces continue to
attack civilian protesters, while the Government
continues to seek Iranian assistance in repressing
Syria's citizens through the same brutal tactics that
have been used by the Iranian regime. The Syrian
Government must stop the arbitrary arrest, detention
and torture of civilians, especially journalists and
activists. We call on the Syrian Government to allow
the media, including foreign journalists, as well as
human rights monitors, to verify events independently
on the ground, which include reports of indiscriminate
attacks on populated areas by Syrian forces.

The Syrian Government must acknowledge its
people's legitimate calls for substantial and lasting
reform. Words must be backed by actions to ensure real
reform in Syria. The Syrian people's cries for freedom
of expression, association, peaceful assembly and the
ability to freely choose their leaders must be heeded.

