Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on the United States delegation's
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and to
wish you every success.

However, I will begin my statement not with words
of gratitude for organizing today's meeting but rather
by affirming our firm position. The Russian Federation
is categorically opposed to a discussion of the situation
in Nicaragua in the Security Council. We have major
concerns about the invited briefers. I am not sure that
the members of the Council who supported the format of
today's meeting grasp the potential consequences ifthis
type of practice should continue. What message can the
Security Council send if it is clearly split on a particular
issue? What value does it add to our discussion overall?
Does the Council's mandate really include putting
pressure on the authorities of a sovereign State to force
it to make changes, whatever they may be, and thereby
conniving with anti-Government forces? After today's
discussion, the polarization in Nicaragua can only
worsen. It is difficult not to believe that that is what the
ringleaders of today's meeting had in mind.

We see support for this notion in that some people
cannot deal with the fact that there are States in the world
capable of carrying out self-sufficient, independent
policies in the interests of their citizens while not
playing up to the regional ambitions of major Powers.
Instead ofbuilding relations with such States on a basis
of mutual respect, they all rush to inflict maximum
damage on their economies in order to provoke social
unrest and foment intolerance with the sole purpose of
achieving regime change. It is extremely regrettable
that international and regional organizations are getting
involved in these processes.

The initiators of today's discussion are trying to
ignore the fact that thanks to the Government's efforts,
the situation in the country has recently stabilized.
The outstanding disagreements should be resolved
through a direct, peaceful dialogue, without destructive
outside pressure.

I want to say it once again. It is obvious to us that
the issue of Nicaragua has no place on the Security
Council's agenda. The Council is responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, and
the domestic political situation in Nicaragua does not
pose those kinds of threats. Rather, it is a vivid, sad
example of destructive outside interference. And what
we heard at the beginning of this morning's meeting
compels us to conclude that the Security Council
appears to be becoming something like a court of trial
for Nicaragua.

Taking the words of its initiators on faith, an
unsophisticated listener could get the impression that
the United States really cares about Nicaraguans. It
is no secret to anyone, however, that Washington's
subversive relationship to Managua has a long history.
The fact of the open interference of the United States
in Nicaragua's internal affairs was confirmed by the
27 July 1986 decision of the International Court of
Justice in The Hague with regard to the so-called Iran-
Contra affair, when the United States tried to circumvent
its own laws in order to finance Nicaraguan insurgents.

And since the American presidency of the Council
has used a regional rationale in order to shovel the
Nicaraguan issue onto the Security Council's agenda,
we should not fail to mention some examples of
Washington's interference in the internal affairs of
other Latin American States as well. Cubans have
never forgotten the Bay of Pigs invasion; Chileans are
unlikely to forget the role that the United States played
in overthrowing the Government of Salvador Allende;
and to this very day Venezuelans are still receiving
direct threats of the use of military force, which is a
gross violation of the Charter of the United Nations.
And all of that is far from being Washington's complete
record of service in one region alone. I have not even
touched on earlier episodes, or the Monroe Doctrine,
which, it is true, has not been in operation with regard
to Europe for a long time. The peoples of Africa, Asia,
the Middle East and the Pacific also have some things
to say about this issue. Against the backdrop of this
dictatorial policy, which you do not even bother to
disguise, Madam President, your accusations about third
countries' mythical interference in American domestic
political life with the supposed goal of undermining
America's great democracy look particularly clumsy.

We in the United Nations talk a lot about the
importance of conflict prevention. And we often hear
claims that human rights situations are indicators of
looming crises. In fact, as we have once again been
convinced today, blatant interference in the affairs of
a sovereign State has replaced so-called preventive
diplomacy and is discrediting the very notion of
preventive diplomacy itself. Reality is presenting
us with more and more examples of the fact that the
concept of human rights violations as indicators of
conflict is one of trickery and hypocrisy. More often
than not the reality is just the opposite - it is conflicts,
including those stirred up from outside, that result in
major violations of human rights. So let us not interfere
in the internal processes of sovereign States. After
all, you yourself are always exhorting everyone about
that, Madam President. Or is it only others who are not
allowed to do it?

We call on Washington to refrain from its efforts
in the colonial tradition to influence the situation in
Nicaragua, and in particular those specifically aimed
at it, such as its Nicaraguan Investment Conditionality
Act initiative, its visa and other restrictions on
Nicaraguan officials and the abolition of temporary
protected status for migrants from Nicaragua. And
if the United States is really concerned about the
situation of Nicaraguan citizens, it would be logical to
lift the economic restrictions that have been imposed
on them for political reasons. We genuinely hope that
all of Nicaragua's political forces will demonstrate
common sense and will work consistently to establish
constructive and respecful cooperation within the
framework of its existing laws and Constitution.

