Ms. Niamke (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): I
commend Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process and Personal
Representative ofthe Secretary-General, for his detailed
briefing on the latest developments in the situation in
the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Cote d'Ivoire notes with regret the persistent climate
of violence in the Middle East, which is increasingly
detrimental to the prospect of the restoration of peace
in the region. Given the complexity of the situation,
it is important for the Council to propose innovative
approaches to peacefully resolve the various conflicts
in the region.

With regard to the conflict in Syria, the
consequences on the region are worrisome. C6te
d'Ivoire once again deplores the lack of consensus
within the Council, which impeded the adoption of a
draft resolution yesterday on the humanitarian situation
in Syria aimed at easing the suffering of millions of
Syrians. We are convinced that there is no military
solution to that crisis. My country wishes to reiterate its
support for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for his tireless efforts to find a lasting political solution
to that crisis, in line with the provisions of resolution
2254 (2015).

Turning to the Palestinian question, Cote
d'Ivoire, given the impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations, believes that the following imperatives
are necessary. On the one hand, an appropriate
framework for negotiations must be established and the
political process launched, and, on the other, there must
be compliance with the resolutions on the Palestinian
question and international law.

My delegation laments the fact that to date no
compromise has been reached to meet the aspirations
of both sides, namely, the right of the Palestinians
to self-determination and independence and Israel's
right to ensure its security. In response to that, and in
accordance with the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary-General dated 26 August,
Cote d'Ivoire calls on the international community to
redouble its efforts to resume the political process for a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the crisis,
as soon as possible.

My country remains convinced that a lasting and
mutually acceptable solution to the conflict can be
reached only through strictly adhering to international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016). In that regard, we
reaffirm our commitment to the solution of two States
peacefully coexisting within the framework of the
1967 borders.

My delegation also calls on the Palestinian and
Israeli authorities to ensure respect for the rights of
all vulnerable persons, including children, who are
paying a high price in the conflict, an aspect that
various UNICEF reports regularly stress. Similarly,
Cote d'Ivoire supports all possible efforts towards
inter-Palestinian reconciliation, including between
Fatah and Hamas, with a View to enabling the Palestinian
Authority, which has the primary responsibility for
meeting the social and humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people, to exercise its sovereign functions
in Gaza and the West Bank.

My delegation also remains concerned about
the humanitarian situation in Gaza owing to the
extremely difficult socioeconomic conditions, as well
as difficulties with the energy supply and in access
to basic services. Those precarious living conditions
represent potential threats to regional stability,
especially since this humanitarian crisis is aggravated
by a difficult socioeconomic situation, resulting in
the irregular payment of civil servants' salaries and
a high unemployment rate, which especially affects
young people. The easing of restrictions is therefore
necessary, both for the delivery of humanitarian aid
and for the movement of goods and people. In that
regard, Cote d'Ivoire underscores the crucial role
that the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays in
addressing the needs of nearly 5.4 million people.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the material
and financial support of the United Nations specialized
agencies and international partners of UNRWA and
reiterates its call on them to continue their vital efforts
for the benefit of the Palestinian population.

