The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Afghanistan, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the members of the Council, I extend a
warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. Abdullah
Abdullah, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Abdullah
(Afghanistan), took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/576, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2005/574, containing the text of a letter
dated 9 September 2005 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
If I hear no objection, I shall now put the draft
resolution to the vote.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1623 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.20 am.

