Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express the appreciation of the
Egyptian delegation for your initiative, Mr. President,
to convene this general debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflicts.

This debate takes place at a very perilous time.
The Palestinian people in the Gaza Strip are
confronting genocide under the very nose of the
Security Council, and the Israeli occupying Power is
clearly and flagrantly violating its obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law.
Moreover, its actions constitute a blatant defiance of
the authority of the Security Council, which has made
continuous calls - inter alia, in its press statement of
15 December and its resolution 1860 (2009), adopted
on 8 January 2009 - for an immediate ceasefire
between Palestinians and Israelis.

The recent Israeli aggression against the Gaza
Strip has demonstrated unequivocally the inability of
the Security Council to enforce its decisions. It has
also demonstrated the Council's inability to adopt
critical decisions in a timely manner, as expected by
the international community. Furthermore, the Council
has demonstrated its inability to prevent the escalation
of Israel's brutal air and ground military operations and
its use of internationally banned weapons. The Council
is also unable to impose the will of the United Nations
as the sole representative of the international
community, even when such representation takes the
form of a unanimously adopted statement or a
resolution adopted by 14 votes in favour and the
abstention of one member that endorsed the main thrust
of the text.

The issue, then, is that the Security Council
discusses the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
but turns a blind eye to the ongoing massacre, which
has killed approximately 1,000 Palestinians and injured
nearly 5,000, at the hands of a brutal force occupying
their land. The Council procrastinates on any
significant negotiations aimed at peace and claims,
with support from forces within and outside its
membership, that Israel is exercising its legitimate
right to self-defence and reacting to the deaths of
Israelis, who number no more than the fingers of one
hand, from rockets launched from the Gaza Strip. Israel
uses not only excessive and disproportionate force, but
also internationally prohibited weapons, in its so-called
self-defence, while flouting all its legal and ethical
obligations.

Protecting civilians in armed conflict from death
and injury and providing humanitarian and economic
assistance to the brotherly Palestinian people were the
main goals of the Egyptian initiative launched by
President Mubarak on 8 January, in conjunction with
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009). The initiative
calls first for an immediate ceasefire for a
predetermined period, during which humanitarian
assistance can be delivered. It provides for an
appropriate timeframe for negotiations on the
arrangements and guarantees stipulated by the
resolution in order to make the temporary ceasefire
permanent, thereafter promoting the resumption of
peace negotiations.

However, both parties have so far chosen not to
implement this initiative; each believes that it will
emerge victorious from this military confrontation,
ignoring the fact that there are no winners in such a
war. There will be clear losers, however: the civilians
of Palestine and Israel alike. Those civilians have lost
their lives so that some might achieve their electoral
aspirations or claim a bogus victory at the expense of
the deceased victims. Victory cannot be achieved
except through a genuine peace process based not on
the ambitions and aspirations of individuals, but on the
benefits of peoples living in peace and stability.

Egypt's efforts to establish an immediate
ceasefire between both sides continue, but it also
believes that the Security Council has a great
responsibility to impose the international will
represented in its resolutions and statements; adopt all
the necessary measures to protect civilians on both
sides by pushing forcefully to implements its decisions;
enforce all human rights protection mechanisms,
especially through the convening of a special session
of the high contracting parties to the Fourth Geneva
Convention; implement the resolution adopted by the
Human Rights Council on 11 January; and provide
international protection through a protection force for
the Palestinian people, in implementation of the
principle of the responsibility to protect. Some seek to
apply that principle to specific countries, while
bypassing others toiling under brutal occupation and
confronting ferocious aggression without any
international force to protect them.

Furthermore, the Security Council is primarily
and the General Assembly secondarily responsible for
investigating war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide, and for handing over those who are
responsible for committing such crimes to international
prosecutors. This should take place in conjunction with
Arab and international efforts to end the occupation,
since without an end to the occupation and without a
right for the Palestinian people to establish their
independent State with Jerusalem as its capital, the
Middle East will never enjoy stability and civilians in
Palestine and Israel will not enjoy lives of peace and
security.

In order to achieve those ends and to create an
opportunity for the peace process to succeed, the siege
imposed on the Palestinian people in Gaza must be
lifted, access to basic humanitarian and economic
needs must be ensured, and Palestinian national
reconciliation should be achieved so that clear political
prospects that will contribute to the success of regional
and international efforts to stop the violence and ensure
the success of the peace process, can be established. In
this regard, Egypt will continue to do its utmost to
achieve those two goals by supporting all efforts to
restore full security and stability to the occupied
Palestinian territories until the occupation has ended
and the independent Palestinian State is established.

