Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative Sandra Honore for her
briefing, which, together with the Secretary-General's
report (S/2013/493), show that real progress is occurring
in Haiti, while more work is needed to ensure that it
lasts.

The United States reaffirms its support for the
Secretary-General's conditions-based consolidation
plan for MINUSTAH and his recommendation for the
withdrawal of additional military elements, provided
that conditions on the ground allow for it and that
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) maintains a robust, quick-reaction
capability. Political stability, in particular, is crucial to
continued progress in Haiti. The establishment of the
transitional Electoral Council was an important step, but
the ongoing delay in the scheduling of local municipal
and senatorial elections is worrying. The elections must
be held as soon as possible and need to be credible,
free, fair and inclusive. To that end, we welcome the
submission of the draft electoral law to the Parliament
and urge Haiti's political leaders to work together now
to publish a new electoral law that fully accords with
Haiti's Constitution. In that regard the United States
very much appreciates Special Representative Honore's
efforts to promote dialogue among Haiti's political
actors.

Political stability requires security and, therefore,
that recent security gains be sustained, such as the
improved performance of the Haitian National Police
and reinvigorated police recruitment efforts, which are
critical for Haiti's future. We encourage MINUSTAH
to maintain capacity-building of the Haitian National
Police as its highest priority. That should include strong
recruitment and retention efforts to ensure that the
force reaches its goal of 15,000 officers by 2016, with
an emphasis on recruiting women and expert personnel
capable of addressing the needs that the Secretary-
General identified in his report.

The United States would like to see MINUSTAH'S
community-violence reduction programmes sustained,
as they increase public safety by offering at-risk youth
productive employment and reduce their vulnerability
to gang recruitment. For the sake of long-term security,
better policing cannot happen in isolation but must be
accompanied by improvements in the rule of law. The
United States therefore strongly supports MINUSTAH'S
assistance to Haitian institutions responsible for
ensuring the rule of law. We also welcome the
new United Nations Rule of Law Working Group
coordination mechanism, which should coordinate
closely with civil society, donors and the Government
of Haiti to identify priorities for the justice sector and
set concrete, realistic benchmarks for Haiti's rule-of-
law priorities, including the protection of human rights
for all Haitians.

In that vein, the Government's establishment
of the interministerial commission on human rights
to promote and protect human rights is a positive
step. The Government's statement in July calling for
tolerance and rejecting Violence and discrimination
against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people
was another welcome development.

Indeed, protecting Haiti's most vulnerable citizens
must also remain a priority for the Haitian Government
and for MINUSTAH. Sexual and gender-based Violence
tragically persists in Haiti. It is a significant problem,
one that MINUSTAH must continue to address,
including by training police to prevent and respond to
such crimes. Meanwhile, the voluntary resettlement
of displaced persons should continue in a manner that
fully respects the rights of the displaced, while those
in the camps must have adequate services and security.

The health and well-being of the Haitian people are
important to the United States. As part of our broad
assistance programme in Haiti, and in coordination
with the United Nations and other donors, we continue
to support the Haitian Government's efforts to treat and
prevent cholera.

Before concluding, I want to reinforce our support
for MINUSTAH's zero-tolerance policy on sexual
exploitation and abuse. Such incidents are unacceptable
stains on MINUSTAH and the United Nations. We
encourage continuing and determined efforts to
prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as other
misconduct by peacekeepers.

Finally, let me reiterate the deep gratitude of the
United States to those serving in MINUSTAH, who
work tirelessly every day to improve the lives of the
Haitian people.

As MINUSTAH moves forward with the conditions-
based consolidation plan, the United States welcomes
the Secretary-General's forthcoming examination of
how the United Nations can best continue to contribute
to Haiti's stabilization and development.

Although key challenges remain, Haiti is becoming
more stable. The United States remains committed to
working with the Government and people of Haiti, as
well as the United Nations and international partners,
to build a more secure and prosperous future for the
country.

