Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): Thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to participate in the
discussion of such an important issue for my country.
I would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Frans Timmermans, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, for their
briefings.

Two days ago marked two months since a terrible
tragedy in the Ukrainian sky took the lives of about
300 people. Nothing can heal the pain of that terrible
loss. No words of condolence can soothe the families
and friends of the victims of the tragedy. Our duty is
to find the perpetrators of the crime and to hold them
accountable, for the sake ofjustice, and to ensure that
such tragedies will not happen in future.

From the very first day of the tragedy, Ukraine
has demonstrated its openness and commitment to
transparent, inclusive international cooperation in
order to establish the true cause of the crash. Following
the adoption of resolution 2166 (2014), which Ukraine
co-sponsored, and given the fact that the vast majority
of the victims were citizens of the Netherlands, we
transferred the right to investigate the air crash to the
Dutch Safety Board. By so doing we contributed to
ensuring a fair, objective and impartial investigation.
The Dutch Safety Board is being assisted by experts from
Australia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Ukraine, the United
Kingdom, the United States, Russia, the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the European Aviation
Safety Agency and other parties concerned.

In addition, the relevant Ukrainian authorities have
been providing necessary support to the international
mission in order to safeguard the investigation
established by an agreement between Ukraine and the
Kingdom of the Netherlands to facilitate the recovery
of the remains of the victims and to conduct an
investigation as called for by resolution 2166 (2014).

Contrary to what the Russian representative said
today about the late submission of materials and about
the negotiations between the Board and air traffic
control centres in Ukraine, 1 should remind the Council
that a week after the crash, on 23 July, an international
group of experts was provided electronic and paper
records ofnegotiations between the flight crew and staff
from the Lviv, Kyiv and Dnipropetrovsk control centres
involved in the air traffic control of the aircraft, as well
as various types of radar materials. Most probably, that
was mentioned by Ambassador Churkin at the end of
August. With regard to the additional request made
by the Netherlands, we provided additional materials
involving the recordings of conversations between the
flight crew and Ukrainian air traffic controllers.

Ukraine remains committed to resolution 2166
(2014), calling for full respect for the ceasefire and for
ensuring the security and safety of the international
investigation in the immediate area surrounding the
crash site. However, the illegal armed groups that
control the crash site have been jeopardizing the
efforts of the investigators. Before the international
investigators arrived at the crash site for the first time,
Russian-controlled militants had already been at work
at the site - as it were, to clear it of evidence. They
were not interested in revealing the truth, which could
obviously be harmful to them and to those who support
them.

The preliminary report of the Dutch Safety Board
establishes that external factors caused the accident
of Flight MH-17. That adds to our conviction that
Flight MH-l7 was shot down by a surface-to-air missile.
In the very first days after the crash, we submitted
evidence we had collected that it was a Russian missile
launched by Russian mercenaries.

The Russian Federation continues to send powerful
air defence systems to support militants in the east of
Ukraine. Those facts are repeatedly recorded not only
by Ukrainian intelligence, but also by intelligence
agencies ofother countries. A recent fact is that militants
received from Russia a Pantsir armoured rocket
launcher that is capable of hitting targets at an altitude
of 15 kilometres. We must therefore reiterate that the
tragedy of Flight MH-17 would not have happened if
militants had not acquired access to sophisticated
Russian weapons, such as air-defence systems capable
of hitting targets at high altitudes.

Unfortunately, the tragedy of Flight MH-l7 has
not taught Russia a good lesson. Moscow continues to
deny that it is arming terrorists with heavy weaponry.
All attempts by Russia to shift the responsibility for
that terrible attack onto someone else do not withstand
criticism. The Russian leadership persists in repeating
the necessity of stopping the bloodshed, while it
continues to contribute to the escalation of the conflict
by supporting terrorists, sending in mercenaries and
regular troops, violating Ukraine-Russia border and
shutting Ukrainian troops out of their territory.

None of the provisions of the Minsk protocol of
5 September have been implemented by Russia. On a
daily basis, we have been recording numerous ceasefire
violations by Russian troops and the Moscow-controlled
militants. In total, they have broken the ceasefire and
shelled Ukrainian miltary and civilians 480 times since
the truce started. As a result, 22 Ukrainian military
personnel have been killed and 138 wounded. Russia
continues its military build-up along the border with
Ukraine, as well as in temporarily occupied Crimea.
The Russian artillery and mortar shelling of the
territory of Ukraine, which, inter alia, was confirmed
by monitors from the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, have become a daily threat to
Ukrainian servicemen and civilians on the ground.

We therefore urge both Russia and the Russian-
controlled militants to comply with their commitments,
including those undertaken in accordance with the
Minsk protocol to ensure the success ofthe international
mission to the crash site and the safety and security
of international civil aviation flights. We expect that
the final results of the investigation, the impartiality
of which is beyond any doubt, will make it possible to
affirm the real cause of the catastrophe and to establish
the perpetrators of that brutal terrorist act in order to
bring them to justice.

