Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): At the outset, Mr. President, I should like to
second the eloquent words you spoke to our American
colleague, Ambassador Khalilzad. I fully agree with
what you said and I would like to express gratitude to
Ambassador Khalilzad for his contribution to the work
of the Security Council and to the United Nations as a
whole. We know that the geometry of working in the
Security Council is such that sometimes we sit across
from each other and sometimes we sit on the same side
of the table, and it seems to me that the work of the
Security Council has always won when we were on the
same side of the table. Every effort should be made to
that effect and I know that that was how Ambassador
Khalilzad acted. I wish him every success in all his
future endeavours. Since the President's eloquent
words of farewell were not spoken in English, I shall
rely on the very good Russian analogue. We do not say
"farewell" - we say "until we meet again".

Moving on to the item under discussion today -
the resolution we just adopted - I would like to make
the following remarks.

The Security Council has recently given focused
attention to the situation in Somalia, adopting a Whole
set of resolutions and statements to support the
political settlement in that country, to combat piracy,
and to operationalize the mechanism of targeted
sanctions. Today, we have adopted a new important
resolution to strengthen the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM).

Russia supports the activities of AMISOM. The
purpose of the resolution is to promote the full
deployment of the Mission and to prepare for its
possible transformation into a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. A future decision of the
Security Council on the deployment in Somalia of a
United Nations peacekeeping operation will depend, to
a large extent, on the commitment to peace of the
Somalis themselves, a significant improvement in the
security situation in their country and the achievement
of serious progress in the political settlement. In that
respect, we believe that the established budgetary
procedures for the transfer to AMISOM. of United
Nations assets will be fully respected through the
division of the competencies of the Security Council
and the General Assembly.

Moscow sincerely welcomed the signing of the
Djibouti agreement. We call upon all parties to the
Somali conflict to scrupulously abide by the
agreements reached and to work together
constructively to advance the process of consolidating
their society, restoring statehood and restoring long-
term peace in the country.

Without doubt the main responsibility for
overcoming this protracted crisis lies primarily with
the Somalis themselves. The Russian Federation
supports the efforts of the Transitional Federal
Government to restore law and order, achieve national
reconciliation and provide for State sovereignty and the
territorial integrity of the country.

The resolution we have just adopted provides for
increased assistance in support of the Somali peace
process. The achievement of progress in this area will
help to resolve the entire set of problems, including the
eradication of piracy off the coast of Somalia. Russia
was a co-founder of the contact group on piracy around
Somalia, the activities of which will take place in the
general context of international efforts to stabilize the
situation in that country.

We look forward to the full and effective
implementation of this resolution with the constructive
cooperation of all parties with the African Union and
the United Nations.

