Mr. Prasad (Fiji): Let me start by congratulating
you, Mr. President, on convening this open discussion
and allowing us to contribute to the important
topic of training and capacity-building in United
Nations peacekeeping.

Last year, the United Nations celebrated 70 years
of peacekeeping. Over these 70 years, the United
Nations has established more than 50 peacekeeping
missions. More than 15,000 peacekeepers from Fiji
have participated in United Nations missions, ranging
from Timor-Leste to South Sudan. Fiji has also paid a
heavy price, having lost 60 of our own men and women
across these missions. Peacekeeping casualties remind
us of the importance of training and capacity-building.
United Nations peacekeepers need to be able to fulfil
their mandates effectively, while minimizing casualties.
This has become only more important as conflicts have
become more complex and varied, both at the regional
and the international levels.

United Nations peacekeeping has evolved over the
last 70 years, from mostly observer and peacekeeping
missions into stabilization, justice support, transitional
support, confidence restoration and multidimensional
and enforcement tasks. These reflect the growing
complexities of peace operations and mission mandates
in increasingly complex conflicts. The United Nations
and its peacekeepers are being asked to do more and
more. This is indeed the right thing; of all the work that
the United Nations does, peacekeeping is perhaps the
most important. This work needs to be well supported,
as do capacity-building and training. This support
must be consistent and predictable and the capacity-
building ofpeace operations must be ofa high technical
and operational quality. This can be achieved only if
capacity-building and training needs are properly
supported financially from the outset.

In 2017, the Secretary-General unveiled reforms to
integrate the United Nations peace and security pillar
to support peacebuilding and make United Nations
peacekeeping more effective. That was a timely
decision. Peace operations must include, at their heart,
peacebuilding and conflict resolution. At best, the
mission of United Nations peacekeeping is to create
spaces to make politics to work to enable leaders - both
men and women representing their conflict-affected
communities - to take measured risks to ensure peace.
In environments affected by years of conflict, it takes
time for markets to kick in; it takes time for institutions
that protect civilians to kick in; and it takes time for
politics to kick in. A high-performing peace operation
needs to be able to reduce the time it takes for all of
these to kick in.

A good peacekeeping mission, at its core, is about
broadening spaces in and between communities. This
process involves peacekeepers interacting with the men,
women and children who need their protection. But it
also involves peacekeepers knowing what the stress
points are; understanding hidden drivers of conflict;
being able to identify victims and support them; and
being able to identify and respond to systemic sexual
Violence. When the United Nations does peacekeeping
well, we save lives, we promote sustainable development,
we increase prospects for peace and we demonstrate
progress across the Sustainable Development Goals.

The world has become more dangerous for United
Nations peacekeepers, as they must combat asymmetric
threats from non-State actors. To be fit for purpose,
peacekeepers will need to be highly trained in broader
ways to respond to new and complex mandates. This
will require capacity-building to focus on these skills,
including new and specialized ones.

One of these new skills in a new area relates to
climate change. Water stress, extreme weather events
and food insecurity associated with climate change are
all drivers of conflict. They may exacerbate competition
and conflicts. They may fuel the outbreak of new cycles
of conflict in a context of intense competition for
resources. Peace operations need to understand these
climate-related drivers of conflict far better. They
may be small performance improvements in our peace
operations, but they will have far-reaching implications
for stability and peacebuilding in the long term.
Fiji has embarked on an ambitious peacekeeping
capacity-building action plan to enhance its peace
operation preparation for United Nations missions.
It is doing so with the strong support of our regional
partners, particularly Australia and New Zealand. Our
ambition is to make Fiji's peacekeepers fit for these
more complex United Nations peacekeeping roles. As
a significant troop-contributing country, we have an
obligation to do far more to perform to the highest
standards expected of us.

We are proud that Fijian peacekeepers bring
extraordinarily strong soft skills into complex
peace operations. Fiji's experience over 40 years
of peacekeeping from deployments around the
world has taught us important lessons, which we are
systematically integrating into our preparations for
new missions. We are doing so because we recognize
that when peacekeepers strike a positive rapport with
communities, it contributes hugely to improving
dialogue and prospects for reconciliation.

Fiji's peacekeeping capacity-building action plan is
firmlycommittedtoimprovingallareas ofpeacekeeping.
For a small developing country, partnerships are the way
forward in its United Nations peacekeeping role. Fiji's
partnership with Australia and New Zealand may serve
as a model for other small countries seeking to engage
in United Nations peacekeeping. With the support of
these and other traditional partners, including all of the
permanent five members of the Council - and your
own country of Indonesia, Mr. President - we expect
to go a lot further.

We are preparing our forces to be able to speedily
respond to climate-induced disasters, both in regions
affected by conflict and regions that are not. We hope
to be able to contribute these skills within United
Nations peace operations. Fiji remains steadfast in our
commitment to United Nations efforts to persistently
improve performance and capacity-building.

