Mr. de Ruyt (Belgium) (spoke in French): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the European Union.
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe associated
with the European Union - Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia - and the associated
countries Cyprus, Malta and Turkey, as well as Iceland,
a European Free Trade Association country and
member of the European Economic Area, align
themselves with this statement.

I wish to welcome among us the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard She
Okitundu, and thank him for his statement on the
position of his Government.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Congo,
Mr. Amos Namanga Ngongi, for his excellent
introduction to the ninth report of the Secretary-
General.

The peace process in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is laborious and complex. However, it is still
on track, and the European Union is glad of that. We
note with satisfaction that the ceasefire has generally
held since last month and that the second phase in the
deployment of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is nearing completion. We now have to
capitalize on these positive developments so as to make
progress. This will be a long process, requiring action
in both the short and medium terms, but whose success
will in the end depend primarily on the will of the
parties to the peace process.

In that connection, we noted with interest the
report of the Secretary-General. At a time when we are
preparing to embark on the third phase of MONUC's
deployment, this report assumes particular importance.
This phase is indeed a crucial one, and it is also more
complex than the preceding ones. However, we deplore
the fact that the United Nations still does not possess
some of the essentials it needs at this stage, including
the information to be provided by the parties regarding
the number, composition and exact position of the
armed groups in the field. We urge the parties
concerned to supply this information, as they promised
to do several months ago.

Nonetheless, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation to the Security Council that the third
phase of MONUC deployment be started in order to
maintain the momentum of the peace process. In
response to the Secretary-General's comments on the
subject, the European Union states that it is in favour
of the arrangements regarding this phase of the
deployment despite the associated risks and costs, in
the expectation that the parties to the conflict, both
inside the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the
region, will fully shoulder their moral and political
responsibilities to end the suffering of the population,
which has gone on far too long. In other words, the
European Union wants to stress clearly at this stage
that it is urgent that the signatory States and other
parties to the Lusaka Agreement demonstrate the
political will necessary to press on with the peace
process.

The withdrawal of troops from the territory of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is continuing, and
we welcome in particular the withdrawal of the
Namibian troops and of a significant number of the
Ugandan troops. We should remember that Namibia is
the first signatory to the Lusaka Agreement to have
withdrawn its forces in accordance with the
Agreement. We fervently hope that the other States
concerned will follow its example. In this respect, we
encourage Uganda to complete the withdrawal process
it has initiated, and we urge the Rwandan Government
and the other Governments concerned to accelerate the
preparations for withdrawing their troops in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1304 (2000).

We consider that the proposal to establish a
MONUC base at Kindu provides parties with an
opportunity to demonstrate their goodwill and to
implement a genuine confidence-building measure: the
gradual deployment of MONUC in the east of the
country could be accompanied by a gradual withdrawal
of the troops in the field.

Aside from that, there is another measure whose
implementation can wait no longer: the demilitarization
of Kisangani by the Rassemblement congolais pour la
democratie (RCD-Goma) pursuant to the Security
Council's decisions under Chapter VII of the Charter.
We appeal to the Rwandan Government to exert all its
influence on RCD-Goma to bring about that
demilitarization.

The Council is aware that the European Union
considers the question of disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR)
to be one of the pillars of a resolution of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
connection, it is crucial that Kinshasa and Kigali agree
on how to proceed. We call upon Presidents Kabila and
Kagame to step up their dialogue and to seek mutually
acceptable solutions. In the meantime, the Union urges
all countries in the region, and the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular, to put
a stop to any support being given to the armed groups
in the East of the Republic.

The inter-Congolese dialogue is another, no less
essential, pillar for a resolution of the conflict. Despite
disappointment at the missed opportunity of the Addis
Ababa meeting, we remain convinced that with
goodwill and a spirit of compromise the process can be
put back on track. We would stress that the inter-
Congolese dialogue is the unique forum where all the
Congolese parties can express their opinions and
decide in a peaceful manner on the political future of
their country. It is now important that the facilitator, Sir
Ketumile Masire, and the Congolese parties meet as
soon as possible and determine a date and location for
a substantive dialogue on the parameters for an
inclusive and democratic transition, subject to a
realistic timetable. The European Union confirms that
it continues to support the dialogue, as do its member
States.

The suffering of the population, and in particular
the serious violations of human rights and the
deplorable humanitarian situation of the Congolese
people, cannot be ignored. We are restating in the most
urgent terms our appeal to the region's leaders to find
solutions commensurate with those problems. We hope
that the dispatch of adequate numbers of United
Nations civilian personnel to accompany MONUC's
military deployment, including political, human rights,
humanitarian, child protection and DDRRR specialists,
will help substantially to improve matters.

The European Union confirms its support for the
peace process under way in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and undertakes to that end to make every
effort and use all its influence, in close cooperation
with the United Nations, the Organization of African
Unity and all the parties concerned. We trust that, in
the light of the recommendations of the Secretary-
General and of his Special Representative, Mr. Ngongi,
the Council will take the measures necessary to ensure
that the process that has been initiated can continue in
the right direction.

