Mr. Fernandez-Taranco: Last month, we
reported that there was a series of quiet and informal
meetings between the parties characterized by positive
engagement and the constructive handling of several
potentially destabilizing events on the ground. At that
time, Special Coordinator Robert Serry warned that the
situation remained uncertain and fragile, highlighting
the need for mutual confidence-building measures
in order to sustain the talks. We are worried that that
has not happened thus far and that the earlier positive
environment brought about by quiet engagement
between the parties appears to be challenged. The latest
announcements related to settlements are an added
setback.

As we speak, there are ongoing intensive efforts to
avoid a renewed deadlock. It is in that spirit that Quartet
envoys met in Brussels on 15 June. The envoys agreed
that there was an urgent need for the parties to continue
to pursue the present efforts towards resumed dialogue
and substantive negotiations and that it was time for
them to take the necessary steps towards that goal.

On 6 June, Prime Minister Netanyahu announced
the construction of approximately 850 settlement
units in several West Bank settlements. The timing
coincided with efforts to reach agreement with settlers
to relocate five housing units in the settlement of Beit
E1. The units were built on private Palestinian land and
are due to be relocated no later than 1 July, following
an Israeli High Court decision. Let me reiterate that
all settlement construction in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, whether on private
land or elsewhere, is in violation of international law
and Israel's road map commitments, and it makes the

two-State solution all the more difficult to achieve.
On 17 June, near Hebron, an Israeli truck driver
allegedly shot and killed two Palestinians after having
been attacked himself and injured. Clashes between
Israeli settlers and Palestinians continued in the West
Bank during the reporting period. Palestinian attacks
on Israelis in the West Bank resulted in three Israelis
being injured, including a child.

Settler attacks on Palestinians near Hebron on
5 and 11 June resulted in several students and a
farmer being injured. Early this morning, a mosque
near Ramallah was spray painted and set on fire. The
attack is linked to the Israeli decision to evacuate the
Ulpana outpost, adjacent to the settlement of Beit El.
We note that the Israeli Government has condemned
that desecration and vowed to use all means necessary
to find the perpetrators and bring them to justice. The
United Nations condemns that flagrant act against a
Muslim holy site and calls upon the Israeli Government
to protect Palestinian individuals and property.

Additionally, 24 Palestinian structures, including
seven residences, were demolished in the West
Bank, leading to the displacement of 28 Palestinians,
including 14 children. On 12 June, a final demolition
order was issued against 51 structures in the village of
Susiya, near Hebron, which if implemented could lead
to considerable displacement of affected Palestinian
inhabitants and result in the destruction of international
assistance projects in the village.

Palestinian security forces have continued working
to maintain law and order in the West Bank, for which
the Palestinian security forces need to be adequately
equipped. Palestinian security forces defused a number
of unexploded devices and returned to Israel a number
of Israeli citizens, including a soldier, who had entered
the West Bank. A Palestinian security operation aimed
at restoring order in Jenin following the death of its
Governor in May was extended to Nablus in early
June. Around 50 suspects have been detained. The
recent opening of state-of-the-art police training and
corrections/rehabilitation facilities in Jericho provides
further evidence of Palestinian progress in advancing
their governance and rule of law agenda. Support
from the international community remains essential if
continued progress is to be ensured.

The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted 189
operations in the occupied West Bank, during which 114
Palestinians were injured, including one child, while
79 Palestinians were arrested, mostly in connection
with protests marking the anniversary of the 1967 war.
Demonstrations also continued against the barrier,
which deviates from the Green Line in contravention
of the advisory opinion (see A/ES-10/273) of the
International Court of Justice.

Despite the agreement reached on 14 May that
ended the hunger strike of Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli custody and amid reports that some additional
Palestinians have been put in administrative detention,
two prisoners are reported not to have ended their
hunger strikes. On a positive note, Mahmoud Al-Sarsak,
who started his strike on 19 March, ended his hunger
strike yesterday, after an agreement was reached for
his release to Gaza on 10 July. Family visits from Gaza
are scheduled to resume shortly, and, on 31 May, Israel
transferred the remains of 91 Palestinian militants to
the Palestinian Authority. We continue to call for the
agreement to be implemented in full by all sides and for
the urgent resolution of the ongoing hunger strikes on
humanitarian grounds.

Efforts to promote Palestinian reconciliation
continued, following the most recent 20 May
reconciliation agreement. Fatah and Hamas delegations
met in Cairo on 6, 7 and 15 June to discuss candidates
for a transitional technocratic Government to be headed
by President Abbas. President Abbas insists that any
new Government must follow his political programme
and abide by Palestinian Liberation Organization
commitments. The Palestinian Central Elections
Commission resumed operations in Gaza, with full
cooperation from the de facto authorities, and plans to
register voters in Gaza between 3 and 14 July.

In Gaza, the relative calm that prevailed since
April was disrupted on 1 June, when an Islamic
Jihad-affiliated militant breached the southern Gaza
border and opened fire on a group of Israeli soldiers,
killing one before being killed himself. That incident
was followed by several exchanges of fire until 6 June.
Violence resumed on 17 and 18 June, when rockets were
fired from Gaza into Israel, while Israeli air strikes
resulted in four Palestinian militants killed and several
Palestinians injured, including a woman and her child.

Overall, for the reporting period, a total of 15 rockets

and 27 mortar shells were fired from Gaza into Israel,
while Israel Defense Forces conducted seven incursions
and 14 air strikes into Gaza, resulting in 9 Palestinian
militants killed, 9 Palestinian militants injured and 15
Palestinian civilians injured. Two Palestinians were
also killed in tunnel-related incidents. We continue to
condemn all indiscriminate rocket attacks from Gaza
into Israel, which must stop. We also urge Israel to
show maximum restraint.
We are also concerned about serious security
incidents over the weekend in the vicinity of the
Israeli-Egyptian border. Two rockets were shot from
the Sinai into southern Israel on 16 June, one landing
in the proximity of the Israeli town of Mitzpe Ramon
and the other in the Ovda area, both approximately
30 kilometres from the border. No damage or injuries
were reported. In the early morning of 18 June, at least
three militants attacked Israeli workers constructing
the security fence at the Israeli/Egyptian border near
the locality of Kadesh-barnea. One Israeli worker
was killed and two were injured. The IDF deployed
in the area, exchanged fire with the militants, and two
militants were killed.

With the closure entering its sixth year, the full
implementation of resolution 1860 (2009) and Gaza's
recovery and long-term economic growth remain
fundamental objectives of the United Nations. As
reported in previous briefings, some significant progress
was made towards that goal, but much more needs to be
done. For United Nations agencies to continue to play a
major role in the international efforts towards that end,
further Israeli approvals of outstanding United Nations
projects are required. The United Nations continues
to urge Israel to allow the unrestricted import of key
building materials and particularly aggregate, iron bar
and cement, which continue to be illegally imported
through tunnels with Egypt.

Gaza continues to face an electricity shortage, and
despite the gradual transfer of Qatari-supplied fuel from
Egypt, the fuel that is reaching the Gaza power plant
cannot produce more than 30 megawatts (MW) of the
plant's current 90-MW potential. That, together with a
decline in fuel procured from Israeli suppliers, means
that the energy situation in Gaza remains bleak. The
United Nations will continue to monitor the situation
with the aim of helping to restore a sustainable level of
energy supply.

Overall, the Palestinian economy is showing signs
of slowing. Real gross domestic product (GDP) grew
by only 2 per cent in the last quarter of 2011, with GDP
growth slightly higher in the West Bank than in the
Gaza Strip. Among the most significant challenges is
unemployment, which increased by 3 percentage points
in the first quarter of this year. Unemployment is now
24 per cent across the occupied Palestinian territory.
Again, it is higher in Gaza than in the West Bank, and
young people are particularly affected by the lack of
employment opportunities.

Despite those challenges, the Palestinian Authority
continues to realize progress in building the institutions
of a future Palestinian State, including its ability to
collect economic and other data. The Palestinian Central
Bureau of Statistics achieved an important milestone
when it subscribed to the International Monetary
Fund's Special Data Dissemination Standard for the
dissemination of economic and financial statistics. That
important step should enable better decision-making
within both the public and private sectors and, in
so doing, should contribute to the pursuit of sound
macroeconomic policies by the Palestinian Authority.

Let me briefly turn to the situation in Syria.
Achieving a full and sustained cessation of violence
and seeking a peaceful resolution of the crisis in Syria
remains at the centre of our efforts. General Mood will
provide the view from the ground in relation to the
activities of the United Nations Supervision Mission in
the Syrian Arab Republic (UNSMIS) this afternoon.

I will therefore limit my remarks to emphasizing
that the Secretary-General remains gravely concerned
about the intensification of violence and the rising
death toll, as well as the continued human rights
abuses and unmet humanitarian needs. The situation
in Homs is particularly alarming. The tragic human
suffering resulting from the escalating conflict calls for
urgent and concerted efforts to avoid a full-scale civil
war. Time is running out. The Secretary-General has
repeatedly underscored that the Government of Syria
bears the prime responsibility for changing course
and fully implementing the six-point plan. Shelling
and firing against population centres by Government
forces, including from tanks and helicopters, must stop
immediately. The cessation of armed violence in all its
forms is an obligation for all sides. The opposition, too,
must abide by it.

Joint Special Envoy Annan and his deputies
continue to work with the concerned Governments
and a broad spectrum of the Syrian opposition towards
launching a political process, which would provide a
chance for a peaceful resolution of the Syrian crisis,
which is already in its sixteenth month. We welcome
and encourage the ongoing efforts to find common
purpose in the international community. It is urgent
that those consultations yield real results soon. As
was recommended by the Secretary-General and the
Joint Special Envoy on 7 June, a truly joint effort by
the Council - one that delivers unified and sustained
pressure to demand compliance in full with the
six-point plan - is urgently needed. Otherwise, we
may be reaching the day when it will be too late to stop
the crisis from spiralling out of control.
Humanitarian organizations continue to scale up
their activities, reaching over 400,000 people in the
first 10 days of this month and providing 50,000 people
with basic living items this month alone. However,
access is still very limited, and the gap between what
is needed and what is provided remains far too wide.
Due to the increase in fighting, there are now well
over one million people in need inside Syria. The
number of assisted refugees in Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon
and Turkey has reached 86,000 and continues to rise.
The Secretary-General calls on the Government of
Syria and the opposition groups to facilitate access by
humanitarian organizations to all those in need.

In that context, the regional aspects of the
peace process are stalled. It is worth noting that the
5 June anniversary passed without incident, both in the
occupied Syrian Golan and in southern Lebanon.

Let me now turn to the situation in Lebanon. Since
the last briefing (see S/PV.6775), Lebanon has continued
to face challenges to its security and stability, owing
partly to the continued crisis in Syria.

On 1 June, further fighting broke out in Tripoli
between the predominantly Sunni and Alawite
neighbourhoods of Bab al-Tabbaneh and Jebel Mohsen,
which continued for several days and left 15 people
dead and several dozen injured. The deployment of the
Lebanese Army and the Internal Security Forces in the
area contained the fighting, but the situation in Tripoli
remains fragile. United Nations Special Coordinator
Plumbly visited the city on 12 June.

Additionally, there have been reports of Syrian
Army incursions into the northern area of Akkar and
in the Bekaa, with two persons killed during such
incursions. In other incidents, Lebanese citizens were
abducted and taken across the border to Syria. Most
of them were subsequently released, in some instances
in exchange for the release of abducted Lebanese
Alawites. The 11 Lebanese Shia pilgrims kidnapped
in Syria have not yet been released; on 9 June a video
of them recorded approximately five days earlier was
broadcast.

Against that background, President Sleiman
succeeded in reconvening the national dialogue on
11 June, after an 18-month gap. The session was attended
by many of the country's senior leaders from across the
political spectrum, representing both the March 8 and
the March 14 political movements. A joint declaration
was issued after the meeting that, among other things,
effectively commits all of the country's leaders to the
policy of disassociation from regional crises. The next
dialogue session is scheduled for 25 June and is expected
to address the sensitive issue of weapons outside State
control.

Calm has prevailed in the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) area of operations as
UNIFIL continued to carry out its operational activities
in close coordination with the Lebanese Armed Forces.
The Israel Defense Forces completed without incident
construction of the wall to replace the existing technical
fence in the sensitive area of Kafr Kela. However, air
violations by the IDF continued on an almost daily basis.
The Secretary-General's report on the implementation
of resolution 1701 (2006) will be submitted to the
Council by the end of the month.

The Secretary-General continues to follow the
events in Egypt closely. He looks forward to the early
handover of full authority to a civilian Government. He
underscores his concern that the country's transition
should meet the legitimate aspirations of the Egyptian
people and of the international community for the
establishment of strong, representative, democratic
institutions and for the popular will to be respected,
both in the elections and in the drafting of a new
Constitution.

Given such dramatic regional developments,
progress on the Israeli-Palestinian track is of even
greater urgency and would have an important positive
impact on the region.

Let me reassure the Council that the
Secretary-General, together with our Quartet partners,
will continue to stress the necessity of renewing
dialogue and making real progress towards the
two-State solution, which is long overdue and, as the
Special Coordinator warned in his briefing last month,
increasingly at risk. We thus strongly encourage them
to urgently consider taking the necessary constructive
steps that would allow them to renew the meetings
between their negotiators and work towards resumed
direct negotiations. Goodwill gestures will go a long
way towards removing the lack of trust. Only a direct
and meaningful dialogue can help restore the belief in
a negotiated peace.

