Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French): The
importance of the debate being held by the Security
Council today stems from the fact that peacebuilding
remains at the heart of the work of the United Nations.
I would therefore like to thank Colombia, Madam
President, for deciding to put the issue at the centre of
the Council's work for this month.

The annual report ofthe Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) on the work of its fifth session (S/2012/70)
provides an illustration of the actions taken in 2011.
The statements just made by the Secretary-General, the
current and outgoing Chairs of the Commission and the
representative of the World Bank serve to inform the
Council about the work carried out and the challenges to
be addressed. I congratulate the Chairs of the PBC and
its country-specific configurations for their leadership.

Since the 2005 World Summit, peacebuilding
has remained at the centre of United Nations efforts
in countries emerging from conflict. Peacebuilding
supports peacekeeping in order to enhance the
effectiveness and visibility of the United Nations
presence, which has the task of considering
systematically and comprehensively all of the problems
due to or exacerbated by an armed conflict, in order to
build a viable State that respects fundamental freedoms
and establish good political and economic governance.

Since the establishment of the PBC, the Security
Council has also worked to develop and adapt its
peacekeeping mandates, which now give pride of place
to the rebuilding of a country after peace has been
restored.

In that context, my country commends the
reconstruction work carried out by the PBC
country-specific configurations in Sierra Leone,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Guinea, the Central African
Republic and Burundi. Although the results vary from
one country to another, the new approach translates
the will of the United Nations to ensure that countries
emerging from conflict do not revert to violence due to
a lack of appropriate support.

The Commission's report reviews the key actions of
the country-specific configurations, which essentially
concern establishing dialogue among the various
political actors of a country in order to provide solutions
to divisive issues, strengthen national capacities in
order to establish a solid foundation for development
and mobilize external resources to rebuild the country
and foster strengthened coordinated efforts among the
various development agencies aimed at consolidating
real accomplishments.
It is comforting to note that many sectors of the
concerned countries have experienced accelerated
development resulting from the initiatives of the country
configurations, which have established dialogue among
the various actors participating in reconstruction and
targeted priority tasks.

Among the priority actions, Togo believes that
there should be emphasis on political dialogue among
the various actors in a country, so as to ensure that the
settlement of political issues will open a path towards
democracy while establishing the rule of law and good
governance and reforming the key sector of justice.

Nevertheless, Togo would recall that to ensure the
long-term success of those actions it is important to
continue to prioritize the participation of women and
youth in all future initiatives.

The PBC's support for Liberia, Guinea-Bissau,
Sierra Leone and Guinea in West Africa with respect to
their development programmes indicates that the issues
of youth and women's employment, drug trafficking
and security sector reform were particularly targeted
because settling those issues is essential to the stability
and sustainable development of those countries.

Turning to the issue of transnational organized
crime in West Africa, we are pleased by the
cooperation among the four country configurations,
which have joined efforts to respond to the problem
comprehensively based on the principle of common
and shared responsibility, along with assistance from
exterior actors.

In that regard, the call for cooperation among the
PBC, the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and INTERPOL deserves support, not only
in order to implement the relevant ECOWAS action
plan, but also the West Africa Coast Initiative. In each
case, it should be noted that awareness-raising, political
support and resource-mobilization are key elements of
the activities to be conducted.

While congratulating the PBC for its policy on
mobilizing resources, we encourage it to strengthen
efforts in that area. External financing should assist
national authorities to cover all sectors, rather than
targeting only a few areas, such as governance, justice
sector reform, the preparation of elections and security
sector reform.

In that context, my delegation commends the
good cooperation established with such international
financial institutions as the World Bank, the African
Development Bank and other funds and programmes,
which all participate in peacebuilding in their own way
and according to their own capacities.

In spite of all of those efforts and the encouraging
results achieved on the ground, much remains to be done.
Other actions and initiatives should be taken to improve
the performance of the PBC and the country-specific
configurations. Togo believes that the Commission
would provide added value in attracting greater
appreciation if it were to synchronize cooperation and
direct exchanges with local actors and their partners.

By visiting the field more often and meeting not only
country authorities but national and international actors
and other concerned United Nations bodies, the PBC
would be able to see for itself what actions are needed
to strengthen its action in the field. Such cooperation
would have the added benefit of harmonizing the
efforts under way with a view to avoiding duplication.
In that respect, the Chair of the PBC should be given
the opportunity to join the Security Council on its field
missions when needed.

In the same vein, national ownership of development
programmes provides another opportunity for the work
of the United Nations to succeed in countries where it
is involved. This involves, in particular, training for
local stakeholders. In order to properly carry out its
reconstruction mission, the PBC should also rely on
subregional organizations, which have the advantage
of knowing the fundamental needs of the people,
with particular emphasis on the energy and basic
development sectors.

Togo also believes that national reconciliation
should be a major focus in efforts to ensure lasting
peace. Even if reconciliation is based on the application
of justice, the Commission should promote a justice
that repairs and restores. In that respect, truth, justice
and reconciliation commissions should be supported
and encouraged, because they offer true reconciliation
after having established the facts, determined who was
responsible and provided reparations to the victims.

To conclude, Togo calls once again for greater
support from Member States and all competent
organizations for the Peacebuilding Fund and the
Peacebuilding Support Office.

