Mr. Motoc (Romania): I will keep my comments
short, since we fully associate ourselves with the
statement that Ambassador Hoscheit of Luxembourg
will make shortly on behalf of the European Union.

First, I would once again like to congratulate the
High Representative for his inspiring and thorough
work in Bosnia and Herzegovina. As usual, his report
is upbeat about the country's progress, especially in
core areas such as defence and economic reform. Lord
Ashdown's results there and the course that he is
charting are exemplary in proving one of Romania's
cherished and long-standing beliefs, namely, that the
prospects for European and Euro-Atlantic integration
are fundamental to the re-launching and durability of
the recovery in the Western Balkans.

At the same time, those results could not have
been achieved without the commitment of the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I welcome the
participation of Mr. Barisa Colak, Deputy Chairman of
the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, at
today's meeting, as well as the statement he has made.

Romania hopes that Bosnia and Herzegovina will
make progress this year in its top goals, namely,
joining NATO's Partnership for Peace and launching
negotiations with the European Union on a
stabilization and association agreement. Cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) remains the essential precondition
to Bosnia and Herzegovina's progress down the path
towards European and Euro-Atlantic integration. We
therefore join others in calling upon the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, and especially those of
Republika Srpska, to cooperate fully with the ICTY.
All the international organizations that that country
aspires to join are very firm and unequivocal in their
position that there will be no compromises on that
issue. We take note of the reasons for cautious
optimism in that regard that have been reported today
by Lord Ashdown, and we encourage the authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue along that path
and deliver on their cooperation with the ICTY.

Finally, we are pleased with the smooth and
seamless transition to the European Union-led
peacekeeping force, to which Romania contributes
troops and military aircraft. We welcome in particular
the fact that the European Force (EUFOR) has an
explicit mandate to provide support in the fight against
organized crime, which is an important aspect in
stabilizing the region. Moreover, EUFOR's assistance
to the efforts of the European Union's Police Mission
in that regard is of particular relevance and value.

