Mr. Dolgov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We too are grateful to Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his briefing on the situation with
regard to the Middle East peace process.

In recent months, considerable noteworthy
developments have taken place in the Middle East. It is
important to continue to influence the local situation,
taking advantage of the momentum generated by the
Arab Summit held in Riyadh. The decisions taken there
have created a propitious environment for stabilizing
the Middle East peace process. The coming period will
see very intensive contacts, pursuant to the decision
taken in Saudi Arabia, among parties including the
Quartet, which involves Russian participation, regional
partners and other interested parties. We anticipate
positive results from the regular ministerial meeting of
the Quartet to be held in May.

We welcome the robust efforts of the Secretary-
General to help bring about a comprehensive
settlement in the Middle East. We look forward to
hearing his ideas on the outcome of his recent visit to
the region. We welcome the Secretary-General's
positive assessment of the talks held in Damascus.

There is a need to make use of this favourable
overall situation in order to move forward with specific
efforts to revive the Arab-Israeli dialogue on all tracks,
in particular on the Israeli-Syrian track, and to raise the
exchanges of Views between the Palestinian National
Authority and the Israeli Government to the level of
substantive negotiations. Clearly, all of that will
require considerable efforts. The main thing is that this
work be undertaken collectively, with the participation
of all interested parties.
Despite these positive trends, the situation in that
region continues to be very complex. That is due above
all to the security situation in the Palestinian territories.
The parties need to show the utmost restraint,
implement their relevant obligations and prevent any
actions that could undermine the process.

On 18 April, there was a meeting of the Arab
League Ministerial Committee to follow up the Arab
Peace Initiative. Russia has responded positively to the
outcome of that meeting. We attach great importance to
the League's establishment of a working mechanism to
establish a substantive dialogue in which all interested
parties, including the relevant Egyptian and Jordanian
authorities, will have direct contacts with Israel in
order to find a way to settle the Arab-Israeli conflict.

That is the very approach that Russia, as a
permanent member of the Security Council and a
member of the Quartet of international mediators on
peace in the Middle East, has consistently advocated.
We will continue to support movement towards a
comprehensive Arab-Israeli settlement that would, of
course, be reciprocal and would take into account the
concerns of both sides and towards a search for
genuine solutions that would have a legal basis.

Moscow has drawn attention to the statement by
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, which
hosted the recent meeting of Arab States, favouring a
United Nations-sponsored conference on the Middle
East with the participation of the international
community, regional players and the parties
themselves. This proposal is consonant with the well-
known Russian initiative on convening an international
conference on the Middle East. We are certain that this
would make it possible to resume the peace process in
the region on all tracks with a View to achieving a
comprehensive, just and lasting settlement of the Arab-
Israeli conflict.

The situation in Lebanon unfortunately continues
to be very complex, because in parliament the majority
Lebanese Government and the opposition parties have
not reached a consensus on the two key issues:
formation of a national unity government and the
establishment of an international tribunal on the
assassination of former Prime Minister Hariri. We urge
the Lebanese people to continue their efforts to achieve
the central goal of maintaining national consensus,
which means ensuring that Lebanon retains its unity,
territorial integrity and sovereignty.
The international community needs,
constructively and without exerting unwarranted
pressure, to help the Lebanese people find a
comprehensive, effective solution to outstanding

problems. But primary responsibility for the fate of
Lebanon continues to lie with all Lebanese political
forces.

