Mr. Dos Santos (Mozambique): I would like to join
others who have spoken before me in congratulating you,
Sir, on the magnificent leadership you have provided this
Council in the month of February. We are particularly
happy to see you preside over our deliberations on the
important agenda item before this body today. My
delegation extends its sincere congratulations to your
predecessor, Ambassador Hisashi Owada, Permanent
Representative of Japan, for the remarkable way in which
he guided the affairs of the Council for the month of
January.

Allow me also to express my delegation's gratitude
to the Secretary-General for the comprehensive report
before us today and for his efforts in search of real peace
and reconciliation in Angola.

When we last addressed the Council, we expressed
our concern at the slow pace of the implementation of the
"Acordos de Paz" for Angola and of the relevant
resolutions of this body. While we appreciate the
encouraging developments, as presented in the

 

Secretary-General's report, we cannot fail to register our
desire to see greater commitment translated into concrete
action, particularly on the part of UNITA.

From the messages we received just prior to the last
debate in the Council, we were led to believe that by this
time we would be celebrating the formation of the
Government of National Unity and Reconciliation and that
there would be free movement of people and goods
throughout Angola.

As we meet today, the implementation of the
remaining and crucial aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
particularly the incorporation of UNITA troops into the
Angolan Armed Forces, demobilization and the extension
of State administration throughout Angola, have not yet
been completed. We are constantly faced with new
elements being introduced in order to delay or postpone
actions already agreed upon. This should not be allowed to
continue. We concur with the observations in the Secretary-
General's report that attempts to introduce linkages or
conditions for moving the peace process forward should not
be supported by the international community and must be
abandoned immediately.

In order for the peace process in Angola to make
tangible and desirable progress, UNITA has to take urgent
and decisive steps towards the implementation of all aspects
of the Lusaka Protocol. The UNITA leadership has to
ensure that deputies to the National Assembly, as well as
those who are to take part in the Government of National
Unity and Reconciliation, return to Luanda.

We believe that the Angolan Government has shown
commitment, made efforts to comply with its obligations
and demonstrated the necessary political will to
accommodate UNITA and its leadership so as to bring
about lasting peace and reconciliation in Angola.

The international community, under the aegis of the
United Nations, has played a constructive role in helping
the Angolan people to restore peace in their land and
reconcile.

The Secretary-General's reports indicates that Angola
continues to face severe economic challenges and that
efforts are being undertaken by the Government and
cooperating partners to address the situation and initiate a
reconstruction programme. These efforts will not succeed
if they are not backed by steady progress in the peace
process, which will build confidence in the economy.

The challenges of reintegrating demobilized soldiers
and of demining can be dealt with more adequately in
conditions of stability, with the Government providing the
attention that these programmes require. The support of
the international community in this area remains of
paramount importance. Post-conflict peace-building is a
necessary precondition for lasting peace and stability.
Mozambique is undergoing a similar process. It is a
daunting task, but it certainly pays dividends.

We would also like to register our support for the
Secretary-General's proposed phased withdrawal of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission
(UNAVEM. III) and arrangements for a transition period.
We equally support the extension of the UNAVEM. III
mandate.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm its
continued unconditional support for and solidarity with
the people and the Government of Angola in their search
for peace. My delegation would also like to seize this
opportunity to reiterate its gratitude to all members of the
Security Council for their active commitment to the
restoration of peace, harmony and national reconciliation
in Angola.

