Mr. Djinnit: Since my most recent briefing to
the Council, a year ago (see S/PV.7923), my Office
has continued to support the implementation of the
Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region, in
close collaboration with the African Union and the
other guarantors of the Framework agreement, namely,
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC). During the period under review,
I and my Office focused our engagement on a number
of critical areas.

The first issue is that of negative forces in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The negative forces, including the Allied Democratic
Forces, continue to attack and terrify the population,
causing suffering and displacement and fuelling
mistrust between the countries ofthe region. The Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR) remain
active and exert control over their disarmed former
members and dependants in transit camps, whose
continued presence further exacerbates tensions with
the host population. The issue of the ex-Mouvement du
23 mars (M-23) members WHO are still in Rwanda and
Uganda is yet to be fully resolved.

Based on the outcome of the visit of representatives
of signatory countries and the guarantors to the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in September 2017, which my Office promoted, the
leaders of the region, at the eighth high-level meeting of
the Regional Oversight Mechanism, held on 19 October
2017 in Brazzaville, adopted the following decisions,
among others.

They called for the strengthening of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
Intervention Brigade and for the repatriation, without
conditions and no later than 20 October 2018, of
disarmed FDLR combatants and dependants still in
camps in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of
ex-M-23 members WHO remain in Rwanda and Uganda.

As a next step, the Joint Follow-up Mechanism
on the repatriation of disarmed combatants and their
dependants is expected to be launched in Goma at the
end of this month.

Secondly, I turn to support for peaceful dialogue
and electoral processes. Our focus has remained
on the situations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, two core countries of the
Framework agreement.

In the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, despite the
progress made in preparations for the elections, tensions
persist between the Government and the opposition over
conditions for the holding of the elections. My efforts
during the period under review focused on mobilizing
concerted regional and international support for the
implementation of the 31 December agreement and
the holding of peaceful and credible elections. In this
regard, we have been promoting initiatives by the
Framework agreement guarantors and engaged key
Congolese stakeholders.

With the same aim, I maintained close contacts with
regional leaders, particularly President Sassou Nguesso
of the Republic of the Congo and President Lourenco
of Angola, in view of their role and engagement on
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as
the African Union and other partners. Most recently,
I facilitated a consultation in Addis Ababa between
the African Union Commission Chairperson and
representatives of the guarantors and Special Envoys
for the Great Lakes region.

Regarding Burundi, the political and human
rights situation remains of great concern, particularly
as the country is heading towards a referendum for
constitutional changes. In consultation with Special
Envoy Kafando, I seized every opportunity to encourage
regional leaders to remain focused on the crisis and to
support the efforts of the East African Community
facilitation to ensure progress in the inter-Burundi
dialogue and to maintain the legacy of the Arusha
Peace and Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi.

The third critical area is addressing the root causes
of conflicts in the region. In this regard, the continued
illicit exploitation and trade of natural resources from
the Democratic Republic of the Congo contributes, as
we know, to financing negative forces and deprives the
country of critical sources of growth and development.
As recommended by the meeting on natural resources
that we convened jointly with the ICGLR in July 2017,
my office will continue to encourage greater political
commitment by the core countries of the region to curb
the illicit trafficking of resources from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

Human rights violations and impunity remain
central to the instability in the region. Recent cases
of the extradition of leaders of armed groups are
encouraging, but more concerted efforts are necessary
to advance judicial cooperation. Together with the
ICGLR, we are working to operationalize the judicial
cooperation network that we jointly established in 2016.

The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region is of great
concern to all and requires greater attention. My Office,
together with the ICGLR and with the support of the
United Nations regional team, especially the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, is preparing to convene stakeholders'
consultations on forced displacement to raise awareness
of the magnitude of the problem and reinvigorate the
commitment to finding lasting solutions to conflict and
displacement in the region.

Furthermore, within the United Nations regional
team, we have continued to implement the Great
Lakes Regional Strategic Framework as a cross-border
approach to assist in addressing the root causes of
conflict. We have also been supporting women, youth
and civil society to enable them to play a key role in
promoting the objectives of the Framework agreement.
For instance, we are now preparing, together with
ICGLR and the African Union women mediators,
known as #FemWise, joint high-level missions to
Burundi, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Central African Republic and South Sudan to promote
the role of women in peace and political processes.

Lastly, we have continued to mobilize the leadership
of the region through the governing mechanisms of
the Framework agreement to promote dialogue and
cooperation among signatory countries. The Regional
Oversight Mechanism and its Technical Support
Committee of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework are indeed critical vehicles to ensure
sustained political engagement with regard to the
regional commitments under the Framework agreement
and to address contentious issues. I am encouraged by
indications of greater ownership, as exemplified by the
commitment of Uganda - succeeding Angola and the
Republic of the Congo - to assume the chairmanship
of the Regional Oversight Mechanism later this year.

This past February marked the fifth anniversary
of the Framework agreement. On that occasion, we
organized consultations on 26 and 27 February in Addis
Ababa to assess its implementation. That initiative came
in the wake of the adoption of resolution 2389 (2017),
which requested the Secretary-General to engage in
high-level dialogue to assess progress and challenges
in the implementation of the Framework agreement and
to present his vision on the way forward. It came to
light that, although progress is slow and the Framework
agreement has yet to fully deliver on the expectations it
raised, it remains a vital tool for promoting cooperation,
peace and security in the region, in complementarity
with the 2006 Pact on Security, Stability and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.

Progress was noted in some areas, such as the
defeat of the M-23 rebel movement, the weakening of
the FDLR and the establishment of confidence-building
mechanisms, as well as increasing economic cooperation
and integration. However, participants highlighted that
greater political will is needed to fully implement the
commitments under the Framework agreement. It was
noted that mistrust among core countries in the region
also continues to undermine progress.

(spoke in French)

The discussions in Addis Ababa brought to light the
fact that the signatory countries must, with the support
of the international community, strengthen their efforts
to bring about lasting peace to the region. In that
regard, I underscore the important role that regional
organizations are playing in finding a lasting solution to
instability in the region. I therefore recall the following
priorities that should guide our collective action.

First, increased resolute efforts must be made
to dispel mistrust among the countries in the heart
of the Great Lakes: the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi. In that regard, I
welcome the sustained commitment of the leaders of the
region and the African Union. At the recent meeting I
had on 29 March with President Sassou Nguesso, in his
dual capacity as Chair of the ICGLR and Chair of the
Regional Oversight Mechanism of the Peace, Security
and Cooperation Framework, we discussed possibilities
for strengthening relations among those countries
through the good offices of the leaders of the region.

Secondly, in the months to come we must continue
to focus our attention on the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo both in terms of security in the
eastern part of the country and in terms of the electoral
process. Although measures are being considered
to enhance the effectiveness of the MONUSCO
Intervention Brigade, the financing of armed groups
must also be addressed by effectively combating the
illicit exploitation and trafficking of natural resources.
Moreover, all parties concerned must fully commit
to the repatriation of unarmed foreign combatants.
In addition, in order to ensure the implementation
of the 31 December 2016 agreement and to create
the conditions for an inclusive and credible electoral
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is
essential that the Security Council remain united in its
support for the ongoing work under way in the region.

Thirdly, we must not lose sight of the situation
in Burundi. Greater commitment on the part of the
leaders of the region and the African Union, with the
support of the United Nations, is needed to reinvigorate
dialogue among all stakeholders in Burundi, led
by the East African Community and its Facilitator,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa.

Fourthly, the countries of the region and
humanitarian actors must come together to come up
with sustainable and regional solutions to the worrying
humanitarian crisis in the Great Lakes. I hope that
the consultations that we intend to facilitate with the
ICGLR and stakeholders will help in that regard.

Lastly, it seems to me that at some point the United
Nations, in cooperation with leaders of the region, must
address the problem of overlapping mandates and goals
of the Framework agreement and the ICGLR Pact,
while considering the comparative advantages of both
instruments and the need to ensure complementarity
and synergy between those two mechanisms.

The Great Lakes region remains one of the most
volatile and complex regions of the continent, even
though it could significantly contribute to Africa's
stability and development. I encourage the Security
Council to continue to urge all stakeholders to work
towards the common goal of bringing lasting peace,
stability and development to the region and its people.

