Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): I would like to
congratulate Poland on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, and to thank the presidency
for holding this much-needed debate at a time when we
are witnessing an erosion of multilateralism and blatant
violations of basic rules and principles of international
law, the latest example of which is the brutal killing of
civilians in Gaza.

For my country, Lebanon, international law
represents the essence of the progress of civilization
towards a multilateral rules-based system. The Charter
ofthe United Nations in particular acts as a safeguard of
our sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence,
which is why it is important to fully and strictly adhere
to it. The key words here are "full implementation" and
"compliance".

First, Security Council resolutions must be fully
implemented and bind all Member States. It is the
responsibility of this organ, which is entrusted with
the maintenance of peace and security, to ensure full
respect for its resolutions in order for international law
to prevail. Let us not forget that Article 24, paragraph
2, of the Charter requires the Security Council to abide
by the purposes and principles of the United Nations.
Only through faithful respect for those provisions will
we avoid double standards and selective application of
international law.
Secondly, there must be full compliance with the
judgments and advisory opinions of the International
Court of Justice, the primary judicial organ of the
United Nations and a court of universal character.
Justice is a strong guarantee for the peaceful settlement
of disputes, and the Security Council must use the
authority vested in it by Article 94 of the Charter to
give effect to decisions by the Court.

Lebanon believes that Member States should make
full use of the tools set out in Chapter VI to settle their
disputes peacefully. I would like to remind the Council
of my country's 2016 initiative, based on the Charter of
the United Nations and paragraph 10 of resolution 1701
(2006), to seek the good offices ofthe Secretary-General
in the delineation of the disputed maritime border and
the exclusive economic zone between Lebanon and
Israel. It goes without saying that, absent a resolution,
this issue remains a source of conflict that could
threaten the peace and security of our region. Lebanon
has also reaffirmed its commitment to the rules and
principles of international law through its voluntary
commitment to the French-Mexican initiative and the
Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group's
code of conduct, which are both aimed at preventing
and halting the commission of mass atrocity crimes.

In conclusion, it remains imperative that we achieve
universal, fair and just acceptance of the existing rules
and principles of international law, especially the
Charter, as well as their full implementation, rather
than entering into new treaties. Conversely, in the
light of the emerging concepts that are debated at the
United Nations, it is fundamental to define them or
clarify their legal basis, so as to prevent or limit their
politicization. International law is a precious asset that
we must fully protect.

