Mr. Schulz (Germany): We very much welcome
this renewal of the arms embargo on Libya for another
12 months through the adoption of resolution 2473
(2019), and call on the Council to intensify its efforts to
halt all breaches of the arms embargo in order to stem
the weapons flow into Libya.

Through its inspection and investigation activities,
the European Union military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean has made an important
contribution against illicit arms trafficking and
continues to contribute through its ongoing activities.

In today's environment in Libya, the strict
implementation of the arms embargo is more important
than ever. The ongoing and flagrant violations of the
arms embargo must not be accepted by the international
community. We therefore very much support the call of
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Salame
on all actors to strictly implement the arms embargo.
The influx of weapons contributes to the escalation of
the conflict and leads to more victims and destruction
in Libya, as Special Representative Salame pointed out
in his recent briefing to the Security Council.

Furthermore, the seemingly unlimited arms
supply fuels the erroneous belief in a military solution
to the conflict and contributes to the unwillingness
of actors on the ground to agree on a ceasefire and
resume the political process, as proposed by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
supported by the vast majority of members of the
international community.

The violations of the arms embargo therefore
constitute a key impediment to a political solution,
and the unhindered influx of weapons also carries the
risk of a further destabilization of the neighbouring
countries and the whole region. The European Union,
as a direct neighbour, cannot and will not accept this.

Lastly, the open breaches of the arms embargo
imposed by this very Council diminish the credibility
of the United Nations and the Security Council
itself. It is time to redouble our efforts to assume
our responsibility and act in close cooperation with
Special Representative Salame to find ways to finally
implement the arms embargo effectively.

