Mr. Terzi di Sant'Agata (Italy): I wish to join
other delegations in thanking Presidents Robinson and
Byron, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow,
for their presentations to the Council. I also wish to
congratulate President Robinson on his recent election
and to wish him every success on his future
endeavours. Let me also take this opportunity to
commend the work of Fausto Pocar as President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) over the past three years. Under his
leadership, the ICTY was able to reach very high
standards of efficiency, in full respect of the principle
of fair trial.

Italy welcomes the tangible progress made in
pursuing the completion strategies through the strong
commitment of the Tribunals, the judges, the
prosecutors and the entire staff. However, we are
somewhat concerned about the fact that achieving the
completion strategies will be delayed. Of course, that
has been largely due to objective factors, the inability
to ensure the prompt arrest and surrender of
defendants, obstacles in judicial cooperation and other
reasons. We believe that, rather than discussing the
past, it is now time to look ahead and to try to ensure
the smooth conclusion of judicial activities, in keeping
with the best standards of fair trial and due process.

At the same time, the Council should underline
that cooperation is essential for a truly successful
completion. In that regard, cooperation with the
Tribunals has largely improved recently. Still, it is a bit
frustrating to see that difficulties remain after so many
years. Cooperation must become a resolute practice.

Under the presidency of Judge Byron, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
endeavoured to improve its ability to respect the
completion schedule. It also has ambitious plans to
complete trials during 2009. But regrettably, further
delays seem unavoidable at this stage. Nonetheless, we
are confident that the Tribunal will continue to do its
best to keep delays to a minimum. We will carefully
consider the proposal made today by President Byron.

We are confident that both Tribunals will make
every effort to finalize pending cases and facilitate
judicial activities on appeal. At this juncture, it is
important to make appropriate plans to assure that the
Appeals Chamber is granted the necessary staff and
resources.

In our View, it is also essential to strengthen
capacity-building in the countries most directly
concerned, both in terms of the judiciary and outreach.
Support through the international community would be
more than welcome, including by strengthening States'
judicial capacity to conduct criminal trials for
international crimes. In that regard, Italy commends the
assistance given to the ICTY by the United Nations
Interregional Crime and Justice Research Institute and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, as mentioned in the report (see S/2008/729) of
the President of the ICTY.

We would like to note that the Tribunals' legacies
must remain under the Council's consideration. In
numerous meetings of the Informal Working Group on
international tribunals, chaired by Belgium, delicate
issues have been discussed pertaining to the aftermath
of the completion strategies. In that regard, we believe
that the obligation to try fugitives should remain a
clear duty of the international community. With the
active contribution of the Council, important decisions
should be adopted in a timely manner to reaffirm the
purpose for which the Tribunals were established:
bringing to justice those responsible for the most
heinous international crimes in the territories of the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

Lastly, we would like to thank Ambassador
Grauls and the Belgian delegation for having
efficiently chaired the informal working group on
international tribunals. The activities of the group have
paved the way for the legacy of the Tribunals.

