Mr. Vieira de Mello (Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator):
On behalf of my colleagues in the humanitarian community,
thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to
address the Council in an open meeting.

The aim of my remarks today is to put before the
Council some of our concerns as they relate to the question
of peace and security, and to suggest a number of issues
that the Council may wish to take up in 1999. Let me start
by touching on two aspects of the environment in which we
work: the nature of modern warfare and the legal context
that guides our action.

Contemporary armed conflict is seldom conducted on
a clearly defined battlefield by conventional armies
confronting each other. Today's warfare often takes place
in cities and Villages, with civilians as the preferred
targets, the propagation of terror as the premeditated
tactic and the physical elimination or mass displacement
of certain categories of populations as the overarching
strategy. The acts of warring parties in recent conflicts in
the former Yugoslavia, Sierra Leone and Afghanistan bear
testimony to this. Breaches of human rights and
humanitarian law, including mutilation, rape, forced
displacement, denial of the right to food and medicines,
diversion of aid and attacks on medical personnel and
hospitals are no longer inevitable by-products or collateral
damages of war. They have become the means to achieve
a strategic goal. As a result, even low- intensity conflicts
generate enormous human suffering. Humanitarian needs
are disproportionate, in fact, to the scale of military
conflict. Meeting these needs has become more difficult
as the dividing line between combatants and civilians has
grown blurred.

Too often, humanitarian agencies are left alone in
these desperate situations, and their efforts are taken for
granted. Humanitarian action on its own may alleviate and
at times appease through non-political dialogue, but it can
never resolve conflicts that in essence have political or
other origins. The willingness to commit resources - be
they political or military - to resolving international
crises has diminished since the early 19903. As Edmund
Burke said, the only requirement for evil to prevail is for
good individuals to do nothing.

The only effective way to deal with many of these
crises is for the Security Council to exercise its central
and unique responsibility for the maintenance of peace
and security, as foreseen in the Charter.

The second aspect of the environment in which we
work is the legal framework for our activities. This year
is the tenth anniversary of the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and the thirtieth anniversary of the
Organization of African Unity Convention governing the
Specific Aspects of Refugee Problems in Africa, a very
important regional instrument. It is also the fiftieth
anniversary of the Geneva Conventions and the one
hundredth anniversary of the Hague Convention. 1999 is
also a year of commemoration of the St. Petersburg
Declaration, one of the first instruments in terms of
international humanitarian law. Combined with other
instruments, such as the Genocide Convention, today we
have a greater body of international law regulating the
behaviour of parties in conflict and aimed at protecting
civilian populations, before or after they become victims,

 

than was ever before the case. This is a major achievement
of humankind.
However, in most contemporary conflicts, international
humanitarian law, human rights law and refugee law are
unknown, ignored or wilfully disrespected. The gulf
between existing international norms and respect for them
on the ground has probably never been so wide. Our
greatest challenge is to bridge this gap through the
realization of international laws and fundamental principles
in practice. While the primary obligation to abide by
international humanitarian law and human rights rests with
Member States and parties to conflicts, which have often
committed themselves on paper, the Council is still charged
with ensuring respect, as part of its international
responsibility to maintain peace and security.

Almost every abuse of a civilian population or attack
on humanitarian personnel represents a breach of
international legislation and principles. The 1998 Statute of
the International Criminal Court (ICC) elaborates further on
previous international instruments in defining the crimes of
genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes under
the jurisdiction of the Court. The elaboration of the Statute
of the International Criminal Court is a major development
in this respect. The process of ratification of the ICC
Statute and the setting up of the Court need to be
accelerated. The action of members of this Council will be
crucial in setting an example to other Member States. By
establishing the two ad hoc Tribunals, for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, the Council has in fact recognized
its responsibility for dealing with the question of impunity
and its link to sustainable peace and security.

Most importantly, the Security Council has for some
time recognized that massive violations of humanitarian law
can constitute a threat to peace and security. To cite only
a few, resolutions 688 (1991) of 5 April 1991, establishing
the security zone in northern Iraq; resolution 941 (1994) of
23 September 1994, on "ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia; and
resolution 955 (1994) of 8 November 1994, calling upon
States to cooperate with the International Tribunal for
Rwanda, all are based on this understanding.

Alongside international humanitarian law, the
importance of respect for human rights is more and more
frequently recognized. Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his
13 April 1998 report on Africa highlighted the all-important
link between upholding human rights and preventing
humanitarian disasters. While international law defines the
moral and legal imperatives for action, the law is
ineffective if it is not translated into pragmatic action. A
major accomplishment in recent years is the recognition
that human, civil, political and social and economic rights
are not simply a matter of principle or politics, but from
a strictly pragmatic point of View constitute an essential
building block for peace and security of and among
nations. The Secretary-General, in his reform programme
of 1997, notes that

"Human rights are integral to the promotion of peace
and security" (A/51/950, para. 78).

The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child is
the only Convention which incorporates articles of human
rights as well as international humanitarian and refugee
law. Article 38 directly calls on States to respect
international humanitarian law and also establishes the
minimum age for conscription at 15, a provision which is
being regularly flouted in today's conflicts. I strongly
support the move by the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) and others to increase the minimum age to 18
and to introduce an age requirement for United Nations
peacekeepers and international civilian police as well. The
Council may wish to examine the fate of children caught
up in armed conflict, and effective ways of protecting
them, on a future occasion, as it did, I know, last year.

I have elaborated on the two main elements that
characterize the environment in which we currently
operate: the changed nature of conflict and the pervasive
disregard for international norms by parties to a conflict.
I would now like to make some further specific
suggestions on ways in which the Council could consider
assisting humanitarian agencies in these very difficult
circumstances.

Humanitarian action cannot succeed without
unimpeded access to those in need. Government and
opposition leaders in countries affected by conflict must
understand that they do not confer recognition on their
opponents simply by allowing civilians living in areas
which they do not control to receive help. On the
contrary, it is an obligation under international law of all
legitimate authorities to ensure that all those in need
receive assistance. This is the fundamental principle of
the responsibility of States towards their citizens. I was
pleased that this was immediately recognized by both
sides to the conflict in Guinea-Bissau. We need the
Council's help to get the message across in Angola, as we
discussed yesterday, and Sierra Leone, where hundreds of
thousands are in immediate need.

 

General Assembly resolution 46/182 of 1991 - the
resolution which also established my functions - spells out
that humanitarian aid should be undertaken with the consent
of the sovereign State. The same resolution also reiterates
the responsibility of States to take care of victims of
emergencies occurring within their territories. International
law spells out the right of victims of armed conflict to
humanitarian assistance and protection. If States are for any
reason unable to fulfil this obligation, they have another,
which is to facilitate the provision of international
humanitarian aid. In reaffirming the rights of victims,
humanitarian organizations must also accept their obligation
to uphold the non-political nature of humanitarian action
and the highest standards of impartiality.

We need the Council, as I have stated in the past, to
strongly reaffirm these principles, both in a generic and
country-specific manner.

The caution regarding international engagement
evident after the Somalia experience has led to more
reluctance in the deployment of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. I do not wish here to get into the
arguments for or against the deployment of individual
peacekeeping missions, which is clearly beyond my
competence, but would like to highlight a number of points
which have a bearing on humanitarian action.

The contribution peacekeeping forces and international
police can and do make to averting and containing
humanitarian crises is too often overlooked. There are many
positive examples of collaboration between peacekeepers
and humanitarian agencies, which I know from experience,
such as Cyprus, Lebanon, Cambodia, Mozambique, the
former Yugoslavia and Central America. Even where
humanitarian objectives were not part of their primary
mandates, peacekeeping operations have proved valuable,
often vital, in supporting and protecting needy populations,
humanitarian workers and supplies in environments where
there was limited consent from the warring parties or when
the security situation is simply beyond their control.

Peacekeepers can also play a valuable role in helping
to prevent the diversion or abuse of aid for political or
military purposes. The non-combat military resources
available to peacekeepers have also proved crucial in
dealing with humanitarian emergencies, for instance in the
Great Lakes and in Bosnia. I am thinking in particular of
their airlift, manpower and engineering capacities.

When mass murderers or other criminals hide in
refugee camps, as in Eastern Zaire in 1994, the primary
responsibility lies with the host Government and its
security forces. But peacekeepers can play a key role in
strengthening national forces to allow for the separation
of combatants from the victims. As members are aware,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) is now actively working with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations to draw up
options for an international mechanism to assist
Governments in maintaining security and a humanitarian
environment in camps and settlements. The Council's
continued support to this effort will be essential.

Another non-traditional area the Council may wish
to look at relates to the use of the media to prepare and
foster conflict. The most powerful weapons in the hands
of modern mass killers, or ge'nocidaires, are radio stations
and other mass media. The genocide in Rwanda and the
"ethnic cleansing" in Bosnia were instigated by criminal
politicians using lies and distortions to persuade ordinary
people to murder their neighbours. In both cases
nationalistic or ethnocentric hate campaigns propagated
through the mass media prepared the way for genocide.
United Nations-supported radio stations can help to
counter such propaganda.

In the atmosphere created by such propaganda,
peacekeepers and humanitarian workers face a Virtually
impossible task. The Council could examine the feasibility
of replicating, in other places, the measures taken by the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) first and
then by the High Representative in Bosnia to curb the
abuse of the media there. In a climate of ethnic
intolerance and total disrespect for international law,
UNPROFOR earlier and the High Representative later
ensured that fair, objective, tolerant radio and television
as well as newspapers received adequate international
support, while broadcasting licences for other stations
were withdrawn, and the Stabilization Force (SFOR) took
control of transmitters when necessary.

A further mechanism at the disposal of the Council
to encourage the upholding of international law, combat
impunity and help avert or reduce humanitarian crises is
the judicious use of sanctions. There is increasing
recognition that well-targeted or "smart" sanctions can
have a real impact without necessarily leading to the kind
of humanitarian consequences which we have seen with
some recent sanctions regimes.

If sanctions can be used to prevent war criminals
from enjoying the fruits of their evil, without harming
innocent women and children, we have given ourselves a

 

potent new tool for good. The ideas contained in the
Secretary-General's report on Africa of using individual
targeted sanctions against the perpetrators of abuses of
human rights and humanitarian law, and holding them
financially responsible to their victims, deserve to be
implemented with the broadest possible support.

I should like to make one final point before I
conclude. Given the environment I described in my initial
remarks, assisting affected populations in war zones has
become more and more dangerous. In the past six years,
153 United Nations personnel have lost their lives while on
duty. The recent shooting down of two United Nations
aircraft in Angola has brought this issue home to us even
more starkly. What can we do?

I welcome the fact that the Convention on the Safety
of United Nations and Associated Personnel of 1994 finally
entered into force last week, on 15 January. The
Convention relates to personnel serving in operations
specifically authorized by the General Assembly or the
Security Council and is therefore binding only on States
parties. It thus does not apply to most of the situations in
which humanitarian personnel work. Ways of extending the
Convention to cover all situations in which United Nations
and associated personnel, including national staff, are
deployed, and of ensuring its implementation by non-State
actors, need to be further explored. Humanitarian operations
see a high turnover of staff, and security training is
therefore essential. A Trust Fund for Security has been
established; so far, only three States have contributed, while
one other has pledged. That is an extraordinarily
disappointing response. Conversely, the inclusion of attacks
against humanitarian personnel as a crime falling within the
jurisdiction of the ICC is a very positive development.

Humanitarian workers appear to be seen as
expendable. Many times they are deployed where
Governments consider it too risky to deploy better-trained,
better-equipped and better-protected peacekeepers. The
casualty rates among humanitarian workers are simply
atrocious. Last year, the World Food Programme suffered
particularly severe losses, but so did other United Nations
agencies, the Red Cross Movement as a whole and non-
governmental organizations. Well over 90 per cent of the
deaths of humanitarian workers were not even adequately
investigated by the authorities concerned. The killing will
continue either until humanitarian agencies refuse to go
where their security cannot be guaranteed or until
Governments with influence give the security of
humanitarian personnel the importance it merits. In this
context, I would like to reiterate our appreciation for the
action undertaken by the Government of the Russian
Federation to ensure the liberation of Vincent Cochetel,
a UNHCR colleague held hostage in the Caucasus for
over six months.

In conclusion, the anniversaries being
commemorated in 1999 are generating considerable
interest in international humanitarian law and in the ways
in which the international community prevents or
responds to the outbreak of war - with humanitarian aid,
by facilitating political negotiations, with military
deployment or by promoting forms of governance and
development as factors of stability and peace.
One theme which is uppermost in the public's mind
worldwide is at the core of all the issues I have briefly
raised with the Council today: the treatment of civilians
in armed conflicts. Humanitarian organizations would
welcome any move by the Council to examine practical
ways in which we can ensure a greater level of protection
for civilians in armed conflict, which we believe is of
direct relevance to the Council's core responsibilities.
This is an urgent task. We can celebrate the last year of
the millennium by helping translate international laws and
principles into reality, and elementary moral standards, as
well as the universal concern for humanity, into action.

I should like to finish by paraphrasing Vaclav Havel
and to say that we must not be afraid of dreaming the
seemingly impossible if we want the impossible to
become a reality.

