Mrs. Rodriguez Camejo (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
We endorse the statement made by the representative of
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Cuba regrets that since, the last open debate on this
issue (see S/PV.8244), there has been no progress in
promoting the just cause of the Palestinian people. On
the contrary, the situation on the ground continues to
deteriorate, with arbitrary decisions being made, such
as one Member State's decision to stop funding the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. It is deplorable that owing
to the repeated obstruction of one of its members, the
Security Council has not even condemned the escalation
of violence and the tragic events in the Gaza Strip since
30 March.

Cuba reiterates in the strongest terms its rejection
of Israel's use of disproportionate and indiscriminate
force against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territory, including East Jerusalem and particularly
the Gaza Strip, in gross and flagrant violation of
the Charter of the United Nations and international
humanitarian law. We once again condemn the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the demolition
and seizure of Palestinian property. All such measures,
together with the blockade of the Gaza Strip, violate
the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode the viability
of a two-State solution. Cuba urgently reiterates its
call on the Security Council to fulfil its responsibility
under the Charter for the maintenance of international
peace and security. The Council must demand that
Israel immediately end its occupation of Palestinian
territories and its aggressive colonization policies and
practices, as well as abide by the relevant Security
Council resolutions on the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question, particularly
resolution 2334 (2016).

We reiterate our unreserved support for a
comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, based on the establishment of two
States and enabling the Palestinian people to exercise
their right to self-determination and an independent
and sovereign State, within in the pre-l967 borders,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, as well as the right of
return of refugees. We reject the unilateral action of the
United States establishing its diplomatic representation
in the city of Jerusalem, which only exacerbates
tensions in the region. We call for support to President
Mahmoud Abbas's proposal (see S/PV.8183) to hold
an international peace conference, based on agreed
parameters and terms of reference. We want to express to
the Palestinian Government and people our unwavering
solidarity and support for Palestine's admission to the
United Nations as a full Member.

Cuba once again calls for Israel's total and
unconditional withdrawal from the Syrian Golan and
all occupied Arab territories. We want to point out that
any measure or action designed to change the legal,
physical and demographic status and institutional
structure of the occupied Syrian Golan, as well as
Israel's measures to exercise its jurisdiction and govern
that territory, violates international law and the Charter
of the United Nations.
Lastly, we call for respect for multilateralism and
for the Charter. We call for an end to interference in
the internal affairs of others, to foreign aggression and
support for terrorist groups to promote instability and
conflicts in the Middle East, as well as to the invention
of pretexts and theories in the Council in an attempt
to legitimize the unilateral use of force and aggression
against sovereign States.

