Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first like to thank the Secretary-General for his
presence and his briefing, especially for the clarity of
his message and proposal.

The humanitarian situation in Yemen, Somalia,
South Sudan and north-eastern Nigeria is certainly
alarming. The crises in those regions are concentrated
in fragile communities that are experiencing serious
conflicts or are threatened by terrorist groups, and in
areas that are particularly vulnerable to the effects of
climate change. Let us be clear. The world produces
more than enough food to meet the needs of its entire
population. It is the actions of humans that result in
such unprecedented humanitarian crises, through
armed conflicts that displace populations and the
destruction of productive infrastructure and food-
distribution channels.

We must act urgently to respond to the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia, which has been
exacerbated by years of conflict and insecurity that
have the potential to derail the country's political
development and the legitimacy of Federal and state
institutions. We sjpigd redouble our coordinated
efforts to meet immediate needs and strengthen
future resilience.

With regard to Yemen, the violence produced by the
armed conflict and the paralysis in the peace process
are causing great suffering to Yemeni civilians. With
each passing day, that suffering further jeopardizes
the country's humanitarian situation, which is on the
brink of collapse, aggravated by famine, the spread
of cholera and difficulties in delivering aid. The three
years of conflict in Yemen have led to a catastrophic
humanitarian situation and the world's most serious
food-security crisis. Millions ofpeople need assistance,
in the form of food, water and medicine, to survive.

It is the civilians who are paying the highest price
for this war, as they lose their lives. Ending the suffering
caused by such man-made crises is possible, but it will
only happen when the parties return to the negotiating
table - without preconditions and in good faith - and
agree to put an end to the armed conflict. Recalling
the provisions of resolution 2286 (2016), we emphasize
that aerial attacks on schools and hospitals, where the
most vulnerable, innocent civilians are to be found, are
despicable and unacceptable. We reiterate once again
that the rebels in Yemen do not control its airspace,
which means that those bloody attacks are being
perpetrated by other forces. Sadly, when such attacks
are carried out, we are putting the future of the whole
onemeni society, especially children, injeopardy. The
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law that all the
warring parties have committed are unfortunately now
common currency in Yemen.

With regard to the crisis in South Sudan,
Mr. Stephen O'Brien, the former Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, told the Council in
March (see S/PV.7897) that the famine that the people
of South Sudan are enduring is man-made. Those who
are inciting and perpetuating the conflict there are
complicit in the people's starvation.

There is a multidimensional crisis in north-eastern
Nigeria, with many factors sowing seeds of instability
in the region. In an area whose economy is dependent
on agricultural activity and where 5 million people are
suffering from food insecurity, climate change, drought
and the terrorist threat presented by Boko Haram are
wreaking ever greater havoc.

We have said that these situations are man-made.
It is therefore also up to humankind - all of us - to
bring an end to that suffering, identify those responsible
and make sure that they are held accountable for
their actions.

If I may, I would like to point out that another
victim of these horrors, besides the innocent civilians
suffering from famine around the world, is our own
consciousness. I would ask my colleagues to think about
the words that we use to talk about this situation. We
have become used to antiseptic euphemisms that protect
us from harsh realities. Today we often talk about food
insecurity. What that actually means is that there is no
food. We often talk about severe food insecurity. What
that actually means is that there are people who on the
verge of famine. Or we say that people are enduring
livelihood crises. What we are really saying is that they
do not have the most minimal amount of food that a
person needs to survive. I believe we must stop being
indifferent to such perversities.

