Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): First of all, I would like to congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation on the
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for December. We are certain that your African wisdom
and skills will enable you to direct the work of the
Council successfully. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Mayr-Harting and his delegation for
wisely conducting the Council's work last month.

I wish to welcome the Presidents and the
Prosecutors of the two courts, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and thank
them for all the information that they provided in their
briefings.

We welcome the noticeable progress made in the
completion strategy work for the two Tribunals and the
strong determination of the judges, prosecutors and all
the staff of the Tribunals to complete their mandates
successfully and as soon as possible. However, we are
aware of the difficulties that the Tribunals encounter
while carrying out their work, in particular when the
swift arrest and extradition of the accused become
impossible. While it is true that we welcome the
cooperation of the Governments of Serbia, Croatia, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda on the
arrest and the extradition of some senior accused, we
hope that all countries will continue to fully cooperate
in arresting the remaining fugitives as soon as possible,
given the importance of the arrests to provide equity
for the victims, to uphold justice, to achieve
reconciliation and to provide security and stability in
their respective countries and regions.

We firmly believe that enhancing the capacity of
the judicial authorities in the countries concerned, in
particular Rwanda, is especially important if we want
those national judicial institutions to take on the trials
that the two Tribunals will not be able to take up
because they will have completed their work. It is vital
to transfer as many pending cases as possible to
national jurisdictions, in full conformity with the rules
and procedures for fair trials. Transferring some cases
to national jurisdictions would undoubtedly boost the
rule of law in those countries, in particular access to
documentation, which is even more important than the
judicial procedures themselves in order to know the
history and national reconciliation efforts in those
countries.
We must ensure completion of the Tribunals'
work with scrupulous respect for the deadlines called
for by the two completion strategies, which means that
we must make a decision on the legacy of the
Tribunals. We are pleased to see the efforts made by
the informal Working Group on international tribunals,
chaired by Austria, seeking to reach an agreement on
all pending issues with regard to the legacy of the
Tribunals.

Thus, we would expect the Council to address the
conclusions of the Working Group in the near future,
and for it to establish an international mechanism that
would guarantee the effective and professional
treatment of the legacy of the two Tribunals after the
completion of their work.

