Mr. Baja (Philippines): We are honoured, Mr.
Prime Minister by your presence here today presiding
over this meeting. This underscores the importance of
the theme of our debate.

As a member of the Association of South-East
Asian Nations (ASEAN), the Philippines aligns itself
with the statement made by Laos on behalf of the
ASEAN member countries outlining regional efforts
towards the creation of an ASEAN Security
Community in 2020, and the activities of the ASEAN
Regional Forum in enhancing political and security
dialogue and cooperation, as well as confidence-
building, in the Asia-Pacific region.

ASEAN's own indigenous actions in maintaining
regional peace are well known. They are exemplified
by its management of disputes in the South China Sea
and the regional actions that it undertook in
cooperation with the United Nations with regard to
Cambodia and East Timor. This morning the
representative of China also mentioned the ASEAN+3
process and the ASEAN cooperation dialogue.

Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security requires a framework
within which it can be carried out. Some issues have to
be clarified in developing this framework for
cooperation.

The questions relating to subsidiarity and
comparative advantages raised in the non-paper should
relate to the stages of a conflict. In conflict prevention,
the regional approach should first be exhausted,
because of important geopolitical considerations.
However, the United Nations should monitor
developments even during that stage and should
ascertain if there are impediments to the regional
approach, especially if a conflict is country-specific
and has grave humanitarian implications.

In conflict resolution, the United Nations should
be ready to extend its cooperation in resolving disputes
through peaceful means, in addition to the use of
existing regional dispute-settlement mechanisms, when
required by the concerned regional organization. The
Security Council assumes exclusive authority when all
peaceful means to conflict resolution fail. Post-conflict
measures should be open and participatory, with the
United Nations serving as the coordinator of all the
activities of Member States, regional organizations,
United Nations agencies and civil society.

Regional organizations embody regional norms.
The simplest way to understand the linkage between a
regional organization's economic interests and its
security interests is to study its charter or - in the
absence of such a document - the instruments
establishing the regional grouping. Regional
organizations have emerged from particular regional
developments, as reflected in the preambles of regional
charters or instruments.

The exchange of information relating to the
maintenance of peace and security at the regional level
is not only required under Article 54 of the Charter, but
should serve as the backbone of a framework for
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations. In that regard, the Secretary-General
deserves our compliments for having organized five
high-level meetings with heads of regional
organizations and for reporting the outcomes of the
meetings to the Council. Those biennial meetings
should be regularized, with provision being made for
inter-sessional modalities for information exchange so
as to keep the United Nations abreast of developments
in the regions.

Cooperation among regional organizations
themselves should be encouraged. There are two
options to that end. The first is the high-level meetings
with regional organizations organized by the Secretary-
General, at which an agenda item on that topic should
be included. The second is the organization of bilateral
meetings between two interested regional organizations
on the fringes either of those high-level meetings or of
the high-level debate segment of each General
Assembly session. ASEAN has developed a tradition of
meeting at the ministerial level with counterpart
regional organizations on the sidelines of the high-level
debate in the General Assembly.

Understanding the root causes of conflict is
crucial in the formulation of appropriate strategies for
stabilization. In that connection, consultations should
not be limited to the United Nations and the regional
organization concerned. As borne out by ASEAN's
experience, a parallel track undertaken by the academic
sector of civil society or by regional think tanks has
proved itself useful. Its value-added is confidence-
building, as parties intimately involved in conflict -
potential or actual - participate in the process.

With regard to the issue of transition from
regional to multilateral peacekeeping missions under
United Nations auspices, regional ownership dissolves
when the Council issues its imprimatur for the
deployment of regional peacekeepers. Although the
United Nations exercises overall command and control
of regional peacekeepers, the transition to an expanded
international mission should be planned not only with
the regional military commands, but also with the
political organs of the regional organizations
concerned.

The monitoring of cooperation between the
United Nations and a concerned regional organization
is an essential element of the planning process and
should be designed so as to determine whether or not
pre-set goals are achieved. From the monitored results,
every effort should be made to highlight best practices
and lessons learned for future reference and guidance.
Monitoring should also include an oversight function
so that a new oversight mechanism with possible
budgetary implications need not be developed.

The presidential statement that will be issued at
the end of the debate will serve as a springboard for the
early adoption of a framework of cooperation between
the United Nations and regional organizations, taking
into account the recommendations of Council members

and the representatives of regional organizations
participating in today's debate.

