Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, for
his very useful briefing, which enables us to understand
in greater detail one of the main activities designed to
consolidate international peace and security. We are
equally grateful to the representatives of Bangladesh
and Canada for their most relevant briefings.

To begin, we pay our most sincere and heartfelt
tributes to all personnel ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
operations around the world, who spare no efforts
in fulfilling their missions. In the same vein, we are
grateful to the countries that contribute troops -be they
military, police, observers or civilian personnel - for
their generosity to, solidarity with and commitment
to the system of the United Nations and countries that
suffer the vagaries of conflicts.

Within the framework of peacekeeping operations,
the force generation process carried out by the United
Nations clearly entails a complex system that must be
developed and implemented in a timely and efficient
manner, in line with realities on the ground and in
consultation with host and troop-contributing countries.
Consequently, in order to effectively and adequately
provide the economic, human and material resources
necessary to the missions, a technical, logistical and,
above all, political analysis is required, in accordance
with the mandates designed by the Council, which must
be more realistic, accurate and better-focused.

Given the multidimensional nature and the varied
roles of peacekeeping missions, we believe that their
capabilities must be strengthened. Force generation
must not solely be the work and responsibility of the
Office of Military Affairs or the Force Generation
Service. Rather, it must be the result of synergies
among all members of the system, which must contain
elements that generate coherence in the planning and
evaluation in the aftermath of missions. In that sense,
responsibility must be shared.

We consider it vital that the implementation of
analysis and planning processes for missions be less
bureaucratic. The concepts of operations must be the
priority and simultaneously linked with the political
decisions made by the Security Council when it designs
mandates. In that sense, we must test our Organization's
ability to design and implement a mandate that is
appropriate to needs on the ground. We believe that
it is necessary to improve institutional agility for the
deployment of troops, and to choose the best-trained
troops and those with greater specialization to respond
in increasingly complex asymmetric contexts.

It is clear that the international scene is not static.
It is undergoing significant transformations. Constant
threats by terrorist groups and transnational crime
against international peace and security highlight
the need for peacekeeping missions to be subject to
structural changes that allow them to adapt more
efficiently to their respective contexts in order to repel
those threats.

We highlight the efforts of the United Nations
and Security Council to achieve the objectives of the
mandates in force, and we call for unity among all
actors to strengthen the financial, tactical, operational
and strategic areas on the ground, in strict adherence to
the Charter of the United Nations and in full respect for
the principles of sovereignty, territorial integrity and
independence of States. Moreover, the improvement
of the material and technological factors must make
peacekeeping missions more effective in carrying
out their missions. It should be noted that adequate
equipment and training of troops are the responsibilities
not only of troop-contributing countries, but also that
of our Organization as a whole.

To conclude, it is also worth mentioning that no
peacekeeping mission can be successful if it does not
enjoy the support and backing of the host country. In
that regard, the ongoing and smooth coordination and
exchange of information among missions and local
authorities are essential.

