Ms. Paik Ji-ah (Republic of Korea): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Ivan Simonovic' for his
briefing.

We also appreciate the dedicated work of the United
Nations human rights monitoring mission in Ukraine
and welcome its fourth report, which provides a clear
assessment of the situation on the ground. As the report
elaborates in detail, the continuing violence in eastern
Ukraine has resulted in a growing number of casualties
and a further deterioration of the human rights situation.
We are troubled that illegal armed groups have
committed serious human rights violations, including
abductions, arbitrary detentions, torture, harassment
and killings. New allegations of military tribunals
and execution orders by armed groups are particularly
alarming. All allegations of such egregious crimes
must be investigated thoroughly, and the perpetrators
must be held accountable.

Meanwhile, it is worrisome that the situation in
the east is now affecting the border region of Ukraine,
along with a significant increase in the number of
people fleeing the eastern region. Hate speech is also
deepening divisions between communities and fueling
tensions.

In the light of such a volatile situation, we believe
that the only way out of the crisis is an immediate
cessation of all hostilities through constructive
dialogue. To achieve that, it is of paramount importance
that all parties agree on an immediate, genuine and
durable ceasefire, building upon relevant agreements,
including the Berlin Joint Declaration.

At the same time, the illegal armed groups must
lay down their arms and stop provocative actions
aimed at destabilizing Ukraine. We support the
critical role of the trilateral contact group and the
observer mission of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe at the Russian-Ukrainian border
in de-escalating intentions to create the conditions for
a political process.

Before concluding, we once again call attention
to the importance of a full, thorough and independent
international investigation of the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-17. All concerned parties must
comply with their obligations under resolution 2166
(2014) and fully cooperate with such an investigation.

Despite ongoing tensions on the ground, we
continue to believe that a political solution is necessary
and attainable. There is not a moment to lose. With
that shared sense of urgency, we once again encourage
all concerned parties to continue exerting maximum
efforts to seek a peaceful political solution.

