Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We welcome the participation in today's
Security Council meeting of Mr. Nikola Spirie,
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We listened with interest to his
presentation of the Bosnian leadership's assessment of
the current situation in the country. We are grateful to
Mr. Christian Schwarz-Schilling, High Representative
for the Implementation of the Peace Agreement on
Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his report to the Council
(S/2007/253, annex) and for his substantive briefing on
recent developments in the country and on the work of
the Office of the High Representative under its
mandate pursuant to Security Council resolution 1722
(2006).

In general, we commend Mr. Schwarz-Schilling
for his work during the reporting period. We take note
of his balanced approach towards the interests of the
Bosnian parties, with a view to helping them achieve a
compromise solution through constructive dialogue.
We hope that the High Representative will continue to
take that approach, which is intended as far as possible
to support political and diplomatic mechanisms, to
encourage local initiatives and to reject unlimited
recourse to the Bonn powers.

Success in the process of comprehensive
normalization in Bosnia and Herzegovina continues
largely to depend on the solid foundations of the
Dayton Agreement, which has been shown in practice
to be an effective instrument for maintaining stability.
This relates in particular to the priority goal of further
enhancing the climate of confidence and the
constructive dialogue among the peoples of Bosnia on
all outstanding issues, as well as to the importance of
patience in the Bosnian parties' search for mutually
acceptable solutions in building a democratic and
stable Bosnia and Herzegovina as a integral, multi-
ethnic State composed of two entities and ensuring
development for its three peoples.

We pay tribute to the High Representative for his
efforts to assist in the ongoing process of reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are convinced that for
such reform to go forward it must be based on the real
situation in the country; every step taken must be
carefully considered, and full account must be taken of
the interests of the Bosnian parties. In our view, neither
the tools available to the High Representative nor the
instrument of sanctions should be used to further an
agenda that goes beyond the Dayton Agreement, in
particular with respect to police and constitutional
reform. Progress in such reform should be strictly
based on consensus among the Bosnian parties.

We take note of the balanced efforts made by the
High Representative in the difficult period following
the October 2006 general elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope he will continue to take a
cautious approach, carefully weighing every measure
to be taken. We hope that in the framework of the
forthcoming October 2007 review, the members of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
will take account of the realities, not of some imagined
threat to stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina. This
relates first and foremost to the political rhetoric that is
often heard in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is
clearly aimed at appealing to the sensibilities of the
international community. We support an early transfer
to the Bosnian side of responsibility for managing their
country's affairs, including with respect to the
forthcoming transition of the Office of the High
Representative to a European Union mission. We
advocate stepped up efforts in this area, and we share
the European Union assessment that the Bosnian
Government is capable of effectively controlling the
situation in the country. That is reflected in the
reduction of the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina by nearly two thirds.

With regard to the frequently heard concern that
Kosovo issues are influencing the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, we are convinced that instead of
cracking down in Bosnia itself, we should focus on
negotiating a sustainable compromise settlement on the
future status of Kosovo that would stabilize the
situation in the region and not set an undesirable

precedent. As a member of the Steering Board of the
Peace Implementation Council and of the Contact
Group, Russia will continue, in close contact with the
High Representative, to play an active and constructive
role in international efforts to support the leadership of
Bosnia and Herzegovina in making continued progress
on political and economic reform.

