Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): As we all
know, and as the Angolan people know all too well, the
war in Angola has gone on far too long. Unfortunately, as
history has demonstrated, this state of affairs will continue
as long as UNITA possesses the capacity to let it.

We believe effective implementation of the sanctions
against UNITA is an indispensable ingredient for the end to
this war. The sanctions regime against UNITA has been
cited as a model package, directly focused as it is on the
commodities and activities that enable UNITA to wage war.
These sanctions are not punitive. They are intended simply
to diminish UNITA's war-making ability and thereby help
establish the conditions for - and encourage UNITA to
resume - a political dialogue as a method of bringing a
durable peace to the people of Angola.

Until now, UNITA has managed to evade most of
these sanctions and has therefore been able to remain
aggressive on the battlefield. The world community, nations
and citizens alike, must work together to change this. Peace
for the people of Angola must be our constant focus. Profit
from sanctions-busting must be seen for what it is: the
means to continued war and suffering.

Under the leadership of Ambassador Fowler of
Canada, the momentum is changing. Positive things are
happening with our international partners that tell us the
desire to strictly enforce the United Nations sanctions
against UNITA is taking hold. As the Chair of the UNITA
sanctions Committee this year, Ambassador Fowler's
energy and creativity have sparked great progress and
helped many people see, perhaps for the first time, the
immense importance of this enterprise.

Specific points of progress have already been
achieved. The Security Council earlier this summer created
two expert panels to collect information on violators and
Violations and to recommend measures aiding enforcement.
As we have just heard from Ambassador Fowler, those
panels should become operational soon. Chairman Fowler
himself has been indefatigable, as has his colleague
Mr. Angell, in spending many weeks in Africa and Europe,
investigating disparate leads and enlisting national leaders
to support this effort.

The United States, for its part, stands ready to work
together with any State committed to the common coal of
improved implementation of the United Nations sanctions
against UNITA. In this vein, my Government has worked
to identify senior UNITA officials to whom specific travel
and financial sanctions apply; we have promulgated
regulations with criminal penalties for United States
citizens violating these sanctions; we have volunteered
personnel for the expert panels, and we are seeking to do
the same with financial support; and we have also
consistently sought to share intelligence information on
Violations and Violators.

While Angola's neighbours are not the sole actors in
making sanctions against UNITA more effective, their
role cannot be overemphasized. As the porous borders
that are used to supply UN ITA are made ever more solid,
the peace and security of the whole region are improved.
The profiteers who help supply UNITA, if allowed to
continue their malevolent mischief today, will create death
and suffering elsewhere tomorrow. We must work
together to put an end to these destructive activities.

In this light, the United States welcomes Chairman
Fowler's report today. We urge all Member States of the
United Nations to consider seriously his findings and
recommendations.

