Mr. Arkwright (United Kingdom): Like other
speakers before me, and on behalf of all of us in the
British delegation, I should like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Merimee, with whom we have all worked so
closely, and whose contribution to the work of the
Security Council has been immeasurable. We wish him
bon voyage and bonne chance in Rome.

The resolution we have just adopted marks what we
hope will be a turning point for the long-suffering
Liberian people. The Abuja Agreement signed last month
gives grounds for cautious optimism. Prospects for peace
in Liberia appear to be better than at any time since the
war started. My delegation welcomes in particular the
establishment of a broad-based Council of State and the
presence in Monrovia of representatives of all the
Liberian factions.

We are concerned, however, about recent reports of
violations of the cease-fire. We call on all parties to
respect that cease-fire.

The Council's decision to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL)

 

until 31 January 1996 will give the factions time to
demonstrate their commitment to the Abuja Agreement. It
is vital that they make use of this limited period to
demonstrate clearly their commitment to a genuine peace
by proceeding with implementation of the Abuja provisions
on disarmament, demobilization and steps towards free and
fair elections in 1996.

My delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's
decision to increase immediately the number of military
observers in UNOMIL. We hope that they will be deployed
as soon as possible. We look forward to the
Secretary-General's presentation of a new concept of
operations for UNOMIL. As he recognizes, improved and
effective cooperation between UNOMIL and the Cease-fire
Monitoring Group of ECOWAS (ECOMOG) will be the
key to the success of both missions. We therefore welcome
the task force that UNOMIL has established with
ECOMOG, the Transitional Government and development
agencies to recommend ways forward in the crucial areas
of disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
combatants into civilian life.

While the primary responsibility for the reconstruction
of their country lies with the Liberian people, the
international community will have an important role to
play. We urge it to help the Liberians help themselves. The
British Government will play its part. But continued
international support will depend on further political
progress and on the cease-fire holding. Bitter past
experience has shown the fragility of peace efforts in
Liberia. The Abuja Agreement represents the best chance
for peace in a long time. We urge the Liberian people to
seize this chance to end the misery which they have
suffered for too long.

I should like to conclude by paying tribute to the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative, and all the
personnel of UNOMIL, as well as to the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) and the Economic Community of
West African States, in particular its Chairman, President
Rawlings. The Abuja Agreement is a good example of the
effectiveness of concerted regional efforts to promote peace
and stability. The task is now to put it into effect.

