The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Members have before them the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Rwanda, which is contained in document S/ 1995/297,
and the third report of the Secretary-General on security in
the Rwandese refugee camps, which is contained in
document S/ 1995/304.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/l995/3lO, which contains the
text of a letter dated 13 April 1995 from the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council has considered the
Secretary-General's progress report on the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Rwanda (UNAMIR)
(S/ 1995/297, of 9 April 1995) and his third report on
security in the Rwandese refugee camps (S/1995/304, of 14 April 1995), as well as the oral briefings from
the Secretariat on the tragic events on 22 April 1995
at the Kibeho camp for internally displaced persons.

"The Security Council condemns the killing of
numerous civilians in the camp and is encouraged by
the decision of the Government of Rwanda to carry
out a full investigation of these events without delay
and to bring to justice those responsible. In this regard
it welcomes the decision of the Rwandese authorities

to establish an independent inquiry with United
Nations and other international participation to carry
out this investigation of the events. The Council also
requests the Secretary-General to report to it,
without delay, on these events and on the role of
UNAMIR.

"The Security Council is concerned by the
generally deteriorating security situation in Rwanda.
It underlines that the Government of Rwanda bears
primary responsibility for maintaining security
throughout the country and for the safety of
internally displaced persons and returnees, as well as
for ensuring respect for their basic human rights. In
this context it reaffirms the need for coordination
between the Government of Rwanda and UNAMIR
and other agencies on these matters. The Council
does, however, note with satisfaction that the
Government of Rwanda has in previous months
made considerable efforts directed at national
reconciliation, rehabilitation and reconstruction,
which are of crucial importance. The Council calls
on the Government of Rwanda to intensify these
efforts and on the international community to
continue to support those efforts, in order to bring
about a climate of trust and confidence which would
assist in the early and safe return of refugees. In this
context, it underlines the importance it attaches to
demining, including the United Nations proposal.

"The Security Council notes with deep concern
disturbing reports of increased incursions into
Rwanda from neighbouring countries, allegations of
arms shipments into the Goma airport and of
elements of the former Rwandese Government
forces being trained in a neighbouring country. It
calls upon all States, especially those neighbouring
Rwanda, to refrain from any action that would
further exacerbate the security situation in that
country and to prevent incursions into Rwanda from
their own territories. The Council invites States and
organizations which have information on the
transport of arms into countries neighbouring
Rwanda for the purpose of their use in Rwanda in
contravention of resolution 918 (1994) to pass that
information to the Committee established under
resolution 918 (1994) and requests the Committee to
consider that information as a matter of urgency and
to report thereon to the Security Council.

"The Security Council notes with satisfaction
that the deployment of the Zairian Camp Security

 

Contingent and the Civilian Security Liaison Group
has had a positive effect on the security situation in
refugee camps in Zaire.

"The Security Council pays tribute to all
members of UNAMIR. It reaffirms that UNAMIR
constitutes one essential factor for creating a climate
of confidence and for promoting stability and security.
In this context, it underlines the responsibility of the
Government of Rwanda for the safety and security of
all UNAMIR personnel and other international staff
serving in the country. It urges the Rwandese
authorities to proceed with the exchange of letters
supplementing the agreement on the status of
UNAMIR and its personnel, reflecting the changes in
UNAMIR's mandate following from Security Council
resolution 918 (1994). The Council calls for increased
cooperation and collaboration between the Government
of Rwanda, its neighbouring countries and UNAMIR
as well as other agencies, including in the
humanitarian field.

"The Security Council expresses grave concern
at the situation created by the overcrowded prisons in
Rwanda which has resulted in the death of numerous
persons in custody and requests the Secretary-General
to consider urgently measures which could be taken
quickly in conjunction with the Government of
Rwanda and humanitarian agencies to improve the
conditions of those in detention or under investigation.
The Council emphasizes that the development of the
Rwandese justice system continues to be an important
factor in creating conditions of security, law and
order, conducive to the return of refugees from abroad
and of displaced persons to their homes. The Council
calls on the international community to assist the
Government of Rwanda in re-establishing the justice
system as a contribution to confidence-building and
the maintenance of law and order.

"The Security Council expresses its appreciation
for the action of those States which have arrested and
detained persons following the adoption of resolution
978 (1995). It urges States, in accordance with that
resolution, to arrest and detain persons against whom
there is sufficient evidence of responsibility for acts
within the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal
for Rwanda. It requests the Secretary-General to
facilitate the rapid establishment of the Tribunal.

"The Security Council requests the Government
of Rwanda to facilitate the delivery and distribution
of humanitarian assistance to refugees and displaced
persons in need, in conformity with the principles
and current practice of UNHCR. It invites States and
donor agencies to deliver on their earlier
commitments and to further increase their assistance.
It urges all Governments in the region to keep their
borders open for this purpose.

"The Security Council appeals to all States to
act in accordance with recommendations adopted in
the Regional Conference on Assistance to Refugees,
Returnees and Displaced Persons in the Great Lakes
Region held in Bujumbura in February 1995, in
order to contribute to facilitate the return of
refugees. The Council welcomes the Dar-es-Salaam
trilateral agreement of 12 April 1995, on the
voluntary repatriation of Rwandese refugees from
Tanzania.

"The Security Council reaffirms the view that
an international conference would contribute
substantially to peace and security in the subregion.
It welcomes the intention of the Secretary-General to
carry out consultations with all concerned so that
such a conference can be held at the earliest possible
date.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1995/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 4.15 pm.
