Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium attaches great importance to the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that, in
general, we can welcome the work accomplished
during the first year of its existence.

At the outset, my delegation would like to recall
the multidimensional nature of the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is an organ that is at the crossroads of
issues relating to concepts such as security,
rehabilitation, reconstruction and development. That,
moreover, explains its twofold provenance, namely, the
Security Council and the General Assembly.

This multidimensionality is reflected in what is
the primary task of the Peacebuilding Commission:
promoting an integrated approach that takes into
account the particular needs of fragile States and
potential risks of relapse.

Through such an integrated approach, the
Peacebuilding Commission can pave the way for
cooperation for classical development by dealing with
difficult and critical issues concerned with policy,
national reconciliation, drafting a constitution,
electoral processes, establishing and strengthening
institutions, security, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, justice, the rule of law and transitional
justice, but also, inter alia, the return of refugees,
access to the media, the employment of young people,
or land ownership disputes. It is important for the
Peacebuilding Commission to identify in these sectors
risks to peacebuilding and means to cope with them.

My delegation welcomes the work that has been
done at the Burundi and Sierra Leone country-specific
meetings. We welcome the fact that substantive debates
have prevailed over procedural ones. On the whole, the
various dimensions previously cited have been
properly integrated into peacebuilding strategies for
these two countries.

It is important, however, to ensure that Integrated
Peacebuilding Strategy (IPBS) is not viewed as a
framework for supplemental development, alternative
to or competitive with existing strategies.

The operational follow-up of Commission
recommendations should be done on the basis of
benchmarks through monitoring mechanisms that still
need to be worked out. The Peacebuilding Commission
should not, however, be locked into an excessively
rigid mechanism. To remain flexible, it must be able, in
real time, to make recommendations correlated with
developments in the field, as was fortunately the case
for Burundi recently.

My delegation believes that the Peacebuilding
Commission is now in a position to take up other
countries. Under resolution 1645 (2005), the Security
Council has a key role to play, in consultation,
naturally, with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
Council must not be solely reactive in the choice of
countries that could properly benefit from working
with the Peacebuilding Commission and consider the
specific merits of each file.

It is also important for the Council to spell out,
when possible and when necessary, specifically what it
expects of the Peacebuilding Commission when it is
planning to put a new country file before the
Commission. On the other hand, a candidate member
must have a good understanding of the nature of the
Peacebuilding Commission and what it can
legitimately expect from it. In the light of that, we
might wonder whether the Peacebuilding Commission
needs to draw up an integrated peacebuilding strategy
for each country on its agenda. One might imagine for
some countries approaches that, to be sure, would be

integrated, but more specifically targeted to those
needs and situations where the Peacebuilding
Commission could provide clear and specific added
value to the efforts made by the countries involved.

The expectations of the Peacebuilding
Commission are justifiably high. However, the
Commission is not an operational but an advisory
body. Its objective is to exert an effective impact on the
field by acting so that, through wise advice and views,
the various bilateral and multilateral players can assist
the Governments involved in coping in the most
appropriate manner with the challenges of a fragile
peace.

A source of confusion is, and it is our duty to
venture to say this, the fact that today we also have a
Peacebuilding Fund, and its role is not to replace the
conventional donors, but rather to provide financing
for critical gaps or to operate as a catalyst fund. In the
specific cases of Burundi and Sierra Leone, there is
additional confusion because the offices that the
Security Council has established in these two countries
have mandates with a strong peacebuilding aspect.
These offices depend, however, on the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and not on the Peacebuilding
Support Office. There is a need to clarify the role that
these offices will be playing in the future in the
specific context of the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

Belgium is confident that the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission will soon attain cruising
speed. In the view of my delegation, it is important for
us to have far-reaching goals, but also to be realistic at
the same time, and that indeed will be the key to the
success of the Commission.

In conclusion, I wish to thank the Support Office
headed by the Assistant Secretary-General Carolyn
McAskie for the work that she had done, and to voice
our full confidence in the chairmanship of Ambassador
Takasu of Japan and, of course, to thank our colleague
from Angola, Ambassador Gaspar Martins, for having
set the Peacebuilding Commission on the right path.

