Mrs. Collet (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I wish to thank the Presidents and Prosecutors
of the two ad hoc Tribunals for their extremely detailed
and interesting briefings.

I also congratulate Judge Fausto Pocar on his
recent election to the presidency of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and ask him to convey our thanks to his predecessor,
Judge Meron.
Since our last meeting, we have received some
good news: the arrest of Ante Gotovina, one of the four
fugitives referred to by name in Council resolutions.
That is good news for the European continent, for
international justice and for justice as a whole.

That arrest, the fruit of efforts made by the
Prosecutor, Croatia and Spain, and the two arrests of
recent months in Argentina and Russia naturally
heighten our impatience - 10 years after the signing
of the Dayton-Paris accords - to see Ratko Mladic
and Radovan Karadzic swiftly transferred to the ICTY.
As the French Minister for Foreign Affairs recently
recalled in Belgrade, cooperation - especially that of
Serbia and Montenegro - with the Tribunal will be
full and complete only when those two fugitives are in
The Hague. That is the only way for a rapprochement
with the European Union to be achieved. It is a legal,
political and moral necessity.

We also expect full and complete cooperation
from all States concerned in the arrest of Felicien
Kabuga and others indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), who are still at
large 10 years after the genocide.

For us, the completion strategy of the Tribunals,
approved by the Council, has two major objectives: to
provide timely justice to the victims and to ensure
thereby that the spirit of vengeance gives way to
reconciliation. We note, and naturally regret, that
delays are expected at the ICTY with regard to the
second phase of the strategy - the end of the trials -
but we hope that they will not hinder compliance with
the completion deadline.

We appreciate the considerable efforts of both
Tribunals to make the most effective use of their
resources while ensuring that the trials enjoy all
necessary safeguards. We also hope that the trials
transferred to national jurisdictions will be monitored
to guarantee the same safeguards, and in that regard we
welcome the willingness of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe to monitor those
trials on behalf of the ICTY Prosecutor. As to the
ICTR, could the Prosecutor tell us if he is considering
the establishment of a similar monitoring mechanism
for cases transferred to national jurisdictions?

The protection of witnesses must remain an
ongoing concern of both jurisdictions. The pressuring
of and threats against witnesses are unacceptable. Ms.
Del Ponte once again emphasized the seriousness of
that problem in Kosovo. We note her remarks
concerning cooperation with the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

As a member of the Security Council, we are of
course resolved to discharge our responsibilities and to
continue to seek, alongside the Tribunals, new ways to
ensure adherence to the completion strategy.
Nevertheless, we feel it important to ensure a certain
stability in the functioning of the Tribunals and in their
statutes, and to avert repeated interventions by the
Council in their organizational affairs.

In conclusion, I reiterate France's belief that the
Tribunals' missions will not be accomplished so long
as the major suspects at large - in particular
Mr. Karadzic, Mr. Mladic and Mr. Kabuga - have not
been brought to trial. The fugitives must be transferred
to Arusha and The Hague forthwith. Like the States
concerned, they must understand that the Council will
not back down from its demands.

