Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America):
Mr. Minister, I would like to thank you for convening
this meeting on the very important and timely issue of
the role of regional and subregional organizations in
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
07-58364
welcome the Secretary-General's presence and his
comments.

We share the goal set forth for this meeting and
the Indonesian concept paper, namely, to discuss the
existing and potential capacities of these organizations
in the field of peace and security and to identify and
develop modalities by which to enhance cooperation
between these organizations and the United Nations,
including the Security Council.

While the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security
remains with the Security Council, regional and
subregional organizations play an important role in the
prevention, management and resolution of conflicts.
This role is clearly spelled out in Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations, and its importance has
been emphasized in various Council resolutions and
presidential statements.

Regional and subregional organizations often
have first-hand understanding of the underlying causes
of local conflicts. They understand the local norms and
cultures and, in many cases, have enormous influence
over the parties in dispute. It is in the Security
Council's interest, and that of the United Nations in
general, to work with these organizations to prevent
conflicts and to resolve them once they occur. The
United States supports voluntary contributions to fund
the work of the regional organizations.

The Security Council has asked the Secretary-
General for a report on how the United Nations can
better support arrangements for further cooperation and
coordination with regional organizations. We look
forward to the Secretary-General's report.

Today, I would like to highlight some of the
important contributions of regional organizations. First,
I would like to focus on the important role that the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)
plays in promoting peace and security in South-East
Asia and beyond. For 40 years, ASEAN has helped to
create an environment in South-East Asia that has
encouraged dialogue and progress and enabled the
countries of the region to resolve differences and
problems peacefully and positively. ASEAN is working
to stand by itself as an organization, which we applaud.
As it moves ahead, one of its main challenges will be
dealing with the problems and the threat to regional
security posed by one of its members. ASEAN'S bold
statement on 27 September on the brutal crackdown on
3
peaceful protestors and Buddhist monks in Burma
demonstrated to the military regime the organization's
deep concern over its abuses of the political, economic
and human rights of the Burmese people. ASEAN
made clear that these gross violations do indeed affect
the stability of the region.

Secondly, I would like to address the important
role of subregional organizations in mitigating conflict
in Africa. The African Union (AU) is playing a critical
role in Darfur. The United States commends the
continuing commitment and contribution of the African
Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) amidst the casualties
it has suffered in the face of the violent attacks in
Darfur. We also applaud the important and continued
role that the AU is playing with its participation in the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). The role of the AU is critical for
the successful transition of AMIS to UNAMID. We
look forward to close cooperation with the AU, and we
view its role in UNAMID and in garnering political
support for its deployment and operations as an
excellent example of the importance of regional
organizations in mitigating conflict in Africa.

Thirdly, the European Union (EU) is also
contributing to peace and stability in Africa. On
25 September the Security Council approved the
United Nations Mission in the Central African
Republic and Chad (MINURCAT), a multidimensional
presence consisting mostly of United Nations civilian
police and EU peacekeeping troops. MINURCAT'S
objective is to protect the refugees and internally
displaced persons in the area. Its ultimate goal is to
create security conditions conducive to a voluntary,
secure and sustainable return of refugees and displaced
persons. We commend the involvement of the EU in
this effort.

Fourthly, the Organization of American States
(OAS) has played an indispensable role in facilitating
peace processes and promoting stability in the Western
Hemisphere. In Haiti, for example, the OAS mission
has played a central role in helping to maintain
stability following the resignation of President
Aristide, and its technical experts provided crucial
support in facilitating the elections and the
re-establishment of a democratic government that
followed. Furthermore, the ongoing efforts of the OAS
will result in the establishment of a permanent electoral
registry for the first time in Haiti's history.
Fifth, the Organization for Security and
Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) has helped to build
democratic institutions and promote human rights and
non-violent conflict resolution. OSCE election
monitoring represents the gold standard for
international observation missions. The Unites States
continue to strongly support OSCE activities and
believes its standards and commitment offer positive
examples for consideration by other regional
organizations.

We would also like to pay tribute to the
contributions of the Gulf Cooperation Council, the
League of Arab States, the Organization of the Islamic
Conference and other regional organizations to the
maintenance of international peace and security.

In conclusion, we recognize that regional
organizations will play an increasing role in the way
we solve peace and security issues. We also recognize
that, just as there are differences in ways that various
regional organizations help to maintain international
peace and security, the Security Council must be
flexible in its approach to working with them, based on
the unique facts of each case. Cooperation with
regional organizations can and will take many forms.

The Security Council must work with regional
and subregional organizations to enhance their capacity
and ability to deal with the various challenges they
face. As noted in the draft presidential statement, the
Council should also consider how to further strengthen
interaction and cooperation with these organizations in
accordance with the United Nations Charter, taking
into account the proposals of the Secretary-General.
That cooperation will be essential to enabling early
responses to disputes and emerging crises and to
fulfilling this body's responsibility to maintain
international peace and security.

