Mr. Medan (Croatia): At the outset, please allow
me to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of December.

We would also like to join the previous speakers in
expressing our sadness of the passing of a great leader,
Mr. Nelson Mandela, of South Africa.

I would like to start by welcoming the Presidents
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), Judges Meron and Joensen, along
with Prosecutors Brammertz and Jallow. We commend
them for their important work. Croatia appreciates their
comprehensive reports on the work of the Tribunals,
the status of the cases before them, and the measures
undertaken in the implementation of the completion
strategy during the reporting period. Those documents
add to the substantive volume of work and legacy of the
ICTY and ICTR.

More than 20 years after the establishment of
the ICTY, it is possible to make a comprehensive
assessment of its activities and overall achievements.
There is also an opportunity to learn important lessons
and apply that significant empirical knowledge for
the sake of the further development of international
criminal justice. In our View, the establishment of both
Tribunals and their work have profoundly changed the
landscape of international criminal justice and paved
the way for the International Criminal Court. Croatia
advocated for the establishment of the ICTY from the
very beginning. We believed then, as we do today,

that it is of paramount importance to put an end to the
culture of impunity, regardless of the causes and nature
of the specific conflict within which the crimes against
humanity were committed.

Croatia welcomes the results achieved by the ICTY
to date. However, the work of the Tribunal is not over.
Some of those most responsible for the carnage, deaths
and suffering are still waiting for the verdict to be
pronounced against them. We note with satisfaction the
precise and entirely positive assessment in the ICTY
Prosecutor's report of Croatia's cooperation with the
Office of the Prosecutor and the Tribunal. The brevity
of that part of the report speaks volumes on Croatia's
support and cooperation, which leaves not even the
smallest room for doubt or second thoughts. Members
can rest assured that Croatia will continue to cooperate
and render its full support to the Tribunal.

This is the first time that Croatia has participated
in the Security Council's debate on the ICTY as a State
member of the European Union (EU). Along with many
other accomplishments, our membership has been
achieved through full cooperation with the ICTY and
as a result ofimportant reforms in our national judicial
sector, including the establishment of specialized war-
crimes chambers in selected courts. Croatia was the
first country in the history of the EU's enlargement that
had to meet numerous benchmarks in the negotiating
chapter on judiciary and fundamental rights, among
the most important of which were cooperation with the
ICTY and processing war crimes in domestic courts. I
am proud to say that we succeeded with flying colors.

Croatia has spoken in detail on this subjectnumerous
times, praising but sometimes also criticizing the work
of the Tribunal, so I will not repeat our well-known
position. Let me just say that the results achieved and
the Tribunal's far-reaching legacy do not and cannot
mean that there is no room for improvement in its work.
In that context, what comes to one's mind are often
criticized protracted judicial processes, which in some
cases undermined their own purpose.

Late justice is by all means better than no justice at
all, but such delays interfered with the expectations of
the Victims' longing forjustice to be delivered. Equally
so, the accused have the right to trials that are not only
fair, but also of reasonable duration. One could also
argue that the modifications of the Tribunal's rules of
procedure did not always contribute to legal security,
nor to the clarity or simplicity of the proceedings. Those
are lessons learned that we should apply circumspectly
in the future development of international law.

Enhanced regional cooperation in the area of war
crimes and related issues represents one of the most
important legacies of the Tribunals. Croatia stands
ready to continue mutual cooperation in that area, in
accordance with the generally accepted principles of
international criminal law, and with full respect for the
relevant national jurisdictions and competences.

The saying that there can be no true justice without
peace, nor peace without justice, is a hard-earned
truism. What really matters in the final analysis is
the long-term impact left by the work of the Tribunals
on the ground and their legacy in the countries
concerned. Establishing individual accountability
based on judicially verified facts is a vital tool in the
reconciliation process. However, that process cannot be
carried out by the international tribunals alone. They
can lay the foundation for it, but it is up to societies to
bring the process of reconciliation to its culmination.

Finally, let me conclude by praising once again the
important and valuable work of the Tribunal.

