Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): We commend the Russian presidency and
Mission for the work they are carrying out this month
at the helm of the Security Council. We also thank
Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, and Stephen O'Brien,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their briefings.

I will focus my remarks on two conflicts in the
Middle East: the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and the
situation in Syria. In both cases, the escalation of
violence remains alarming and civilians, including
women and children, continue to pay a high price,
which we firmly condemn.

We also extend our condolences to the Government
and the people of Israel for the passing of former Prime
Minister Shimon Peres. We will remember him for his
role in the negotiations of the Oslo accords, for which
he received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1994, along with
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.

My country reiterates the urgency for the
Palestinians and Israelis to resume negotiations on
the central pending issues of the conflict, based on
prior obligations and agreements previously reached
by the parties, supported by international law and
the decisions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is imperative that a political solution to
this conflict be found and that a new peace architecture
be created as soon as possible in order to resolve
differences and achieve sustainable peace with a view
to establishing the basis for direct negotiations that lead
to the agreed objective of the international community:
the harmonious coexistence between an independent
Palestinian State and the State oflsrael.

We believe that it is urgent that we succeed in
stopping any act that leads to the death of innocents. We
also believe in the need to prosecute those responsible
and join efforts to stop the spiral of violence and prevent
suffering of more civilians.

Costa Rica deeply regrets the way the conflict in
Syria is progressing and how the situation is continuing
to deteriorate while the Security Council fails to take
action to resolve it. It is urgent that we put an end
to armed confrontation and seek an early political
solution, given the humanitarian crisis the country is
experiencing. We very much regret what happened in
this Chamber on 8 October, where the draft resolution
sponsored by both France and Spain was not adopted,
despite its significant humanitarian component (see S/PV.7785). In that regard, we reiterate the call for
the application of the code of conduct promoted by
the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, to which we belong, so that the permanent
members of the Council properly weigh the use of the
veto in such situations and that a restriction on its use
be implemented.
As indicated by the Secretary-General himself
in a recent report to the Council (S/2016/714), the
humanitarian crisis threatening Aleppo could become
the largest in these years of conflict. Hostilities
are characterized by indiscriminate violation of
fundamental rules of international humanitarian law,
and the worst is that obligations to protect civilians are
not being fulfilled.

We regret that the meeting last weekend in
Lausanne, Switzerland, convened by Secretary of State
John Kerry, did not agree on a common strategy for
reaching a peaceful solution and an end to hostilities.
The remarks of the Special Envoy for the Syrian crisis,
Staffan de Mistura, are particularly troubling. On
Monday, 17 October, he said that if we cannot find a
solution to such violence before December, the city of
Aleppo "will not be there anymore". We welcome the
recent announcement of an eight-hour humanitarian
pause in Aleppo, which will take place on Thursday,
20 October, and we hope that it will be recurring
and extended.

We continue to call on the Security Council to
exercise its mandates to maintain international peace
and security and to ensure the full application of
international justice and the rule of law. In the light
of the inaction of the Security Council, we believe it
would be appropriate for the General Assembly to be
convened in an emergency session to address what
is within its jurisdiction. We urge the international
community continue its efforts until a new ceasefire
is achieved, with the particular aim of ensuring the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to Aleppo.

Costa Rica reiterates its concern about the
increasing tensions between regional Powers, which are
raising tone of the fighting, as it makes a strong call for
peace in the Middle East.

