Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Ms. Hennis-
Plasschaert, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for her detailed and objective briefing. The
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
which she heads, is playing an important role in assisting
the Iraqi authorities in dealing with a range of issues
of national reconciliation and rebuilding the economy.
Based on that, we supported resolution 2470 (2019),
which extends UNAMI's mandate for another year.

The stability of Iraq has historically been very
important to the entire Middle East, and strengthening it
is in the interests of the entire international community.
In that connection, we would like to note in particular
that attempts to draw the country into an artificially
stoked confrontation with regard to the Islamic Republic

of Iran are totally counterproductive, unacceptable and
can only have a negative impact on the situation Within
Iraq and the region as a whole.

The escalation of the situation in the Persian Gulf
should be halted immediately, while confrontation
should give way to dialogue and negotiations aimed
at overcoming the existing concerns. Iraq has the
right to develop and build normal relations with all its
neighbours. We welcome Baghdad's consistent policy
in maintaining good-neighbourly relations with all
its regional partners, including Iran, Syria and Saudi
Arabia, of course. The recent inter-parliamentary
conference held in Baghdad, which brought together
representatives of Saudi Arabia, Iran, Turkey, Jordan,
Kuwait and Syria, was very significant in that regard.
We see it as an excellent beginning that should be
consistently developed further. We particularly want
to point to the attitude and activity of the Iraqis and
Kuwaitis in the work of restoring historical justice,
particularly in dealing with the consequences of
the first Gulf War as soon as possible. We welcome
the progress in the work of closing the Iraq-Kuwait
humanitarian dossier with regard to the investigation
of the fate of missing Kuwaitis and Kuwaiti property. It
gives us hope that the parties are working together on
the issue as positively as possible. We are aware that the
Government of Iraq has a great deal to do to consolidate
positive momentum in this area.

The international community should work tirelessly
to support the Iraqi leadership's efforts to restore the
economy and develop the social and economic front
generally. In that connection, we note the conference
held under Kuwait's auspices in February 2018 on the
reconstruction of Iraq. What is essential is consistent,
focused work to overcome the differences among Iraq's
various ethnic and religious components and strengthen
the unity of the Iraqi people and the integrity of the
State. We welcome the recent progress in restoring a
mutual understanding between Baghdad and Erbil,
which should be consolidated and developed.

We cannot allow yet another experiment, wherever
it may originate, to undermine the significant progress
that has been made, at considerable sacrifice, on the
counter-terrorism front, especially since security
challenges still remain. We want to see the threat from
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and terrorism
generally eliminated as soon as possible. We believe
firmly that we can effectively combat that challenge
only by coordinating our counter-terrorism efforts as

broadly as possible. We believe it is essential to ensure
that all involved in fighting terrorism in Iraq respect
the sovereignty of the Iraqi State and coordinate their
efforts with the authorities in Baghdad. Action should
correspond to the stated aims of combating terrorism
and helping the Government of Iraq to stabilize the
situation. Russia will continue to give both political and
practical support to the efforts of the Iraqi leadership on
the security front and in the long-term normalization of
the situation in the country. Iraq and Russia have a long
tradition of military and technical cooperation aimed
at improving Iraq's defence capability and general
potential, including its ability to counter terrorism. The
Baghdad information centre is doing important work
in combating terrorism and fostering regional security
with the participation of Russia, Iraq, Iran and Syria.

We are expanding our mutually beneficial trade and
economic ties, including in the areas of fuel and energy
and humanitarian assistance. The most recent meeting
of the Russian-Iraqi intergovernmental commission on
trade, economic, scientific and technical cooperation
was held in Baghdad at the end of April, and we will
continue to develop that cooperation going forward.
The latest contacts between Russia and Iraqi officials
at senior and top levels in Moscow, Baghdad and
other platforms have affirmed the similarity of our
Governments' positions on many global and regional
issues. Above all, we share the view that it is essential to
resolve all crisis situations through dialogue, collective
efforts and a policy of good-neighbourly relations,
which Iraq has always maintained. We are open to
cooperation on a similar basis with all interested
regional and international partners. Our joint efforts
would be significantly furthered by progress on building
a Middle East architecture for security and cooperation.
In our view the Russian initiative in that regard on the
Persian Gulf has become even more relevant. We want
to remind the Council once again that the Secretary-
General has a mandate to work with regional parties
to develop confidence-building and security measures
in the region in accordance with resolution 598 (1987).
It is essential that we finally implement that mandate.

In conclusion, we would like to commend the
cooperation of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq with the counbtry's authorities. I would like to
assure Ms. Hennis-Plasschaert that she can continue to
count on our support.

