Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Mr. Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Sidikou, Permanent Secretary of the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Buyoya,
High Representative of the African Union for Mali and
the Sahel; and Mr. Serrano, Deputy Secretary-General
for Common Security and Defence Policy, for their
briefings today.

There is no denying the many challenges faced
today by the people and countries of the Sahel. We are
concerned by the increase in intercommunal violence
and insecurity along the borders of Burkina Faso,
Mali and the Niger and by the continued prevalence of
terrorist and criminal activity throughout the region. As
many have said here today, only through a combination
of good governance focused on addressing the root
causes of instability and creating opportunity, respect
for human rights and security can the region resolve the
challenges and defeat the threats that it faces.

The United States commends the initiative of the
G-5 Sahel member States to create and operationalize
its Joint Force to combat threats of terrorism and
transnational organized crime. We take this opportunity
to recognize the sacrifices of the soldiers of G-5
member States and their families and to also honour the
civilians killed as a result of the violence and insecurity
in the region.

The United States strongly supports the G-5 Sahel
Joint Force and its efforts to establish lasting security.
We believe that bilateral support remains the most
effective option. We continue to work closely with
all partners to coordinate our contributions of much-
needed equipment, training and technical advice. Over
the past year the United States has nearly doubled
its assistance to G-5 Sahel member States, from
$60 million to approximately $111 million, specifically
to fill prioritized capability gaps of the Joint Force.
That amount constitutes just one piece of broader and
long-standing United States security assistance to
the G-5 member States, with over $1 billion in total
United States support to their institutions and combat
capabilities since 2012.

We laud the continued support of the international
community and the Joint Force's development and
successful operationalization, in particular the support
of the European Union (EU) for the implementation
of the human rights compliance framework for the
Joint Force and its continuing training missions. We
commend the G-5's collaboration with the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
towards the continued establishment of a compliance
framework. The Joint Force's professionalism and
respect for international human rights law and
international humanitarian law will be critical to
its long-term success. We also salute France's long-
standing and integral role as a security partner to the
Sahel countries through its Operation Barkhane and the
many sacrifices made by that mission's men and women
to defeat continuing violent extremist threats. We also
applaud the role of the United Nations, including the
personnel of MINUSMA, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel and others, who are working
diligently to solve political insecurity challenges across
the region.

The United States hopes to see the effective
implementation of the technical agreement among the
G-5 Sahel, the United Nations and the EU called for
in resolution 2391 (2017), which allows for MINUSMA
to be reimbursed for logistical support provided to the
Force within Mali's territory. As Ambassador Haley
stated a year ago (see S/PV.8080), we believe that
is the full extent of any support role that the United
Nations should play outside of continued coordination
and technical assistance on a voluntary basis. But the
technical agreement remains a way for MINUSMA
to help at a critical stage. We encourage donors to
support the trust fund for MINUSMA reimbursement
in order to facilitate urgent engineering needs like the
Mission-proposed camp designs, which still await the
G-5 Sahel's approval.

On a related but separate note, we also do not believe
Chapter VII authorization is needed to accomplish
the Joint Force's mission, as the G-5 Sahel countries
already has existing agreements in place for military
operations in their respective territories.

As others have recognized, security responses
alone will not solve every problem. Therefore, the
United States continues its multisector partnerships
with the Governments and societies of the G-5 Sahel
countries to bolster stability and security through
United States humanitarian, health, agriculture,
governance and development assistance. The United
States provided more than $460 million during its 2017
fiscal year in development and humanitarian assistance
to programmes in those countries. As we have stated
before, our support seeks to complement the United
Nations Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the
creative partnership envisioned in its Support Plan.
At the centre of the region, with its own unique
political and security challenges, is Mali and its
peace agreement. We call again on the parties to that
agreement and to those ofthe new Pact for Peace in Mali
to make significant progress over the next few months in
recognition of how critical their success on the road map
will be. Going forward, we cannot and should not accept
the lack of coordination and communication among
the parties that we have seen in the past, including,
for example, the disagreements that led to the failure
of the opening ceremony for accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration last week in Gao.
Parties must expeditiously resolve outstanding issues
and rapidly implement the key provisions outlined in
resolution 2423 (2018). The stakes are too high, both
for the people of Mali and of the region. The Security
Council should reserve the right to use all its available
tools, including sanctions, on spoilers who obstruct the
agreement's implementation.

The United States will continue to work together
with the G-5 Sahel and its partners to ensure our
bilateral support is appropriate and effective. We also
encourage all donors to disburse the resources pledged
to the Joint Force last February in Brussels. Through
our effective coordination with the security and
development actors in the region, the leadership of the
African Union and that of the Economic Community
of West African States in solving regional and local
disputes, significant improvements in security can
be made. The sustainability of those improvements
will depend on the progress of the G-5 member States
towards effective governance, the creation of access to
opportunity and respect for human rights, accountability
and inclusiveness. Also critical will be an expansion
of the roles of women, young people and marginalized
groups in decision-making. Together, those steps can
contribute to achieving durable peace and stability and
unleash the potential of this vital region and its people.

