Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am pleased to speak on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Children and Armed
Conflict, an informal network of 40 interested States
Members of the United Nations, representing all five
regional groups of the Organization.

The Group of Friends wishes to reiterate its strong
support for the children and armed conflict agenda,
for the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict, Ms. Virginia
Gamba, and for the United Nations institutions
working to promote the rights of children in armed
conflict worldwide.

This year marks the tenth anniversary of the Paris
Principles and Commitments. Those foundational
documents provide practical guidelines for protecting
children from recruitment and use by armed forces
or armed groups and for assisting in their release and
reintegration. We invite all Member States that have not
done so to consider endorsing the Paris Principles.

We are alarmed by the number of grave violations

committed against children in the past year, including
attacks on schools and hospitals. Devastating in and
of themselves, such attacks often have second- and
third-order effects, stretching far into the future. We
therefore urge the States Members of the United Nations
to promote the protection of schools consistent with the
relevant obligations under international humanitarian
law, and to fully implement resolution 2286 (2016),
which calls for the protection of medical facilities and
personnel in conflict situations.

The Group remains deeply concerned about
the rise in the number of armed groups employing
extreme Violence and their recruitment and use of
children, including as suicide bombers, the abduction
of children, and the systematic use of sexual Violence.
We recognize that violent extremism poses unique
child-protection challenges. However, in our efforts to
counter such groups, we must remember that children
associated with them or with any other armed group
should be considered as victims first and afforded the
relevant protections under international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, they should be detained only as
a last resort and for the shortest period necessary, in
full respect of international humanitarian law and
applicable international human rights law. As the
territory controlled by groups, such as Da'esh, is
reclaimed, tailored and effective demobilization and
reintegration efforts will be essential for addressing
long-term harm and preventing the victimization or
re-recruitment of children.

The Group appreciates the Vital role played by
peacekeepers in promoting child protection and
welcomes the release of the new Child Protection
Policy by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Department of Field Support and the Department
of Political Affairs. We encourage all troop- and
police-contributing countries to undertake concrete
steps to prioritize and further operationalize child
protection within United Nations peacekeeping in the
training and doctrine of their national forces. Adequate
resources are also needed to ensure mission success.
We are therefore deeply concerned that extensive
cuts to the staffing and budgets of child-protection
adviser positions, as well as consolidation efforts, will
undermine the ability of the United Nations to deliver
on the critical child-protection mandates put forth by
the Security Council.

Such capabilities also increase the awareness
of grave violations against children in situations of
armed conflict. Indeed, a key element of the success
of the children and armed conflict agenda has been
the monitoring and reporting mechanism established
by resolution 1612 (2005) to collect and provide
information on grave violations against children,
in cooperation with national Governments. The
information generated through the mechanism and the
annual report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict (S/2017/821) are important tools for
fostering accountability and the compliance of parties
to conflict with international child-protection standards
and norms. In that regard, we welcome efforts by the
United Nations to ensure that the mechanism remains
impartial and objective.

The reporting on grave violations is not simply an
end in and of itself, but should be seen as a mechanism
to begin a dialogue on how to address such violations,
prevent future violations and enhance child protection.
We welcome the recent signature of action plans by
Mali, the Sudan, and the Civilian Joint Task Force in
Nigeria, as well as the positive cooperation of other
parties on measures to address all violations and look
forward to their swift implementation.

In conclusion, the Group of Friends stands ready to
work with the States Members of the United Nations to
move forward on this critical agenda.

(spoke in French)

Let me make some additional remarks in my
capacity as the representative of Canada.

First, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Shaikh for
his briefing today and for his work on deradicalization
in Canada and abroad.

As a Canadian citizen, I would like to underscore
the presence of a Canadian hero adored by all in Canada,
General Dallaire, who is here with Mr. Shaikh today.

The children and armed conflict agenda remains a
key Canadian foreign policy and development priority.
We are proud to be among the 105 signatories to the
Paris Principles on their tenth anniversary. In February,
Canada also endorsed the Safe Schools Declaration,
reaffirming Canada's commitment to protecting
civilians affected by armed conflict, in particular
children, as well as protecting education as a right. The
Declaration will inform the planning and conduct of
the Canadian Armed Forces during armed conflict. We
call upon all States Members of the United Nations to
endorse the Declaration.

In March, Canada developed a national doctrine on
the issue of child soldiers, the first ofits kind worldwide.
The Joint Doctrine Note provides strategic guidance
to the Canadian Armed Forces regarding potential
encounters and engagement with child soldiers. It also
provides commanders with baseline guidance, through
which to develop their pre-deployment training, and
operational and mission-specific considerations.

The Security Council has acknowledged that
the protection of children in armed conflict is a
fundamental peace and security concern and has tasked
specific peacekeeping missions to undertake child
protection since 1999. The Blue Helmets play a critical
role in addressing grave violations against children in
armed conflict.

(spoke in English)

Canada shares the view that more can be done in
a peacekeeping context to protect Children affected by
armed conflict, including to prevent the recruitment and
use of child soldiers, who are prevalent in many areas
where United Nations peacekeeping forces operate. In
that regard, Canada has developed a set of voluntary
and non-binding principles on peacekeeping and
preventing the recruitment and use of child soldiers,
known as the Vancouver principles. Those principles
seek to prioritize and further operationalize child
protection within United Nations peacekeeping, with
a focus on preventing the recruitment and use of
child soldiers. They have been inspired by the Paris
Principles and Guidelines on Children Associated
with Armed Forces or Armed Groups and the Kigali
Principles on the Protection of Civilians, as well as by
relevant Security Council resolutions, and they were
developed in cooperation with the Romeo Dallaire
child-soldiers initiative, in consultation with the United
Nations and the child-protection community. They
were shared with all Member States last week and are
to be formally endorsed on the margins of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Defence Ministerial meeting in
Vancouver next month.

By endorsing the Vancouver principles, Member
States commit to undertake several common-sense steps
to help prevent children from being used as soldiers. They
include planning and training, addressing early warning
signs and reporting abuses and grave violations, sharing
best practices, working towards effectively preventing
child recruitment, appointing child-protection focal
points, ensuring the good conduct of peacekeepers, and

including child protection in peacekeeping mandates,
peace agreements, and disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration efforts. They also address the trauma
experienced by peacekeeping personnel that is related
to interactions with child soldiers.

I wish to emphasize that the Vancouver principles
were designed to complement, but in no way to replace,
critical child-protection instruments, such as the Paris
Principles, which remain a foundation of our work.

(spoke in French)

We invite all Member States to endorse the
Vancouver principles as a concrete demonstration of
our commitment to help prevent the recruitment and
use of child soldiers.

