Ms. Anderson (United States of America): I
thank you, Mr. President, and Assistant Secretary-
General Fernandez-Taranco for your briefings today.

Last month, Israeli and Palestinian leaders took
the momentous step of returning to direct talks. The
core issues of this long-standing and tragic conflict
will not be easily resolved. Direct talks are the path for
the parties to reach a solution that resolves all issues,
ends all claims and establishes a viable State of
Palestine alongside a secure State of Israel as a key
part of a comprehensive peace among Israel and all of
its neighbours. The United States will continue to be a
vigorous and steadfast partner in this vital effort. We
are working closely with both sides to allow these
negotiations to continue.

We were disappointed by the announcement of
new tenders in East Jerusalem on 14 October, which
was contrary to our efforts to resume negotiations. We
have long urged both parties to avoid actions that could
undermine trust, including in Jerusalem, and we will
continue to do so as we work to make progress towards
Middle East peace. Ultimately, however, forging a
lasting and just peace will depend on leadership, vision
and courage from the Israelis and the Palestinians.

As President Obama has noted, we have urged
Israel to extend the settlement moratorium, which we
believe makes sense as long as constructive talks are
under way. As we continue to urge Prime Minister
Netanyahu to institute another moratorium, we also
urge President Abbas to resume negotiations, which
remain the only way to resolve the conflict's most
difficult issues and give the Palestinians the dignity of
an independent State of their own.

We know that many obstacles lie ahead. We know
that attempts to move towards lasting peace may be
met by rejectionists and terrorism, but we must not let
the forces of violence and despair determine whether
Israeli and Palestinian children will live in peace or
languish in conflict. We must press forward together
towards our common goal of a comprehensive Arab-
Israeli peace, including a two-State solution, with
Israel and Palestine living side by side in peace and
security. That goal is in the interests of Israelis,
Palestinians, the United States and all those who seek
to maintain international peace and security.

Those in the region who want a Palestinian State
should do all they can to support the parties' efforts to
bring about a just and lasting peace. And those around
the world who seek an end to this bitter conflict should
support these efforts and do nothing to undermine
them.

Let me turn to the situation in Gaza. We continue
to view the situation there with concern. Israel's
announcement of 5 July was an important step towards
improving the flow of goods and material into Gaza.
That progress is continuing several months later, and
we encourage the Government of Israel to take further
steps to expand trade in both directions, consistent with
its security needs. All those wishing to deliver goods
should do so through the expanded, established
channels to ensure that Israel's legitimate security
needs are addressed even as the Palestinians'
humanitarian needs are met.

Let me also draw attention to the Israeli soldier,
Gilad Shalit, whom Hamas abducted in 2006 and who
remains in captivity. We call again for his immediate
release.

In its 1 June presidential statement on the flotilla
incident (S/PRST/20lO/9), the Council called for a
prompt, impartial, credible and transparent
investigation conforming to international standards. We
commend the Secretary-General's constructive
initiative in convening a Panel of Inquiry that will
receive and review the results of Israel's and Turkey's
investigations. We welcome the spirit of cooperation
that the Panel represents and continue to regard it as
the primary and most appropriate method for the
international community to review the incident.

Let me conclude by touching on the situation in
Lebanon. The United States remains firmly committed
to Lebanon's sovereignty and independence, and
therefore to the full implementation of resolutions 1559
(2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006). We continue to
be gravely concerned by attempts by foreign players to
undermine Lebanon's independence, endanger its
stability and interfere with its sovereign affairs.

The continuing flow of weapons and war-fighting
materiel across the Syrian border to Hizbullah is a
reckless practice that risks plunging the region into
open conflict. We urge the Council to remain vigilant
to these destabilizing trends, which threaten
international peace and security and the lives of
innocent civilians on both sides of the Blue Line.

Finally, let me turn to the Special Tribunal for
Lebanon. On 6 October, the Secretary-General rightly
and unequivocally noted that the Tribunal is an
independent body with a clear mandate from the
Security Council to uncover the truth and end the era
of impunity for political assassinations in Lebanon.
The Tribunal is an independent judicial entity. Its work
is a matter not of politics but of law. The Tribunal is
fulfilling its independent judicial mandate under this
Council's resolution 1757 (2007) at the request of the
sovereign Government of Lebanon. We completely
endorse the Secretary-General's statement that the
Tribunal's efforts must go forward without
interference. Efforts to discredit, hinder or delay the
Tribunal's work should not be tolerated, and those who
engage in them do not have the interest of Lebanon or
justice at heart.

