Mr. Dejammet (France) (interpretation from French):
The situation in Abkhazia, Georgia, is of great concern. The
resumption of hostilities last May caused some 40,000
persons who had returned to live in the Gali region to leave
their homes. The patient efforts of international
organizations in recent years to make possible the return of
refugees and displaced persons in the zone have thus been
obliterated. Homes have been deliberately set afire by
Abkhaz forces. France condemns these actions, which are
apparently motivated by a desire to drive these people out
of their home region.

Tension in the region persists, and unfortunately new
clashes cannot be excluded. It is therefore essential for the
parties rigorously to respect the Agreement on a Ceasefire
and Separation of Forces of 14 May 1994, as well as the
Protocol on a Ceasefire and Withdrawal of Armed
Formations signed on 25 May 1998.

But only a lasting political settlement can ensure the
stability of the region. The United Nations, with the
assistance of the Russian Federation as facilitator, the group
of Friends of the Secretary-General and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, is sparing no effort
to achieve a solution to the conflict. These efforts, however,
can succeed only if the two parties now demonstrate the
necessary political will in the negotiations. The meeting
held at Geneva from 23 to 25 July 1998 under United
Nations auspices was an important step, particularly in the
present context. But it must be followed immediately by
other negotiations on the major points in the dispute.

The parties must also fulfil their commitments
regarding the security of international personnel. Acts
committed against members of the peacekeeping force of
the Commonwealth of Independent States and of the
United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia are to be
condemned. The two parties must take measures to put an
end to them.

That is the substance of the draft resolution before
the Council, and is the reason why France will vote in its
favour.

