Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Mr. President, I
wish at the outset to express my congratulations and
best wishes for your tenure during this month. You
know, Sir, that you can count on our full support.
I wish also to say a very warm word of appreciation
and thanks to Ambassador Puri and his team for the
way they conducted our business in the most efficient
way during what was a very busy month. I also thank
the United Nations in general for providing us with a
Yemeni-like temperature today, which I think is very
appropriate for our debate.

I wish to thank Mr. Benomar for his briefing and
especially for his commitment to and continued efforts
in support of a democratic transition in Yemen. He has
given us a very full, correct and precise report on the
situation, the achievements made and the challenges
ahead.

Let me also say a word of appreciation to the
Secretary-General for his continued good offices. We
welcome his recent trip to Yemen on the occasion of
the first anniversary of the signing of Yemen's historic
Transition Agreement, and we fully support his message
of praise and encouragement to the people of Yemen.

Indeed, under the able leadership of President
Mansour, Yemen has come a long way over the
course of the past year, despite the many difficulties
encountered. The transition process remains largely on
track and several important benchmarks have been met,
the latest of which are the agreement on the distribution
of seats in the National Dialogue Conference and the
establishment of the Supreme Commission for Elections
and Referendum.

We warmly welcome these much-awaited
developments and look forward to the early launch
of a National Dialogue Conference that makes allows
for a participatory, representative, transparent and
meaningful process and engages effectively all regions,
groups and segments of Yemeni society, including
women and young people.

Notwithstanding the numerous accomplishments
registered, the challenges are manifold. Heinous acts
of terrorism continue to claim lives and destroy public
and economic infrastructures. Portugal vehemently
condemns any such acts, which are criminal and
unjustifiable regardless of their motivation, wherever,
whenever and by whomsoever committed, and we fully
support Yemen's efforts to combat terrorism.

While calm has returned to many parts of the
country, security is still an issue of concern. We
welcome the achievements ofthe Committee on Military
Affairs and encourage further measures to complete the
restructuring of the security and armed forces under
a unified, professional leadership structure, which is
essential to guaranteeing State authority and law and
order throughout the country.

In addition, it remains necessary urgently to
address the economic and humanitarian situation,
notwithstanding the fact that some progress has been
made, as we heard from Mr. Benomar. Although
many people have recently returned to their homes,
thousands remain displaced and deprived of the most
basic services and needs. We are particularly troubled
by the hundreds of thousands of children under the age
of 5 who suffer from malnutrition. Equally disturbing
are reports that the education of children continues to
be disrupted by attacks against and the occupation of
schools, which we strongly condemn.

We welcome the commitment made by the
Government of National Unity to end the use and
recruitment of children by the Yemeni armed forces and
call on all parties to urgently end such unlawful acts.
We are hopeful that the National Dialogue Conference
will enable concrete advances to be made on the issue
of transitional justice. Grievances will need to be
resolved if a peaceful and lasting democratic transition
is to succeed. On the other hand, all those responsible
for human rights violations and abuses must be held
accountable. The National Dialogue Conference
may also provide a valuable forum to respond to the
concerns of those that have distanced themselves from
the process in a way that preserves the sovereignty,
unity and territorial integrity of Yemen.

In conclusion, Yemen has come a long way,
but there is still a long and difficult road ahead, as
Mr. Benomar indicated. We call on all Yemenis to build
on the progress of the past year and to press ahead
with the next phase of the transition process, during
which a number of key milestones are to be reached.
Those include, first, the convening of an all-inclusive
National Dialogue Conference; secondly, constitutional
and electoral reform to prepare for general elections by
February 2014; and, thirdly, steps to address transitional
justice and support national reconciliation.
Steady progress on such complex and sensitive
issues will not be easy. The international community
must therefore continue to support the people of
Yemen. The United Nations and the Security Council
in particular must remain vigilant and ensure that
all parties abide by resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051
(2012). The full implementation of those resolutions
is essential for a peaceful, inclusive, orderly and
Yemeni-led political transition that meets the legitimate
demands and aspirations of the Yemeni people for
peaceful change and meaningful political, economic
and social reform.

