Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank the Italian delegation for taking
the initiative to convene today's meeting. In our view,
its format makes it possible to consider the challenges
and threats to global peace and security from a new
perspective, including through the prism of the
situation in the Mediterranean region. We would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his informative
report on the subject.

The Mediterranean region has clearly encountered
a slew of problems spawned by crisis situations in
countries around it as well as beyond it. The terrorist
threat continues to grow and the scale and scope of
transnational organized crime is continually expanding,
owing in part to its close ties to terrorist activity. The
waves of migrants attempting to leave their homes
to seek a better future in a new homeland are not
diminishing. However, it would be wrong to imply
that such worrying trends are linked exclusively to the
region around the Mediterranean Sea. Their negative
impact is being felt around the world. Our planet has
become so interdependent that a crisis in one spot on the
globe can have a chain reaction far beyond its borders.
Regrettably, in this era of globalization, we cannot
defend ourselves from this either by building walls or
deploying military forces. In this situation, there is
only one possible way for the international community
to respond to these threats. We must unite our efforts,
based on cooperation through honest partnerships,
with the aim of resolving the situations of conflict in
the Middle East, North Africa and the Sahel-Saharan
region - which have become catalysts for the wave
of destabilization in the Mediterranean - as well as a
factor of waging an uncompromising fight against the
threat of terrorism. We have long called for this.

One of the stated aims of today's briefing is to
consider the root causes of the multifaceted threats
to security in the Mediterranean. We believe that,
overall, this approach is worth supporting. From the
very beginning of the so-called Arab spring, which
triggered a series of destructive processes in the Middle
East and North Africa, Russia has repeatedly suggested
that the Security Council should conduct a substantive
analysis of what occurred and draw lessons from it
for the future. However, few have made use of that
sad but valuable experience. Meanwhile, the growing
instability in the region has been skilfully exploited by
extremists and terrorist groups. Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, Boko Haram, Al-Shabaab, the African cells
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and others
have hastened to fill the power vacuum that external
forces helped to create.

We share the concerns about the unprecedented
harm they continue to do to cultural heritage sites, using
profits from their trade in historically and culturally
valuable objects to finance terrorism's requirements.
We expect that this problem, and the issue of human
trafficking, will be considered in more detail in separate
Security Council meetings this month.

Just yesterday we discussed the situation in Libya
(see S/PV.8104), where the lack of stability is a key
piece in the region's jigsaw puzzle of security. We
heard worrying assessments of the political situation,
and many expressed their concerns about the slow
implementation of Special Representative Salame's
action plan. Yet almost no one mentioned the original
causes of the crisis in Libya. The representative of
Bolivia alone reminded us - and we thank him
for it - that they are to be found in the military
intervention that the NATO countries undertook in
2011 in order to change a regime that they did not like,
in violation of international law. The result was that
the radical groups that had been used not long before
to oust Mr. Al-Qadhafi gained access to arsenals, a
danger that had warned about well in advance. That in
turn foreordained the further evolution of the situation
far beyond the borders of Libya, primarily in the Sahel-
Saharan region and the Mediterranean.

It would be wrong to delude ourselves that
terrorists can be used for achieving political goals such
as effecting regime change in Tripoli, Damascus or
anywhere else, and then to hope that they will sign up
for deradicalization classes and assimilate peacefully
into civil society. They will accept financial, military
and other assistance, of course, but they will turn their
backs on their sponsors as soon as they consider it
necessary. We have already seen that with Al-Qaida in
Afghanistan, and we will see it again. It is simply wrong
to close one's eyes to manifestations ofradicalization in
such situations, let alone condone them.
We do not share the belief that human rights
violations are the primary cause of conflict and
that action in support of human rights is the key to
preventing conflict. Indeed, practice has shown that
the reverse is true. Only resolving conflicts can lead
to improvements in human rights situations. Reckless
intervention, including under the banner of protecting
human rights, can lead to a collapse of State authority,
humanitarian disasters, civil wars and surges in
terrorism, and thereby produce massive flows of forcibly
displaced people. We believe that States that are actively
involved in such interventions should acknowledge that
it is they who have primary responsibility for assisting
the refugees and internally displaced persons who have
fallen victim to their actions.

We share the concerns about the deaths of refugees
and migrants who choose dangerous paths in their quest
for a better life, fleeing terrorist threats, persecution,
conflict, instability and poverty. It is important to
understand that the long-term solution to the problem
lies in finding political settlements in the refugees'
countries of origin. Millions of people, and entire
nations, are in need of peace, stability and confidence
in the future. The ultimately determining way to
significantly reduce the refugee problem is to establish
lasting peace in Syria, Libya and other countries in the
grip of conflict.

It is essential to comprehensively combat criminal
organizations that are smuggling people, improve and
strengthen mechanisms to manage migration processes
and increase the international community's cooperation
on this issue. We must also expand socioeconomic
development assistance to countries of origin, and it is
as important as ever to combat displays of racism and
xenophobia towards refugees and migrants.

The obvious fact remains that in order to ensure
security, development and stability in a region, it
is essential to strengthen State institutions, provide
for systemic economic and social development and
universal respect for human rights and the rule of
law, as well as taking measures to combat terrorism.
It will be essential to improve the performance of
existing mechanisms. For example, the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel has not yet been used
to its full potential. If the response to the threats in the
Mediterranean is not a truly collective one, waves of
instability will continue to spread from crisis areas. It is
essential to stop double-dealing and courting radicals.
We are ready to cooperate openly with all of our partners
in the interests of preventing the destructive evolution
of events in the Mediterranean region. Russia's policy
is transparent. We have no hidden agenda.

