Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
statement, which clearly illustrates the perspective
of the United Nations on this issue. What took place
last night was clearly not a surprise to any member of
the Security Council. It remained to establish only the
day and the time. In fact, as we said in our statement
yesterday (see S/PV.8232), we are concerned about the
rhetoric that we are hearing and where it will lead us.
It has now led us to where we feared and did not want
to go - military attacks against Syria. Yesterday in
this Chamber, Secretary-General Antonio Guterres
spoke about the memory of the Cold War, which in
fact returned with a vengeance in the early hours of
the morning, reminding the peoples of the world of the
conflict of interests that still exists between two blocs.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea has followed
with great concern the reports on the attacks carried
out by the United States, with the support of the
armed forces of France and the United Kingdom.
According to estimates, the coalition fired more than
100 cruise missiles and air-to-ground missiles from
two United States naval ships stationed in the Red Sea,
as well as from tactical warplanes that overflew the
Mediterranean and B-lB bombers from another area.
The coalition launched a coordinated attack on three
targets, which included a scientific research centre in
an area of Damascus, a facility to the west of Homs and
a command post near that facility.

While surgical and very selective, last night's strikes
are a violation of Chapter V of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the principles and norms of international
law. It is important to recall that, according to Article
24 of the Charter, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. Members of the Council must
therefore refrain from creating situations of insecurity
and instability.

The Security Council should not highlight
or disregard the fact that those strikes may have
unpredictable and potentially tragic consequences
for the Middle East by encouraging or justifying the
development of nuclear programmes in order to prevent
any further aggression. Experts of the Organization
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) are
already in Douma to carry out investigations. Until
we have reliable and irrefutable proof of the alleged
chemical attack in Douma last week, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is of the view that no aggression
can be justified. Our delegation also reiterates that, in
accordance with Article 33 of the Charter, in the case of
any dispute that is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security, it is imperative to
seek a solution first and foremost through negotiation,
mediation or other peaceful means.

History continues to show us that military
interventions never resolves conflicts but, instead, cause
them to proliferate and to continue, causing devastation
and destruction. We must ensure that that does not
happen again in the case of the Syrian Arab Republic.
We again point out that the military intervention in
Libya in 2011 and its consequences today should be
a clear lesson to the international community. The
Republic of Equatorial Guinea opposes the use of force
in international relations. We accept its use only when
it is in line with the principles of international law and
the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.
As we have already said, in the case of Syria, it would
not bring about any substantial change in the overall
situation in the country.

We reiterate that political agreement is the only
viable way to find a lasting solution to the Syrian
problem. All the parties involved must resolve
their differences through dialogue, agreement and
consultation. That process requires the support of the
international community. The failure of diplomacy only
exacerbates the suffering of the Syrian people and is
the highest expression of the Security Council's failure.

Equatorial Guinea continues to believe that, in
order to fully clarify the 7 April events in Douma, a
thorough, impartial and objective investigation must
be carried out in order to reach a reliable conclusion.
We urge the OPCW Fact-finding Mission in the Syrian
Arab Republic to promptly carry out an investigation
and to report to the Security Council on its conclusions
as soon as possible. We also again reiterate the urgent
need to establish, under the auspices of the Secretary-
General, a professional, independent and transparent
investigative body to attribute responsibility for and
identify the perpetrators of the use of chemical weapons
so that those responsible, whoever they are, are brought
to international justice. Only in that way can that thorny
issue achieve consensus and unity among the members
of the Security Council.

I conclude my statement by reiterating the
unequivocal position of the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea, which is that we wholeheartedly condemned
the use of chemical weapons by whomever.

