Mr. Abdul-Ahad: I feel overwhelmed by all the
speeches given here. I do not know ifI can add anything.

The point is, journalists have been killed since the
beginning of conflict. The fact that one is standing
there in a conflict between two warring parties means
one is asking for trouble. One exists in that war zone.
Yet, in the past decade or maybe earlier, there has been
a systematic hunting down of journalists, who are
being killed, detained, chased, tortured and sometimes
treated as commodities. Many foreign journalists in
my country, Iraq, have been mistreated in some such
fashion just because they are foreigners.

We have lost sight of the fact that we are just
journalists, just professionals trying to tell our stories,
like doctors, like nurses, like anyone else. We have
become a way to pressure, to influence the conflict
from one side or the other. I do not mean only warlords
or rogue elements or any particular group. People
who kill, detain or capture journalists have a sense
of immunity. The helicopter pilot who kills a camera
man is never questioned; he never pays for that. The
tank commander who kills another journalist is
never captured. The officials who detain, torture and
intimidate people are never brought to trial. They are
never shamed in public, in front of the world. It creates
a sense, among us and in me, that maybe we deserve
that. Maybe we are asking for trouble by being there.

We are asked why we go there. Is it just to tell a
story, just to witness a conflict? Is it hubris? I personally
would have replaced a van full of journalists with one
nurse in Mogadishu during the famine, but we have to
be there. We are there. We are telling a story. I do not
mean that in this era we have an exclusive right to tell
the story. Many people tell it, so we do not have that
exclusivity anymore. But why are they targeting us?
Why are they chasing us?

When I was in solitary confinement in Libya, the
jailer would come to talk to me every night and tell me:
it is you journalists who have started all these troubles,
it is you journalists who have created that. I would try
to explain to him, from behind the bars: Ifit was not for
your people in revolution against your dictator, if it was
not for the people, the masses, going out on the streets,
I would not be there. Ifit was not for your oppression in
certain States, if it was not for your killing, the famine
there, we would never go there. We would be sitting
happily in our countries and writing from behind a
desk. But the fact that there is oppression brings us into
that conflict and makes us part of it.

To go to the main point here, I think there is a sense
of immunity about killing a journalist. I know very well
that my good friend in Mogadishu is worth a bullet.
One bullet and he will be killed, and no one will be
questioned after that bullet. And it is not only us, the
foreignjournalists. When I was detained in Afghanistan
I had the entire Guardian newspaper working to release
me. The United Nations was involved in releasing me
from Libya. But what about the people who work in
the conflict, the local journalists - Iraqis, Somalis,
Afghans, Egyptians, from all over the world - those are
the people we leave behind. We pay them handsomely
for their services, and we leave them to be ground
under the wheels of civil war, the wheels of famine.
Those are also people who are part of this community
ofjournalists, who deserve to be protected.

I think this is an amazing opportunity - to be
honest, I am really overwhelmed - for the Security
Council to make an effort to recognize journalists
as part of a humanitarian effort to tell a story. Many
participants here hate us, by the way, and I know that.
I think it is a sign that we are doing ourjob properly if
we have managed to piss them off. But there has to be
some sort of balance. Let us be there, let us be treated
as human beings. Just do not kill us.

