Mr. Fulci (Italy): Italy's support for the resolution
renewing the mandate of the Observer Mission in Georgia
has been based on three main considerations: the usefulness
of this resolution to a relaunching of the political
negotiations, the need to consolidate the mechanism that
has enabled the cease-fire to be complied with, and the
reaffirmation of the principle of sovereignty, territorial
integrity and renunciation of the use of force.

We share the opinion of those who maintained on the
eve of the expiration of UNOMIG's mandate that today's
decision could not be limited to something merely
technical. In our capacity as Chairman-in-Office of the
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE)
until last December, we noted that during the different
stages of the negotiations on Abkhazia, both at the political
level and in the discussions between experts on
constitutional law, the unwillingness to look for a
compromise increased rather than diminished. The contrast
between the autonomist - better yet, the separatist -
aspirations and the principle of sovereignty and territorial
integrity assumed a symptomatic importance in the case of
Abkhazia, and the unilateral declaration by the Abkhaz
authorities on 26 November 1994 constituted the
unfortunate epilogue that had been foreshadowed by some
of the elements that had already emerged at the negotiating
table.

In this regard, Italy wishes to commend the
Government of Georgia highly for the restraint and
flexibility that it has always maintained, even when faced
with the most difficult conditions.

The resumption of political negotiations cannot be a
long-term objective. There is an immediate need to
relaunch the negotiations, for two main, compelling
reasons - the downward spiral of the economy; and the
internal security situation that could be triggered by the
high number of refugees who are not allowed to re-enter
their place of origin. But there are other reasons,
especially the risk of the Abkhaz crisis's becoming a
deeply rooted and perverse example for other regions of
Georgia - Osetia in particular, and other parts of the
Caucasus.

The humanitarian crisis is of great concern to my
country. Since the spring of 1993 my Government has
contributed $1.7 million worth of food aid to the
Georgian people and has also helped to provide logistical
support through a humanitarian flight to Tbilisi with first-
aid needs from the Pisa depot. Italy has also contributed
through multilateral channels, sending $1.5 million worth
of humanitarian relief. This, of course, is in addition to its
previous pledge of $1.5 million at the G-7 summit in
London.

The renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Georgia is an occasion to recognize
the validity of the formula identified in Security Council
resolution 937 (1994) of last July. In his report, the
Secretary-General gave a positive assessment of the
degree of cooperation and coordination between the
United Nations Mission and the peace-keeping forces of
the Commonwealth of Independent States. We noted the
specific example of such cooperation mentioned in the
report. The seeds of this positive outcome were planted
thanks to the commitment of the Secretariat and of the
Russian Federation to defining the mandates and
responsibilities of the two distinct missions on the ground,
which are so closely tied by the common goal of
pacification.

The Georgian crisis has provided proof of the
cooperation that has developed between the United
Nations and the Conference on Security and Cooperation
in Europe - now the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The Budapest summit
last December, in its decision on Georgia, which referred
to both Abkhazia and Osetia, recalled the fundamental
concept confirmed once again in today's resolution -

 

strong support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Georgia within its internationally recognized borders;
concern about unilateral acts that undermine the efforts to
promote a peaceful settlement through negotiation; concern
about and condemnation of "ethnic cleansing" and the
massive expulsion of people from the areas in which they
live.

On the basis of these shared principles, we remain
convinced that a regional organization such as the OSCE
can continue to make a significant contribution to the
efforts of the United Nations towards a final settlement of
the crisis - especially in identifying neo-institutional
arrangements.

The Security Council can and must make a decisive
political input, as United Nations success stories in other
crisis areas have demonstrated. In this sense, today's
resolution also represents a new beginning for a
negotiated settlement.

