Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to thank this morning the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
Mr. Augustine Mahiga, for his first appearance in his
new capacity in the Security Council. I would also like
to thank the honourable Foreign Minister of Kenya for
his very heartfelt and thoughtful and insightful
contribution to our discussion today, and the Permanent
Representative of Somalia for his contribution to the
debate.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2010/447) and for the briefing
that the Special Representative gave us this morning.
We greatly appreciate the work of the Special
Representative, including that of his predecessor, his
team and all the United Nations agencies active in
Somalia. The United Kingdom looks forward to
working closely with him on the Somalia issue, and we
offer him our full support.

The situation in Somalia continues to be of deep
concern. There have been a few bright spots, as the
Secretary-General's report spells out. The free and fair
presidential elections in Somaliland in July led to a
peaceful transfer of power from one Government to

another. But that is hugely overshadowed by some very
distressing incidents, including the Kampala bombings,
the attack on the Muna hotel, and the attacks by armed
opposition groups in Mogadishu during the holy month
of Ramadan. These have been shocking reminders of
the impact of instability in Somalia, both on the Somali
people and on the wider region. The Minister set out
very starkly today the immediate threat to Kenya from
the instability in Somalia.

We extend our deepest sympathy to the
Government of Uganda, the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG) and the Somali people for the
tragic losses they have suffered. I pay particular tribute
to Uganda and Burundi for their continuing
commitment to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and the difficult operation they face in
Somalia. We unreservedly condemn any attacks on
AMISOM, including attacks on the Transitional
Federal Government and the Somali people.

It is essential that all parties fully support the
Djibouti peace process and join efforts to bring peace
to Somalia. There are only 11 months remaining of the
transitional period, as defined by the Djibouti
Agreement. Important transitional tasks still need to be
completed. It is imperative that the Transitional Federal
Government and the international community intensify
their efforts towards a more peaceful and stable
Somalia.

I would like to make five points this morning on
the United Nations operation in Somalia, the political
situation, peacekeeping, the problem of piracy and the
humanitarian situation.

First, we welcome the Secretary-General's work
to review the United Nations operation in Somalia and
his efforts to encourage better coordination between
the United Nations agencies. We must have a more
coherent and integrated United Nations approach if the
United Nations is to deliver the strong leadership that
we all want to see. We welcome the Secretary-
General's plans to increase the United Nations
presence in Somalia. We do not underestimate the
difficulties, but we need all parts of the United Nations
working in an integrative manner to deliver a single
strategy. We look forward to seeing further details of
how this can be achieved.
Secondly, greater United Nations engagement
cannot deliver progress without political leadership
from the TFG. We urge the TFG to intensify its efforts

10-5364]
towards dialogue and reconciliation and to deliver
better governance and reform of the security sector.
The constitutional process provides an opportunity for
the TFG to reach out to those outside the Djibouti
process and to give them a stake in Somalia's future.
The TFG must resolve its internal differences, which
are deeply damaging. There can be no successful
military strategy in a political vacuum.

The actions of spoilers also need to be addressed.
Arming, training and supporting armed opposition
groups in Somalia, particularly Al-Shabaab, has a
serious destabilizing effect. The AMISOM. Force
Commander made that clear when he briefed Council
members on Monday this week, and the Foreign
Minister has reinforced that message to the Council
today. Those actions are also in contravention of
Security Council resolutions. We strongly support the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
calling on all parties to abide by their obligations and
work to foster peace in Somalia and the wider region,
and the Council must assume its responsibilities in this
respect.

Thirdly, AMISOM. continues to play a vital role
in providing security. We welcome the recent
announcement by the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and
those in the region about plans to increase the number
of AMISOM. troops. And we agree with the three
briefers this morning that AMISOM. and the TFG
security forces in Somalia need more support.

The United Kingdom was pleased to be able to
contribute $1.5 million to AMISOM. earlier this year
for radio support, in addition to the $15 million we
have already given via the trust fund. We will continue
to look at how we can provide support in the future. It
is essential that AMISOM. and the TFG receive
adequate funding, and we look forward to discussing
this issue in more detail with the Secretary-General.

Fourthly, the international community must also
continue its efforts through the Contact Group on
Piracy off the Coast of Somalia, and we look forward
to the comprehensive report that will be presented to
the Security Council in October on this issue.

Finally, the most serious impact of the instability
in Somalia is on the Somali people themselves. The
humanitarian situation remains deeply worrying and
has been compounded by recent fighting and attacks on
humanitarian workers and their compounds by armed
opposition groups, including Al-Shabaab. We hope that
the World Food Programme will be able to restore its
programmes in southern central Somalia as soon as it is
safe to do so.

Now more than ever, the United Nations must
show strong leadership in Somalia, and the
international community must do all it can to ensure
that the United Nations has the support it needs. We
welcome Mr. Mahiga's determination to give that
leadership, and we look forward to discussing these
issues further at next week's high-level meeting.

