At the outset, allow me to extend my most sincere wishes for good health and well-being to members of the Security Council in these challenging times that the world is witnessing owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The Government of Yemen has always expressed its clear and consistent position in support of all peacemaking efforts based on the three agreed terms of reference, namely, the Gulf Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation Mechanisms, the outcomes of the comprehensive National Dialogue Conference, and relevant resolutions of the Security Council, in particular resolution 2216 (2015), which represents the core and genuine essence of peace. The Government of Yemen has complied with all calls and initiatives to bring about a ceasefire and de-escalate the conflict, in accordance with the directives of President Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour, which came in response to the invitation of the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Antonio Guterres, to unify efforts aimed at combating the implications of an outbreak of the coronavirus disease pandemic in Yemen and at creating an environment conducive for the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen to succeed in achieving sustainable peace. The Government has engaged positively with these initiatives that could alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni people and save them from the catastrophic humanitarian situation caused by the Houthi militia coup. It has welcomed the announcement of a two-week unilateral ceasefire by the coalition to support legitimacy, led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The Government's position flows from its unwavering commitment to giving high priority to the humanitarian issue in its logic of priorities. The Houthi's similar commitment to these issues could represent an opening for convening discussions on other issues, which would ultimately allow for reaching a comprehensive settlement that meets the aspirations of the Yemeni people for the restoration of their State, end the coup, lay down arms and resume the political process from the point where it stopped. The situation in Yemen demands a complete cessation of all forms of escalation and a united stand in terms of global and humanitarian efforts aimed at saving civilian lives and responsibly addressing the pandemic, as well as at establishing urgent and effective mechanisms to prevent the exploitation of the humanitarian truce for military escalation by the Houthis, in the light of their recent military expansion across all fronts and the outcomes of previous truces, which, due to the Houthi militias's intransigence and arrogance, have become an integral tool for prolonging the war - preparing for war rather than striving for peace. The Government of Yemen calls upon the international community to exert further pressure on the Houthi militias to comply with these calls and initiatives without preconditions and hold them responsible for their ongoing escalation of violence, especially after the first case of COVID-19 in Yemen was recorded. The fact is that the Houthi militias persist in committing such vicious crimes as the targeting of civilians in Ma'arib, Al-Hudaydah, Taiz and other locations, attacking the displaced persons camps in Razih district in Sa'dah governorate on the same day the coalition to support legitimacy in Yemen announced its ceasefire, the shelling of the women's section of the central prison in Taiz, which resulted in the death or injury of a number of female prisoners early last week, and the bombing of an oil pumping station owned by Safer oil company in Ma'arib. 27/28 28/28 All of those actions are ongoing and unjustified violations and breaches that should provide the international community with clear and compelling evidence of the criminal nature of the Houthi militias, which serves Iran's destructive project for the region. These actions also prove that the militias wish to deepen the rifts that triggered the war it started and to expand the circle of victims to include all Yemenis. The international community's continued disregard for these brutal crimes encourages the Houthi militias to continue pursuing their subversive project in violation of all resolutions of the international community and contravening international humanitarian and human rights law. In stark contrast to the efforts of the Special Envoy and the Government's call to implement what was agreed upon in the initiative to release all prisoners and detainees, which was based on the all-for-all principle in the light of the risk of a looming pandemic outbreak, the Houthi militias issued death sentences for four journalists who had been kidnapped and detained by the Houthis since 2015 on charges of practicing journalism. We call on the Security Council to condemn these unlawful sentences and stop them from being carried out. Combating an outbreak of COVID-19 is the Government's highest priority. The Government has worked on equipping quarantine centres and enhancing hospital preparedness in all governorates. It is doing everything possible to save the lives of citizens throughout Yemen. Furthermore, the Government of Yemen is trying to obtain the necessary supply of medicine and ventilators to prepare to combat the pandemic. It will provide required resources within the means at its disposal. The Supreme National Emergency Committee for Coronavirus is making great efforts to this end. We highly value the support provided by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to enhance the capabilities of the health-care sector to combat the COVID-19 pandemic, and we stress the importance of receiving urgent support from donors, international organizations and Yemen's development partners. Finally, the Yemeni Government renews its support for the efforts of the Special Envoy for Yemen aimed at reaching a comprehensive and sustainable solution that ushers in a new phase that could bring about an end to both the suffering of the Yemeni people and the ongoing war perpetrated by the Houthis, which is now in its sixth year.
