Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I thank Under-Secretary-
General Feltman for his update on the situation in
Ukraine, which by all accounts remains tense. The
armed attacks of last week that led to the deaths of
16 Ukrainian soldiers near Donetsk represent a very
serious escalation of the crisis. We condemn attacks
against security forces carrying out legitimate orders.
We note the conduct of presidential elections on 25 May
and the outcome. We see the election ofa new President
as a significant first step towards the normalization of
the situation in Ukraine. Issues of human rights still
need to be addressed, as do improving the economy,
fostering inclusiveness and strengthening national
cohesion and reconciliation.

An improvement in bilateral relations between
Russia and Ukraine remains central to resolving the
crisis in Ukraine. That is why we welcome the decision
of Russian President Vladimir Putin to respect the
outcome of the elections in Ukraine. We also welcome
the offer of Russian Foreign Minister Sergey Lavrov
to start a dialogue with the incoming leadership of
Ukraine. President-elect Poroshenko has also indicated
that he will reach out to Russia. Those are encouraging
signs that convince us that the doors to a diplomatic
solution remain open.

We reiterate our position that dialogue among
all concerned parties and stakeholders is the path to
sustainable peace, security and stability in Ukraine.
We urge all armed groups in eastern Ukraine to lay
down their arms, refrain from violence, and desist
from occupying public buildings, erecting road
blocks, illegally detaining international officials and
challenging the authority of the State. We restate our
position that the declaration of a people's republic
of Donetsk and other separatist and secessionist
pronouncements violate the Constitution of Ukraine
and are therefore of no legal effect. We call on all
concerned to respect the independence, territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine, in line with the
Charter of the United Nations.

