Mr. Woldegerima (Ethiopia): We thank the United
Kingdom for taking the initiative to convene today's
meeting. We also thank Ms. Izumi Nakamitsu, the
High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
her briefing.

The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) is the appropriate international
body to address the incident in Salisbury. We know
that it has presented its report on the activities carried
out in support of a request for technical assistance by
the United Kingdom in relation to the incident. We
also followed the fifty-ninth meeting of the Executive
Council of the OPCW, where the issue was discussed
in the morning at The Hague. We take note of what
the Director-General of the OPCW said in his opening
statement with regard to questions arising about the
result of the analysis, including assurances that the
OPCW will continue to use the Executive Council
meetings or briefings to inform the States parties about
its activities and clarify certain points that need to be
addressed. Indeed, the issue is very sensitive and its
implication for global peace and security is so grave
that it is vital that the OPCW does so, and we appreciate
its work.

We agree that preserving the credibility and
integrity of the international regime on the use of
chemical weapons is Vital to global peace and security.
Of course, we understand that the work of the OPCW
technical team was limited to identifying the toxic
chemical used. As was discussed at the Executive
Council meeting today, the OPCW report did not
identify the country or laboratory of origin of the agent
used in the attack. It will therefore still be important to
ensure that a thorough, professional and independent
investigation is undertaken. We believe that will be
essential for getting to the bottom of the truth and
bringing those responsible to justice.
What is clear from the Salisbury incident, and all
the other chemical-weapon attacks that have happened
recently, is that the use ofchemical weapons is becoming
normalized and the international norm on the issue is
being seriously undermined. That should be extremely
worrying to us all. The use of chemical weapons by any
actor, under any circumstances, is totally unacceptable,
and we reiterate our strongest condemnation. However,
we know and understand that we can address that
serious challenge only if all of us provide the necessary
cooperation and abide by the rules that we set ourselves
in all transparency and fidelity to the truth.

