Mr. She Okitundu (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (interpretation from French): The Democratic
Republic of the Congo called for today's debate in a
constructive spirit, not out of a desire for polemics.
Accordingly, we shall not respond to the unfounded
accusations made earlier by our aggressors.

However, I should like to point out that, since 2
August 1998, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has
been the target of aggression that constitutes a breach of the
peace and a serious threat to international security. It was
therefore our duty to call on the Security Council, whose
primary role is precisely to maintain peace and international
security.

Unlike what has been said here today, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a peaceful country in which more
than 450 ethnic groups live in harmony. Despite the
diversity from which it draws its cultural wealth, the
Congolese people practices no racist, let alone genocidal
culture whatsoever. That is practiced, not to say relished,
elsewhere. The origins of the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are the export of external conflicts
from the aggressor countries and the hegemonic impulses
of their leaders. The Democratic Republic of the Congo
was resolutely committed to pursuing the process of
democratization, which was rudely interrupted by the
aggression. The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is resolved nevertheless to pursuing the
process. The national debate recently announced by
President M'zee Laurent-Desire Kabila is a step in that
direction.

Contrarily to the excuses offered by the aggressors,
their aggression pre-dates the intervention of the allied
forces, implemented at the formal request of a legitimate
Government in the context of the legitimate right to self-
defence recognized in the Charters of the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity. Regardless, and as
we stated earlier, since the aggressors are citing border
insecurity as a pretext for their aggression, we would urge
the Security Council fully and immediately to shoulder its
responsibilities by taking the steps necessary to re-
establish the territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and security in our region. We
would therefore call once again on the Security Council
to act appropriately under the provisions of Articles 39 to
42 of the Charter. Should it fail to do so, the aggression
against the Democratic Republic of the Congo would set
a dangerous precedent that would trample the sacred
principles on which this Organization is founded.

It is our deepest desire to see a speedy end to the
war, and with it to the suffering of our people. We would
therefore appeal to the Security Council to be sensitive to
our pain. Your involvement, Sir, as well as that of the
Security Council, are genuinely sought.

