Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan) (spoke in Russian):
First of all, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me this opportunity to speak at today's
meeting. I would also like, at the outset, to extend my
thanks to the members of the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan, headed by Mr. Haile Menkerios, for the
report they have prepared and for the very painstaking
work they have done in implementation of Security
Council resolution 1333 (2000). I would also like to
take this opportunity to express my appreciation to the
Chairman of the sanctions Committee, Ambassador
Alfonso Valdivieso, for the useful work that has been
done in the Committee.

I would like to say that despite the limited time
frame of its mandate, the Committee of Experts on
Afghanistan has done an enormous amount of work.
Their report proposes a regime for effective monitoring
of the implementation of the requirements contained in
the Security Council's resolutions to ensure the
adoption and implementation of the relevant decisions
on sanctions.

We agree with the statement that the effectiveness
of monitoring will depend on the direct involvement
and commitment of all countries to its implementation.
That, of course, also applies fully to us.

We also agree with the statement that the
financing of arms and ammunition purchases and of the
training of terrorists is integral to the overall problem.

Turning to paragraph 33 of the report, we agree
fully with the statement that the flow of arms into,
within and from Afghanistan is a major, long-term
cause of insecurity and instability in the central Asian
region. In that connection, we would note that
Uzbekistan is ready to participate actively in
discussions on the draft programme to monitor the
illegal arms trade with regard to the situation in
Afghanistan, which is to be submitted at the
forthcoming United Nations Conference on the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects, to be held in July of this year.

Uzbekistan also agrees with the view set out in
paragraph 7 of the Committee's report that there is a
direct link between the funds obtained from the
production and sale of drugs and support for the
military activities and training of terrorists in
Afghanistan. In that regard, we support the
Committee's conclusion in paragraph 61 of the report,
namely, that the flow of drugs from Afghanistan should
be monitored as an integral component of the arms
embargo. In this connection, it is particularly important
to take note of the view expressed in the report that
strengthening the capacity of Afghanistan's neighbours
to monitor their borders is a key aspect of the measures
to be taken.

The Republic of Uzbekistan supports the proposal
made by the Committee to establish a United Nations
Office for Sanctions Monitoring and Coordination in
Afghanistan. Such an office would make it possible to
establish a focused mechanism to monitor respect for
the arms embargo and would help to close terrorist
training camps and coordinate the activities of existing
national structures of Afghanistan's neighbours.

We consider constructive the proposal to establish
groups in States bordering Afghanistan to provide
assistance in the monitoring of sanctions. At the same
time, we must note that the organizational aspects of
that proposal will certainly require further work.

The Republic of Uzbekistan regards paragraph 45
of the report as one of the key provisions. That
paragraph emphasizes the need to establish a central
point for collating and analysing information provided
by Member States about terrorist camps. We support
the Committee's conclusion that this database and the
collection of analysis of information from Member
States within a clear international structure will be one
of the most important elements in ensuring effective
monitoring.

In order to do that and to save time and money,
we should strengthen the existing international
mechanisms and instruments for combating terrorism.
We regard it as logical and natural, therefore, that the
Committee should have concluded that the Office
should cooperate closely with the United Nations
Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention and the
secretariats of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the Wassenaar Arrangement
in Vienna.

We believe that the Committee's recommendation
in paragraph 45, regarding the central authority for
collecting information, could be carried out on the
basis of the existing counter-terrorism component in
the United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime
Prevention in Vienna. That component could be
transformed into an international centre to combat
terrorism within this Office.

According to paragraphs 45 and 82 of the report,
in addition to the mandate of the existing component,
the tasks of the Office would include collecting and
analysing information about terrorist training camps,
and collating it before its subsequent submission to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations. There would
also be wide distribution of information about the
camps. That would seem to be the most economical
and effective way of establishing the mechanism for
collecting information. We regard this proposal as a
natural and organic way of implementing the
recommendations of the Committee's report, in
accordance with the provisions of Security Council
resolution 1333 (2000). We hope that that proposal will
be understood and supported by all members of the
Security Council. In conclusion, I would like to say
once again that the Republic of Uzbekistan supports
the conclusions and recommendations in the report of
the Committee of Experts on Afghanistan sanctions.

