Mrs. Papadopoulou (Greece): I would like to
start by thanking Mr. Malloch Brown for his briefing
today on the report of the Office of Internal Oversight
Services (OIOS) under consideration here.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
delivered shortly by the representative of Austria in
that country's capacity as the holder of the presidency
of the European Union. I shall therefore make only a
few short remarks.

Mismanagement, fraudulent activities or related
weaknesses, in any system, call for prompt and
decisive action. We all agree that the United Nations is
no exception. The findings of the review, as presented
today and as included in the report of the OIOS, are
indeed worrying, and we cannot but express our deep
concern. It is evident that procurement rules - and,
even more so, procurement practices - should be
reviewed. Furthermore, all allegations of fraud and
mismanagement should be thoroughly investigated,
and those found guilty must be held accountable.

Nevertheless, we are all well aware that this
investigation is still ongoing. In that respect, we would
like to emphasize the paramount importance of fully
observing due-process principles. We believe that this
issue, which is currently also under discussion in
various competent bodies of the United Nations, is
being handled with the seriousness and the
thoroughness it deserves and through the proper United
Nations channels. In view of today's consideration of
the matter by the Security Council, Greece believes
that action by all appropriate United Nations bodies
involved in peacekeeping operations will contribute in
a positive and effective way to the proper
implementation of the principles and priorities of the
United Nations as a whole. In that regard, we consider
it valuable and useful that the Security Council be
informed of the answers provided by the Secretariat to
the OIOS report.

The need for reform has long been recognized as
a priority for the Organization. As such, it was the
main focus of our leaders' outcome document (General Assembly resolution 60/1). In recent months, all of us
have been deeply engaged in that effort so that the
United Nations can evolve into a dynamic and highly
competent body ready to face the challenges of today's
world.

Some good steps have already been taken in that
direction, such as those adopted with regard to
procurement during the fifty-ninth session of the
General Assembly - concerning, for example, the
issues of accountability and best-value-for-money
practices. Those efforts and the gradual progress they
bring about should be encouraged, along with vigilant
oversight for possible wrongdoing.

In the light of the aforementioned, it is very
important that we be careful here today to strike the
right balance in our discussion. We should not lose
sight of the significance of the role of, and the overall
service provided by, United Nations peacekeeping
operations in the cause of international peace and
security. Those operations are staffed with competent
and dedicated people who, most of the time, work
under difficult circumstances and in extremely volatile
environments. They do excellent work. For that they
deserve our respect. It is our task to support and
encourage them to continue to carry out the duties we
entrust to them with the same professionalism and
outstanding results.

