Mr. Zlenko (Ukraine): Let me, on behalf of
Ukraine, welcome you, Mr. Minister, as you preside
over the Security Council at this very important
meeting. I would also like to welcome the Secretary-
General, Mr. Kofi Annan, who is taking part in this
meeting, and to commend him for his commitment and
personal involvement in the issues related to
Afghanistan. We also welcome the opportunity to meet
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for
Afghanistan, Ambassador Brahimi. We want to thank
him for his very comprehensive briefing and valuable
proposals for a peaceful settlement.

The attention of the entire international
community is today focused on Afghanistan in alarm
and hope, particularly in the light of the most recent
military developments in the country reported this
morning. The people of that country have been victims
of the criminal Taliban regime, which not only imposed
cruel terror against its own people by creating an
atmosphere of peril in the entire region but also
brought about a real threat to the lives of people in
different parts of the globe.

We approach the present situation in and around
Afghanistan primarily in the context of the global fight
against terrorists, who found safe haven in the territory
of that country. In that connection, permit me to refer
to the statement made by Ukraine's President, Leonid
Kuchma, on 6 November at the Warsaw Conference on
terrorism:

"Terrorism cannot be 'European', 'Asian',
'Afghan', 'Chechen', 'Islamic' or 'Christian'.
Terrorism is an enemy without a nation,
nationality or religion. It is armed with hatred and
new means provided by the era of globalization".

To prevent the threat of war and terrorism from
ever again emanating from the territory of Afghanistan,
that country needs peace and stability, which would lay
the foundations for its economic and spiritual rebirth.
Although today it seems to the parties to the conflict
that the military option is a realistic way to resolve the
inter-Afghan conflict, there is in fact no alternative to a
broad political dialogue involving everyone - I
emphasize, all ethnic, political and religious groups in
Afghanistan. The Ukraine is convinced that the United
Nations should play the leading role in arranging such
a dialogue by supporting those representatives of the
Afghan society who sincerely want to bring back peace
and stability to their land. We welcome the ensuing
dialogue with the participation of the Secretary-
General and his Special Envoy, Ambassador Brahimi.

I would like to share the main conclusion that we
draw from this discussion: the need to bring all
international efforts aimed at resolving the conflict in
Afghanistan under the aegis of the United Nations
increasingly comes to the fore. We also believe that the
role of the Secretary-General in supporting the political
process in Afghanistan will remain extremely
important at all stages. In this connection, the
Secretary-General may fully count on the support of
my Government.

Internal stability in Afghanistan is impossible
without external support, primarily from the
neighbouring countries. The Ukraine welcomes the
Declaration on the Situation in Afghanistan, adopted
by the "six plus two" group at its meeting in New York
yesterday. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of these
States made it clear that they are ready to contribute to
achieving peace in Afghanistan.

Next month the Ukraine's term as a member of
the Security Council will come to an end. While
participating in the work of this highly respected body,
our efforts were aimed at contributing as much as
possible to resolving the Afghan problem. Despite the
existing difficulties - and we realize how great they
are - the Ukraine is deeply persuaded that peace in
Afghanistan can be established and that the only path
goes through broadly based national reconciliation.

In the 1960s, when I was a student, I had the
pleasure of studying with fellow students from
Afghanistan. They represented the elite of the Afghan
people. They worked hard to gain and expand their
knowledge, to rise above the routine of everyday life.

The question of the nature of power is an eternal
one. However, the struggle for power often takes
horrific and blood-shedding forms, and the
developments in Afghanistan manifestly prove that.
Today in that country a culture, spiritual foundations
and values that humankind has created and cherished
for centuries are being destroyed. This destruction is
not only physical; it is also spiritual.

These recollections lead me to think that it is
important that our efforts lead to the revival of the
nation's spirit and its belief in a better future. If we
fulfil this mission, we can be confident that the
conflicts like the one in Afghanistan can be resolved.

