Mr. Shobokshi (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
I should like at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and to wish you every success.
My thanks go also to your predecessor, Ambassador
John Negroponte, for his work as President of the
Council last month.

I thank you, Sir, for convening this emergency
meeting to consider the latest developments in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

It is quite clear to the international community
that the dangerous escalation in the occupied
Palestinian territories has continued since the
provocative visit by the present Prime Minister of
Israel to the Al-Aqsa mosque, accompanied by a large
contingent of soldiers, in clear defiance of Arab and
Islamic feelings. That ominous visit was the spark that
ignited the Palestinian intifada, which is an expression
of the Palestinian people's rejection of having its holy
sites desecrated.

Since the present Israeli Government came to
power, it has accelerated its plan to sabotage any
attempt to resume the peace talks and to reach a
peaceful settlement that would restore peace and
security while providing a just and permanent solution
to the problem. It has imposed a suffocating economic
siege; restricted the movement of the Palestinians;
destroyed houses and institutions; demolished the
Palestinian economic infrastructure; destroyed farms;
bulldozed fields; uprooted trees; killed children, elderly
people, the disabled and women; continued to liquidate
political activists and Palestinian leaders; closed
crossing points and international borders; and
continued to expand Israeli settlements, while violating
the human rights of the Palestinian people and
breaching international humanitarian law. As a result,
violence has escalated. And each violent act led to
another. Much bloodshed and killing ensued.

The Israeli Government has insisted on using
excessive force with its entire military arsenal, as a
means of killing and destruction. It has adopted this as
a method of governing that falls within a systematic
policy of targeting the Palestinian people and their
leadership. The most recent instance of this is the siege
of the headquarters of the Palestinian president, and the
threat to bomb the headquarters with all those who are
in it to force them to submit to Israeli demands and
surrender.

The Israeli security forces continue to interfere in
the affairs of the Palestinian Authority, while the Israeli
army continues to kill or displace civilians and
demolish their houses. Intelligence units have
continued their arrests and assassinations pursuant to
what the Israeli Chief of Staff has said: that its country
aims to abolish what he called the Palestinian cancer
and bring about the moral and military defeat of the
Palestinians, in order to abolish their rights. All of this
has occurred before the eyes of the international
community, which has seen all forms of Palestinian
struggle as a form of terrorism while seeing Israeli
terrorism as legitimate self-defence, contrary to all
human ethical values.

The Security Council has a responsibility to face
injustice, denial of rights and threats to international
peace and security stemming from Israeli practices,
which provoke Palestinians and continue to suppress
and terrorize them, putting an end to their aspirations.
They find nothing before them in terms of dignity,
justice and the restoration of their usurped rights,
except to use violent acts, which leads in turn to Israeli
terrorism.

The international community cannot stand by in
the face of the deteriorating situation without doing
anything. We should force Israel to stop its practices
and its attacks, to submit to the requirements of
international humanitarian law, to provide the
necessary protection for innocent civilians, and to
implement the Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.

The siege of President Arafat's headquarters
should end, and Israeli forces should withdraw from
Palestinian cities to their positions before September
2000. The intervention of the Security Council is no
longer for protection, but to put an end to the killing of
a whole people and to save it from being expelled from
its homeland, along with restoring its usurped rights
and putting an end to its humiliation. There is a dire
need for intervention by the international community to
help both parties to control the worsening situation and
to put an end to this spiral of violence and destruction.

The continuing spiral of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories will not be halted unless the
Palestinian people regain their legitimate rights, which
are endorsed by the entire international community and
ratified by international law, and which have become a
legal matter pursuant to the agreements made by
various Israeli Governments with the Palestinian party.

Concentrating on the security side only has
become an obstruction, and not a bridge, to the
resumption of political negotiations. It has shown the
impotence and futility of Israeli policy, while the
Israeli Government's attempt to dictate its conditions
and impose its will has led to more bloodshed and more
innocent victims.

The fact that the Israeli political discourse is not
serious or logical is reflected in its focus on blaming
only the Palestinian Authority on security matters. This
is at a time when the Israeli occupation forces have
undermined the Authority and deprived it of the means
to act. Blaming only the Palestinians for security, and
making it responsible for the violence and insecurity, is
not realistic and does not help to solve the problem.
Security must be garnered through mutual
commitments and responsibilities.

Security is a comprehensive and integral concept.
Being committed to it is the responsibility of all
parties. However, that commitment loses its credibility
when some are exempt from fulfilling it.

Therefore, we cannot accept the fact that Israel
has an exceptional status in the international
community, protecting itself under the pretext of
security, thus allowing it to transcend international
legitimacy and use the policy of force and that of faits
accomplis.

Breaking out of the spiral of violence in the
region has become an international responsibility, one
requiring finding a political settlement based on
international legitimacy and leading to Israel's
withdrawal from all Arab territories occupied since
1967 and to the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Eastern Jerusalem as its capital, side by side with
the State of Israel and bringing about peace, security
and stability for all the peoples of the region. This is
what the Arab initiative provides and what the Quartet
is trying to achieve.

This urgent demand is not just a Palestinian or an
Arab demand. It has increasingly become the demand
of the moderate forces of peace in the world, since the
current policy of the present Israel Government has
shown that security and peace cannot be generated by
repression, aggression and coercion and cannot be
brought about in the light of injustice and the absence
ofjustice.

