Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): I would like to
start by congratulating Ambassador Alexander Konuzin
on assuming the chairmanship of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee at a particularly delicate moment,
when the revitalization process is under way. We also
welcome and congratulate Ambassador Javier Ruperez
on his appointment as Executive Director of the newly
formed Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate, which will be a central piece in the
revitalization process that the Committee is going
through. We assure Mr. Ruperez of our full cooperation
and wish him every success in the discharge of his
responsibilities.

My delegation took due note of the briefing to the
Council by the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee. In that connection, we would like briefly to
underline three issues.

First, the process of revitalizing the CTC, to
which the Security Council and the United Nations
membership at large are committed, is intended to
strengthen the prominent and central role of the United
Nations in the fight against terrorism. It shows how
Member States are determined to overcome any
difficulty that might hinder universal implementation
of resolution 1373 (2001).

The report of the Chairman on difficulties
encountered by the CTC and by States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) (S/2004/70, annex); the report
of the CTC on its revitalization (S/2004/124, annex);
and the adoption of resolution 1535 (2004): all these
reflect the international community's resolve to adapt
the fight against terrorism to changing circumstances
and its flexibility to adapt structures to make them best
suited for effectively responding to such an enormous
challenge.

Secondly, the twelfth work programme (S/2004/54l, annex), presented by the CTC Chairman, shows how the
CTC is beginning a new and important phase of its
existence. It states that the main task for the current
period of work is to render fully operational as soon as
possible the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate established by resolution 1535 (2004), with
a view - as stated in the CTC's report on its
revitalization - to enabling the CTC to fulfil its mandate
of monitoring implementation of resolution 1373 (2001),
facilitating technical assistance to Member States and
promoting closer cooperation and coordination with
international, regional and subregional organizations:
functions which are crucial to the fight against terrorism
and to the central role that the United Nations plays in that
regard.

Thirdly, the briefing by the CTC refers to the
need to change the approach to monitoring the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001), which now
relies on reports submitted by States, by integrating
country assessments of assistance needs into the
process of reviewing the reports as a means to develop
practical cooperation with donor countries and to better
adapt technical assistance efforts to the real needs of
the countries. The fact that by 30 June 70 States had
not met the deadline for the submission of their
respective reports, and the fact that all of them are
developing countries, is a clear demonstration of the
urgent need to step up efforts to provide technical
assistance to those countries, which are also the most
vulnerable to the presence of terrorists and their acts.

We are pleased that the CTC, in its approach to
revitalization, is looking for innovative ways so as to
make technical assistance, capacity-building and the
upgrading of States' anti-terrorist capabilities the main
thrust of international cooperation in the fight against
terrorism. That is indeed a commendable development.

An important provision of resolution 1535 (2004)
recognized the need for the Committee to Visit States
and to engage in a dialogue as part of the monitoring of
the effective implementation of resolution 1373 (2001).
We consider of very crucial importance the fact that the
Committee has undertaken to develop all necessary
forms of direct dialogue with the Member States
seeking assistance in order to strengthen their capacity
to combat terrorism.

In conclusion, we fully support the statement that
the President will deliver as the outcome of this
meeting. It clearly sets out the tasks ahead for the
Committee, as well as those carried out in the quarterly
period under consideration.

