Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I have asked for the floor once again to express our firm opposition to the accusations made against China by the representative of the United Kingdom. Regrettably, the United Kingdom once again blindly followed in the footsteps of the United States against China in the Security Council. Just now, China has comprehensively elaborated its position on Xinjiang and we believe that the United Kingdom has taken note of it. China urges the United Kingdom not to blindly follow the United States in using the Security Council to make trouble, spread rumours and interfere in the internal affairs of China. The allegations made just now by the British representative about Xinjiang are not new and have no factual basis. However, the United Kingdom has suffered many terrorist attacks in the past, including the recent knife attack in London. We advise the United Kingdom to abandon its hypocrisy and double standards and face up to its own serious problems of racial discrimination and human rights violations. It will be good for the United Kingdom. Just now, the representative of the United Kingdom mentioned that State Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs Wang Yi raised the situation in Xinjiang in September (see S/PV.8626). That is because we knew that certain countries wanted to try to use that opportunity to attack China and cause trouble. We wish to make it clear that we categorically reject such attempts at provocation.China's position on Xinjiang remains consistent, and we are firmly opposed to the use of Security Council meetings to discuss the situation in Xinjiang. It is our hope that the members of the Security Council present will in good faith shoulder their responsibility to maintain international peace and security instead of creating political spectacles, spreading rumours and launching unprovoked attacks on other countries. Such behaviour is inconsistent with the role of a Security Council member. The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.
