The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Jamaica.

I wish to join other delegations in expressing
appreciation to the Deputy Secretary-General and
especially to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
and to the Executive Director of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) for their important
statements, which set the framework for today's debate.

We wish also to thank the Secretary-General for
his far-reaching and comprehensive report
(S/2000/712), which constitutes a new and important
contribution to the body of information on the plight of
children in armed conflict. The four years which have
passed since the Graca Machel report on the impact of
armed conflict on children (A/51/306) have allowed for
serious assessment and for the establishment of a
number of innovative and practical initiatives aimed at
protecting children exposed to armed conflict.

It is in that context that my delegation salutes the
innovative and dynamic approach adopted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Olara Otunnu, since his appointment, as well as the
Executive Director of UNICEF, Ms. Carol Bellamy,
and the staff of UNICEF for their demonstrated
commitment to improving the conditions of
disadvantaged children across the globe.

Nevertheless, 10 years after the adoption of the
Convention on the Rights of the Child, and in the face
of numerous international legal norms and standards
for the protection of children, children are still being
killed, maimed, used as combatants and uprooted from
home and community in conditions of extreme
deprivation.

In view of that tragic reality and its implications
for international peace and security, the Jamaican
delegation deemed it important for the Security
Council to revisit the issue of the protection of children
in armed conflict, which was a hallmark of Namibia's
presidency of the Council in August 1999. Jamaica
strongly believes that this issue, which must remain a
priority for the international community, requires our
most effective responses. We also strongly believe that
there are several identifiable steps to be taken in the
pre-conflict and post-conflict phases and during
conflicts themselves in order to address the plight of
children in an integrated and comprehensive manner.

First, addressing the plight of children in the most
effective manner requires that attention be given to the
prevention of armed conflicts. We agree with the
Secretary-General that the best way to reduce the harm
done to children is to prevent armed conflicts in the
first place.

Addressing the root causes of conflict must,
therefore, be a priority for the international community.
There can be no real, effective substitute for addressing
the economic, social and humanitarian circumstances
that fuel children's recruitment and participation in
armed conflict. The international community must also
ensure respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms and encourage specially designated post-
conflict peace-building and rehabilitation programmes,
which will effectively reduce the likelihood of the re-
emergence of armed conflict.

The promotion of a culture of adherence to
humanitarian norms and standards is therefore of
critical importance, especially in the light of the
increased violations of international humanitarian law
in conflict situations. A vital component of any
effective strategy must involve clear efforts by States
to end current levels of impunity by prosecuting those
who deliberately violate the rights of children.
Innovative approaches must be identified, and in this
regard the Secretary-General's recommendation that
genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity and
other egregious crimes perpetrated against children
should be excluded from amnesty provisions
contemplated during peace negotiations is worthy of
our consideration.

It is equally important that appropriate
monitoring and reporting mechanisms be established to
ensure the compliance of armed groups and non-State
actors. The challenge of developing clear and
appropriate strategies to protect children during
conflict must be addressed through cooperative and
comprehensive approaches involving the participation
of a wide range of actors. Initiatives by the United
Nations system must be accompanied by better and
more effective cooperation and coordination with
regional and subregional bodies, multilateral donors
and international non-governmental organizations. This
approach is essential, particularly in combating the
illicit trade in small arms and the illegal exploitation of
and trade in natural resources.

A ground-breaking regional initiative was the
adoption by the Economic Community of West African
States in Accra in April this year of the Declaration on
war-affected children. We encourage and support such
initiatives. My delegation also believes that the
protection of the rights and interests of refugee and
internally displaced children is especially compelling.
The international community must provide additional
resources for nutrition, health care, the education of
internally displaced children and refugees and family
reunification. This must be accompanied by improved
training and sensitization of peacekeepers and
humanitarian personnel.

The post-conflict phase of armed conflicts
remains one of the most crucial stages in the protection
of children. The Secretary-General's report emphasizes
that special attention must be given to the educational,
psychosocial, health and economic needs of children in
these situations. Education is of special importance, as
most of the children being prepared for reintegration
into society lack basic education and are thus
constrained in their ability to contribute as future
productive citizens. Former child soldiers remaining
idle in disarmament and demobilization camps without
appropriate training and education are likely to be
induced to return to armed groups.

The international community, donors and non-
governmental organizations must together invest
greater levels of resources in peace-building activities
and demobilization and reintegration, taking into
account the needs of such former child soldiers. We
also believe that the special vulnerabilities of girls
must be taken into account, not only in conflict
situations, but also in the design of post-conflict
rehabilitation programmes.

While it is important that this debate has allowed
us to identify several practical steps that can be taken
by the Security Council and the United Nations system
to advance the cause of children, the process of
consultation must continue if reasonable success is to
be achieved. This work will be carried forward at the
Winnipeg Conference on War-affected Children, to be
held in September this year, and by next year's special
session of the General Assembly for follow-up of the
World Summit for Children.

If we agree that children have a right to peace and
a right to grow and develop in a safe and secure
environment, the international community must act to
ensure their security. The Security Council, which is
seized with maintaining international peace and
security, has a responsibility to help in providing a
legal framework within which the rights of children are
protected in situations of armed conflict. Resolution
1261 (1999) was an important beginning, on which we
must continue to build. The many tools which we have
at our disposal must be used judiciously to further
advance the security and protection of children.

My delegation hopes that the draft resolution that
this Council will formulate on the basis of the
Secretary-General's report and today's debate will
demonstrate the intention of the international
community to move from words to deeds.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

There are a number of speakers remaining on my
list. In view of the lateness of the hour, with the
concurrence of the members of the Council, I intend to
suspend the meeting now.

The meeting was suspended at 1.10 p.m.
