Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) ofresolution 1970 (2011) of26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security Council
on the work of the Committee established pursuant
to the same resolution. The report covers the period
from 19 June to 16 September 2013, during which time
the members of the Committee met once in informal
consultations.

On 2 July, the Committee received the interim
report of the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution
2095 (2013). I will briefly recapitulate parts of the
executive summary of that document.

Concerning the arms embargo, the Panel concluded
that the Libyan authorities had taken concrete steps in
the security assistance area to implement resolution
2095 (2013), such as the establishment of a focal point
structure for security assistance, which had already
produced the first few end-user certificates. Despite
those efforts, the Panel cautioned that more still needed
to be done in that regard.

The Panel expressed its concern about the
proliferation of arms and ammunition across all of
Libya's borders and noted an increasing number of
reported cases of trafficking of arms and ammunition
from Libya to the Syrian Arab Republic by sea and
air. Concerning arms proliferation within Libya, the
Panel reported that the increasing demand for personal
and small arms had boosted imports of materiel into
the civilian black market in Libya. In that context, the
Panel reported on several seizures that were made by
third countries.

Concerning the travel ban, the Panel stated that of
the 20 individuals originally falling under the travel
ban, five were deceased, four were currently being
detained in Libya, four were living in other countries
and the whereabouts of seven individuals remained
unknown. The Panel further reported that both the
Sultanate of Oman and the Government of Algeria
had indicated that Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi had left Algeria and were present in Oman.

With regard to the assets freeze, the Panel reported
that it had obtained access in part to further revealing
details of the efforts made by Saadi Al-Qadhafi and his
associates to hide, move and use assets that should have
been frozen, and that it was investigating reports ofvery
large quantities of assets believed to belong to listed
entities and/or individuals. The Panel underscored the
inadequacies of some Member States in their legislative
capacity to properly and effectively implement the
assets freeze measure, which at least in one instance
had resulted in the dissipation of almost $2 million in
funds that should have been frozen.

The Committee discussed the report and
recommendations of the Panel of Experts in informal
consultations on 10 July. The report was generally
well received, and the main points that emerged in
the discussion were the following: concern with the
reported violations and with the destabilizing effect of
arms proliferation outside of Libya, in particular to the
Syrian Arab Republic; welcoming the establishment
by the Libyan authorities of certain procedures aimed
at improving the situation, while acknowledging that
more needed to be done; acknowledgement of the
movement of two listed individuals from Algeria to the
Sultanate of Oman; challenges faced by Member States
regarding the implementation of the assets freeze and
the possibility of repatriating frozen funds; welcoming
the good relationship between the Panel and the Libyan
Government; ways in which the Panel could be assisted
with its requests for visits and for information; and how
to carry forward the recommendations of the Panel of
Experts.

Of the eight recommendations, the Committee
agreed to take follow-up action on four. One
recommendation required no action and the Committee
simply took note of it, while the three remaining
recommendations were addressed to the Security
Council. As a follow-up to the meeting, the Panel
was requested to thoroughly investigate information
provided by media reports on several large shipments
of arms from Libya that took place this year.

The agreed action on the four recommendations
of the Panel consisted of the following. After having
received on 18 July further information from the
Permanent Mission of Libya on the focal point structure
for security assistance, on 7 August the Committee
wrote a letter to the Permanent Representative of
Libya requesting further clarification and follow-
up of outstanding issues, which was responded to on
4 September by the Permanent Mission of Libya. On
29 July and 4 September, the Committee updated the
entries concerning Aisha Al-Qadhafi and Mohammed
Al-Qadhafi in its list of individuals and entities subject
to the travel ban and/or assets freeze. On 13 September,
the Committee dispatched follow-up letters to six
Member States concerning outstanding requests for
visits by the Panel.
On 24 July, the Committee shared with the Libyan
Government an unofficial and informal table that
summarized the exemption requests and notifications
relating to the arms embargo measures that were
imposed by resolution 1970 (2011) and modified by
resolutions 2009 (2011) and 2095 (2013) and processed
through the Committee, from its inception until 10 July
2013.

On 27 August, the Committee updated its second
implementation assistance notice on the arms embargo,
reflecting modifications introduced by resolution 2095
(2013).

Also during the reporting period, the Committee
concluded its agreement with INTERPOL on
INTERPOL-Security Council special notices and
reviewed a request for delisting from the travel ban by
Aisha Al-Qadhafi.

Lastly, I would like to mention some updated
statistics on issues that the Committee has dealt with
since the last periodic report to the Council. In relation
to the arms embargo, the Committee approved two
exemption requests and received five notifications, on
which no negative decision was taken. The Committee
also responded to three requests for guidance from
Member States.

