Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Let me join previous
speakers in thanking the Permanent Mission of
China for convening this important debate. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, the Assistant
Secretary-General for Human Rights, and the
representative of the International Committee of the
Red Cross for their presentations.

The Secretary-General's ninth report on civilians in
armed conflict of 2012 (S/2012/376) states that the five
core challenges for the protection of civilians continue
to remain urgent. It states that despite some progress,
the ground reality has not qualitatively improved.
Particularly worrying is that gender-based violence,
including sexual violence, attacks against children,
schools, health facilities, impeded humanitarian access
to affected populations, inter alia, continue unabated.

We welcome the clarification in the report of the
principles, misconceptions and misinterpretations
relating to the protection of civilians and the
responsibility to protect. I quote:

"[T]he protection of civilians is a legal concept
based on international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law, while the responsibility to
protect is a political concept, set out in the 2005
World Summit Outcome (see General Assembly resolution 60/1) there are important differences
in their scope. The protection of civilians relates to
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law in situations of armed conflict. The
responsibility to protect is limited to violations that
constitute war crimes or crimes against humanity
or that would be considered acts of genocide or
ethnic cleansing." (S/2012/376, para. 21)

Further on, the report states:

"Sparing civilians from the effects of hostilities
requires compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and, in particular,
the principles of distinction and proportionality. It
requires parties to take all feasible precautions both
in attacking and in defending. The law is also clear
that under no circumstances do violations of these
rules by one party justify violations by any other
party." (ibid., para. 32)

We hope that the clarifications provided in the
Secretary-General's report will contribute to the
application of those principles in a considered and
non-political manner, without the ever too present
overlay of emotion and propaganda. We also welcome
the recommendations in the report, especially the focus
on displacements and increased attacks against health
facilities.

Ad hoc approaches that we have seen far too
frequently will not achieve the noble underlying
goals of those principles. Global principles, if they
are to be respected, must be applied consistently and
non-selectively.

Furthermore, the protection task cannot be held
hostage to purely theoretical analyses. It requires us to
be conscious of a multiplicity of different underlying
factors, ranging from political realities, socio-economic
influences, basic individual rights, proliferating small
arms and the sophistication of terrorists, particularly
in mobilizing the media. The reliance on modern
technology and propaganda methods by rebel groups,
in particular terrorist groups and their networks of
sympathizers, and the agitated media, are becoming
an increasing concern. Many a time, reality has been
drowned out by clever propaganda.

Practical realities that have been based on the
experiences of Member States, particularly those that
have successfully countered terrorism, must be seriously
examined instead of relying on a theoretical application
of a one-size-fits-all humanitarian framework. The
use of civilians as human shields and bargaining
chips by rebel groups and terrorist groups has made
the application of the those principles a nightmarish
challenge.

The protection of civilians is not a static concept
and it has relevance in immediate and medium-term
post-conflict situations. My country, Sri Lanka, has
seriously taken account of the principles underlined
in the Council's thematic resolutions since 1999. Its
commitment was demonstrated in the manner that
Sri Lanka addressed the needs of civilians and their
protection during and after the conflict with the terrorist
group Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam. Throughout
the final phase of the armed conflict, from 2006 to
2009, Sri Lanka engaged with the United Nations and
its agencies, the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC) and representatives of the international
community and civil society, both in Sri Lanka and
outside.

The difficulties that Sri Lanka faced in protecting
its civilians and providing humanitarian assistance
were a challenge to the State itself and to its institutions.
Sri Lanka highlighted a unique situation where
successive Governments had continued to maintain
the supply of essential food and services - including
educational and health services to terrorist-controlled
areas - unimpeded during the entire period of its
protracted conflict. The Consultative Committee on
Humanitarian Assistance, whose members include
key United Nations agencies and representatives of the
donor community, meticulously monitored the flow
of essential food and medicine to the rebel-controlled
areas.

My delegation hopes that the Council's discussion
on the protection of civilians will facilitate practical
outcomes based on ground realities - realities that
differ from situation to situation.

We must invest greater efforts in preventing
conflicts in the first instance and their recurrence, and
respond practically and proportionately to situations
affecting civilian populations.

Allow me to share the observations of the head of
the UNICEF Executive Board delegation, following a
visit to Sri Lanka in March 2012. He said,

"a lot of times we find that countries that have a
middle-income status tend to drop off the priority
list of UNICEF. In fact, Sri Lanka illustrates why
UNICEF needs to remain engaged. It is in these
countries that lessons can be learned in ways
in which they can be transferred to other, less
developed countries much more rapidly".

