Mr. Ryan (Ireland): We witnessed yesterday in
New York, Washington, DC, and Pennsylvania an
attack of barbarism and evil against innocent people.
As the Secretary-General has just said, this was an
attack on all humanity and the values of humanity.
Every nation and every human being can only be
affronted in the face of such evil.

On behalf of the Irish Government and people, I
extend to the Government and people of the United
States our deep and heartfelt sympathy. Ireland's Prime
Minister, Mr. Bertie Ahern, said yesterday that our
thoughts, above all else, are now with the families of
all the victims in their mourning and loss. The Council
of Ministers of the European Union, in a special
session today, has expressed its horror at yesterday's
terrorist attacks and its solidarity with the United
States.

Europeans have been asked to mark this horrific
event on Friday next; we in Ireland will also do so.
Practically every village in Ireland is bonded as family
with the American people. Our heart and prayers go to
those now heroically working - the police, the fire
crews, the emergency services, doctors and nurses -
to help the injured and save life.

The American people should know that they are
not alone in their grief and revulsion at what has
happened. They are joined by decent men and women
in every part of the world, from every cultural
background, by people of every religion and of none.
Respect for the human rights of each and every person,
for the right of every nation and every human being to
live in freedom and dignity: these are fundamental
principles for the United Nations. It is these values that
the perpetrators of yesterday's crimes seek to destroy.

In our sorrow and loss, it is also right today to
clearly assert that from evil can only come evil; that no
cause that is based on mass murder and carnage can
ever succeed; that those who perpetrate such deeds are
the enemies of all peoples everywhere. Those
responsible for yesterday's barbarism are the enemies
of peace and justice. They must be brought to justice
and the entire international community must work
together towards this end. Here in the United Nations,
it is right to say today, in mourning and in sadness, but
with absolute conviction and determination, that they
will not be allowed to succeed in seeking to destroy the
goals and vision that the United Nations shares with all
the peoples of the world.

Ireland supports fully the draft resolution before
the Security Council.

