Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings, and for their and their
teams' tireless efforts.

On 13 February, the United Statesjoined the United
Kingdom, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates
in welcoming the adoption of resolutions 2451 (2018)
and 2452 (2019), and we reiterated our commitment
to a comprehensive political solution to the conflict
in Yemen. We are encouraged by the reconvening of
the Redeployment Coordination Committee over the
weekend and the parties" progress towards agreement
on redeployment from Al-Hudaydah. We are also eager
to see further progress on exchanges of prisoners and
the return of the bodies of those killed in conflict. We
urge all parties involved to cooperate with the Special
Envoy's team as he works to finalize the terms of
the exchange.

The United States is concerned about the fact that
World Food Programme officials have not yet gained
access to the Red Sea Mills. Special Envoy Griffiths
and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock had already
warned us that the grain stocks there are at risk of
rotting (see S/PV.8424), and we cannot waste any time
assessing the condition of an emergency food supply
that is meant to feed 3.7 million people. We again urge
the parties to facilitate immediate access to the Mills
and ensure that the surrounding area is safe.

The escalation of violence in Hajjah governorate in
January has reminded us that while the Al-Hudaydah
ceasefire is a promising first step, the broader conflict
persists. The Yemeni people must know, and the parties
to the conflict must understand, that the United States
remains focused, as does the Council as a whole, on
achieving a comprehensive, credible and durable
political settlement of the war. That will require
compromise on all sides, so that we can start the long
process of ensuring the country's recovery from this
humanitarian catastrophe. Going forward, the United
States will work with the United Nations and the
members of the Security Council to ensure the success
of all United Nations efforts in Yemen, both political
and humanitarian.

