Ms. Rodriguez Abascal (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We align ourselves the statement made by the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

The Cuban delegation regrets that since the last
open debate on this issue (see S/PV.8449) there has been
no progress in favour of the just cause of the Palestinian
people. On the contrary, there was a dangerous

worsening in the deterioration of the situation on the
ground over the past quarter.

As we commemorate the first anniversary of
the Great March of Return, Israel continues to use
indiscriminate and disproportionate force against tens
of thousands of Palestinian civilians in Gaza, who
are peacefully demonstrating for an end to the illegal
Israeli occupation, the blockade of the Gaza Strip and
the realization of all the rights of the Palestinian people.
Israeli air strikes and bombings continue to massacre
the Palestinian people, while the Security Council
remains silent. It is particularly regrettable that this
organ, owing to the repeated obstruction by the United
States delegation, has not condemned the escalation of
violence and the tragic events that have taken place in
the Gaza Strip since 30 March 2018.

The Cuban delegation reiterates its strong rejection
of the disproportionate and indiscriminate use of force
by Israel against Palestinian civilians in the occupied
territories, including East Jerusalem and particularly
the Gaza Strip, in flagrant violation of the Charter of
the United Nations and international humanitarian law.

We reiterate our condemnation of the illegal
construction and expansion of Israeli settlements in
the occupied Palestinian territory and the demolition
and confiscation of Palestinian property. All of those
measures, coupled with the blockade of the Gaza Strip,
violate the Fourth Geneva Convention and erode the
viability ofa two-State solution.
The Cuban delegation expresses its deep concern
at Israel's decision to not renew the mandate of the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron. It was
very regrettable that the Security Council has also
been unable to demand that Israel renew the mandate
of the International Presence, in accordance with the
relevant Council resolutions, the Oslo II Accords and
international law.

We reiterate the call on the Security Council
to fulfil its responsibility, conferred to it under the
Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance
of international peace and security. The Council
must demand an immediate end to the occupation of
the Palestinian territories and to aggressive policies
and settlement practices, as well as compliance with
the resolutions on the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question, adopted by this
organ, in particular resolution 2334 (2016).

We reaffirm our full support for a comprehensive,
just and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, based on a two-State solution that allows
the Palestinian people to exercise their right to self-
determination and their right to an independent
and sovereign State with pre-1967 borders and East
Jerusalem as its capital, and the right of return
for refugees.

We express to the people and the Government
of Palestine our unwavering solidarity and support
for Palestine's accession as a full Member of the
United Nations.

We reject the unilateral action of the United States
Government in recognizing the city of Jerusalem as
the capital of Israel and its withdrawal of financial
support for the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, all
of which further exacerbates tensions in the region
and deepens the precarious humanitarian situation of
Palestinian refugees.

We vigorously condemn the decision of the United
States Government to recognize the occupied Syrian
Golan as Israeli territory, which constitutes a serious
and flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions, in particular resolution 497 (1981).
That new manoeuvre by Washington, which violates
the legitimate interests of the Syrian people and of Arab
and Islamic nations, will have serious consequences
for stability and security in the Middle East and will
further exacerbate tensions in that volatile region.
We will continue to support the demands of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic to recover
the Golan Heights, and call once again for the total
and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan and all other occupied Arab territories.

We reject the fabrication of pretexts and concepts
to try to legitimize in the Council the unilateral use
of force and aggression against sovereign States. We
demand respect for multilateralism and an end to double
standards, interference in internal affairs, foreign
aggression and the sponsoring of terrorist groups that
promote instability and conflicts in the Middle East.

