Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I thank Ms. Hiroute
Guebre Sellassie, Special Envoy of the Secretary-
General for the Sahel, for the briefing on the progress
towards the implementation of the United Nations
integrated strategy for the Sahel region. As this is the
first briefing of Ms. Sellassie to the Council, allow me
to congratulate her upon assuming that position and
express our support for her leadership and engagement
in tackling the challenges the Sahel region faces. I also
wish to commend the United Nations Office for West
Africa for its dedicated efforts in the Sahel region.

Throughout the reporting period, we witnessed
the further deterioration of the political, security and
humanitarian situation in the Sahel region, which
results from the continuous erosion of State authority
linked with humanitarian and development challenges,
as well as the adverse effects of climate change. Weak
governance, porous borders, illegal migration and
arms trafficking, the phenomenal rise of terrorist
activities - especially those carried out by Boko
Haram and Al-Qaida-affiliated groups - and the lack
of development opportunities need to be addressed to
prevent the outbreak of crises, such as those we have
recently witnessed in Libya, Mali and elsewhere.
Enhanced cooperation and coordination among Sahel
States are essential in order to prevent threats posed
by terrorist groups, notably Al-Qaida in the Islamic
Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West
Africa, Ansar Eddine and Al-Mourabitoune, that cross
borders and seek safe havens in the Sahel region and to
combat the activities of those terrorist groups.

It is crucial to ensure that the elections in Libya
be held without any delays and broad agreement on
the future of the transition of the country is reached
among all parties. Recent clashes in northern Mali
demonstrated the urgency of making progress in the
political dialogue. Further deadlock could have major
security consequences for Mali and the wider region.

The security and political challenges in the Sahel
continue to be triggered by the precarious humanitarian
situation. As the Secretary-General's report (S/2014/397)
states, despite good agricultural and pastoral seasons,
at least 20 million people remain at risk of food
insecurity and nearly 5 million children are at risk of
acute malnutrition. Moreover, the people of the Sahel
are extremely vulnerable to the environmental and
economic shocks that strike the region frequently. As
the Governments of the region have limited capacities
to address the multifaceted, cross-cutting security,

political and humanitarian challenges, coordinated
international engagement is of utmost importance; yet
the primary responsibility and ownership for fostering
peace, security and development in the Sahel should be
in the hands of the countries of the region.

We commend the United Nations engagement in
addressing the challenges in the Sahel and support
its leading role in coordinating international efforts.
The Secretary-General led a visit to the region last
November with representatives of the World Bank, the
African Union Commission, the African Development
Bank and the European Union (EU) and conveyed a clear
message of readiness and willingness of international
actors to coordinate their efforts. Financial assistance
provided by the EU and the World Bank, as well as
other members of international community, provides a
basis to turn commitments into actions on the ground.

We welcome the Sahel strategies and projects by
the EU, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, as well as the establishment
of the ministerial coordination platform and other
regional initiatives. We also welcome the commitment
of Burkina Faso, Chad, Mauritania, the Niger and Mali
to deepening cooperation and establishing the Group of
Five for the Sahel.

With many tools and initiatives aimed at addressing
the root causes of the crisis in the Sahel, it is crucial
to ensure their coherence and avoid duplication. We
commend the conclusions of the high-level meeting,
held in February 2014 in Brussels, recognizing that the
coordination platform for the Sahel should constitute
the overall coordination mechanism ensuring the
synergies among the various strategies and approaches
on the Sahel.

The United Nations integrated strategy for the
Sahel and its implementation plan are the right tool to
ensure the cooperation and coordination of activities
among various actors. We hope that the Group of Five
for the Sahel will also get involved.

As the implementation plan, with a focus on

governance, security and resilience, has been
developed, it is now essential to ensure the coherence of
activities on the ground and to deliver tangible results,
thereby improving the living conditions of the people
in the region. The Security Council should be regularly
informed about achievements in the implementation of
the United Nations integrated strategy for the Sahel.
Setting clear implementation benchmarks would be a
useful tool for monitoring progress and for identifying
issues that need the further attention of the international
community.

