Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): As
this is the first time I speak during Poland's presidency,
I would like to congratulate your country and you,
Madam President, on convening this debate.

After the statements delivered this morning by the
Director-General of the International Committee of the
Red Cross, by Ms. Hanaa Edwar and by my various
colleagues who preceded me, I can only express
my solidarity with the humanitarian and health-
care personnel who contribute so much, generally in
complex and violent contexts, risking their own lives
to consolidate peace. That is a crucial issue, because,
as the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/462) reveals,
armed conflict, terrorism and violent extremism are
increasingly taking their toll, with 128 million people
in need of immediate humanitarian assistance.

In May 2017, in this very Chamber, Colombia
underlined how even the barbarity of war has rules
of obligatory compliance for the parties involved (see S/PV.7951). But when conflict deteriorates, the basic
principles of humanity also deteriorate in attacks on
those in the most vulnerable situations. The continuous
deterioration of the atrocious humanitarian situations,
which have been mentioned here, obliges us to comply
with the pending task of implementing the mandate
of resolution 2286 (2016). It urges us to a greater
political commitment and a duty, before the obligations
emanating from international humanitarian law and
from respect for human rights by everyone, to stop
the barbarism.

The Colombian State has adopted the sacred
mandate to protect all civilians and provide the utmost
respect for and protection to the medical missions that
serve them, with the resolute and effective support
of the United Nations. It has not been an easy task
because, as my country has reiterated so many times
here before, in a conflict that lasted more than five
decades and ended with the Final Agreement to End
the Armed Conflict and Build a Stable and Lasting
Peace, international humanitarian law formed the
indispensable basis for achieving that Agreement. At
present, even with obstacles to overcome, we continue
to make progress with the support of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, as reflected in the
various reports presented to the Council.

The results of that comprehensive approach to the
protection of civilians through peacebuilding efforts are
evident. The objective is obvious if we stop to observe
the positive impact of the implementation of the peace
agreement with the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia, namely, the lowest homicide rate in
42 years, the fewest kidnappings since statistics
have been available, 8,994 weapons surrendered to
the United Nations and 1,238 weapons seized in 205
illegal warehouses.

In the midst of the armed conflict, Colombia
adopted a series of international humanitarian law
instruments that contributed to strengthening its role
in the protection of civilians. Among them, today I
would like to highlight the Anti-Personnel Mine Ban
Convention - an instrument that has contributed to the
decontamination of 33 per cent of municipalities with
anti-personnel mines, which has benefited 2.4 million
people and cleared 6.1 million square metres.

Finally, the consolidation of the rule of law is the
most solid foundation for creating conditions for the
protection of individuals and the full enjoyment of their
individual rights. The best context for that is a country
at peace.

