Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his detailed and objective
update on the situation in the Middle East. We agree
that the situation in the region remains complicated.

In Lebanon, the formation of a new Government and
the election of a new President are positive outcomes,
which will lead, hopefully, to the holding of free and
fair parliamentary elections on 6 May. The signing of
the decree to that end is a manifestation of the people's
unity. We need to help the country consolidate its
constitutional and democratic processes, which remain
contingent on developments in neighbouring Syria. The
Lebanese Armed Forces play a vital role in maintaining
security on the border with Syria and throughout
Lebanon, thus averting threats from the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and the Jabhat Al-Nusrah.
We welcome the outcomes of the international
conference hosted in Paris by President Emmanuel
Macron to support Lebanon's economic stability. It
is commendable that, at that conference, there were
pledges of $10.2 billion for Lebanon.

Turning to Yemen, we know that the conflict
there has no military solution. It is clear that the deep-
seated contradictions in Yemen can be resolved only
through a broad-based national and inclusive dialogue.
All parties must commit themselves to establishing
a new regime for the cessation of hostilities, which
will provide an opportunity to revive the economy,
resolve the humanitarian crisis and restore basic public
services. It is only when there is a political settlement
that the humanitarian situation can also be mitigated.
Everyone should refrain from committing acts that lead
to an escalation of regional tension and insecurity. It is
not acceptable to launch rocket attacks against civilian

targets in the territory of Saudi Arabia, which is an act
that Kazakhstan strongly condemns.

Kazakhstan's position on the Middle East
peace process is very clear and remains unchanged.
Nevertheless, I would like to repeat it. We support the
two-State solution and call for the early resumption
of negotiations, especially in the bilateral format and
without preconditions, which should be in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, relevant
Security Council resolutions, and other mechanisms
and initiatives, such as the Quartet road map for peace,
the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid terms of
reference, including the principle of land for peace.
We support the rights of the Palestinian people to self-
determination and the creation of a free, sovereign and
independent State within the internationally recognized
borders of 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

Jerusalem is the shared homeland of different
ethnicities and religions. Palestine and Israel must
respect each other's right to exist and avoid taking
actions that might further escalate the situation. We
look forward to the implementation of the provisions of
resolution 2334 (2016), and we would like to note that
the increased construction of new Israeli settlements
is causing hardships for the Palestinians, who are
incurring huge economic losses.
Turning to Gaza, we are alarmed that this is
the fourth consecutive week that we are witnessing
Palestinian casualties there. We reiterate that Israeli
security forces must protect civilians and calibrate the
use of force, employing lethal force only as a last resort.
At the same time, we emphasize the right of Israel to
security. We also reiterate our call on Palestinians to
avoid friction at the Gaza fence.

We praise our colleagues at the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the largest
shipment of United Nations medical aid to Gaza since
the beginning of the year. That assistance has provided
hospitals in Gaza with essential life-saving drugs and
other supplies to meet the urgent medical needs of
populations in crisis. It will also help respond to the
needs of 100,000 children and mothers in Gaza. With
regard to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East, Kazakhstan
reiterates the need to support that important mechanism.

My country underscores the importance of achieving
intra-Palestinian unity. The rift between the Palestinian
Authority and Hamas should be resolved in order to
present a unified Palestinian voice in negotiations with
Israel and the international community. We welcome
and support Israel's decision to provide the Palestinians
with some economic concessions on the seashore, as
was mentioned today by Special Envoy Mladenov, so as
to ease the conditions of daily life in the Gaza territory.

Investments in the building of strong Palestinian
institutions, inter alia, promoting reforms in the security
sector and the military, law-enforcement and judicial
and correctional systems, together with new legislation,
will ensure the rule of law and good governance.
The immediate start of direct negotiations, and, as a
result, the speedy implementation of agreements at an
early date, will allow us to solve the problem of the
confidence deficit and enable us to move to a more
open dialogue between the two sides. It is necessary
to identify mutually acceptable principles for the
advancement of the Palestinian-Israel peace process, as
well as to develop a concept for future negotiations and
a mechanism for implementing the agreements.

Lastly, we once again reiterate our call for efforts
to ensure Israel's right to security and Palestine's right
to statehood, with the use of appropriate instruments of
preventive diplomacy and sustaining peace, including
the utilization of confidence-building measures in
political, economic, environmental contexts, and in
addressing new challenges and threats.

