Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): The fight
against international terrorism demands a long-
term comprehensive approach and cooperation at the
national, regional and global levels, with the active
participation of all Member States, regional structures
and civil society.

Kazakhstan is a party to all the major international
conventions against terrorism. It welcomes the idea of
reconvening the Ad Hoc Committee on International
Terrorism to draft a comprehensive anti-terrorism
convention and supports a further improvement of other
anti-terrorist treaty mechanisms. My country also fully
supports the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) of the Security Council.

As evidence of our involvement in the activities
of the Security Council, together with the CTC, in
September 2014, we organized a visit by His Excellency
Mr. Jean-Paul Laborde, head of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate, to Astana. His
discussions with Kazakhstan's high-ranking officials
in law enforcement and of financial and other
specialized bodies were successful in expanding our
joint cooperation.

Kazakhstan is guided by the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and other international
universal instruments that it has ratified. My country
is also actively involved in the security measures of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE), the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO),
the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-building
Measures in Asia and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization.

My country, as an active member of the
Anti-Terrorist Centre of the Commonwealth of
Independent States and the Regional Anti-Terrorist
Structure of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO), has signed the SCO Convention on Counter-
Terrorism and all agreements on combating the illicit
trafficking of arms, ammunition and explosives. We
also work closely with various agencies of the United
Nations system. In particular, the southern capital of
my country, Almaty, hosts the Central Asian Regional
Information and Coordination Centre for combating the
illicit trafficking of narcotics. We are thankful to all
donors for supporting the regional centre of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime in Almaty.

We are engaged in the Joint Plan of Action for the
Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia. The Plan was
elaborated by several partners: the countries of the
region, the task force to implement counter-terrorism
arrangements, the European Union and the United
Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy
for Central Asia, based in Ashgabat. Kazakhstan
also organized a consultative meeting with regional
organizations in June 2012 in Almaty to execute the
Strategy in Central Asia.
As the 2010 Chair of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, Kazakhstan hosted a
conference on the prevention of terrorism, which
adopted the Astana declaration, confirming the
commitment of OSCE participating States and partner
countries to combating terrorism. Those activities are
also very high on the agenda for Kazakhstan-European
Union cooperation. In addition, my country also
participates in an Individual Partnership Action Plan
with NATO, thus expanding its collaboration with the
Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council.

At the national level, last year we adopted the
State Programme for Countering Religious Extremism
and Terrorism in the Republic of Kazakhstan for the
2013-2017 period, allocating $600 million for its
implementation. The main goal of that effort is to
ensure the safety ofpeople, the State and society at large
through improved measures to minimize and eliminate
the consequences of that double scourge. Special
attention is being paid to greater active engagement by
the public on prevention and the reshaping of outreach
activities for target groups.

In conclusion, the Republic of Kazakhstan is
committed to joining hands with the international
community based on our deep commitment to combat
more effectively the ever-increasing scourge of
terrorism and radical extremism.

