Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Please pass on, Mr. President, to Secretary of State for
Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
Mr. William Hague, how much we appreciated him
being with us here today for the debate, as well as to
the other Ministers for Foreign Affairs who came to be
with us. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia
was not able, for unexpected reasons, to participate as
she had intended to. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his interesting analysis of the
subject at hand, which illustrates very well how things
are developing.

Several common features can be found in what
has happened during the past year in countries of the
Middle East and North Africa, events that are part of
what we have been calling the Arab Spring: a primarily
young population, affected by high rates of
unemployment and exclusive political systems that are
not able to adequately represent the interests of the
various sectors of society. We must also add the impact
of new information technologies on the cohesion and
leadership of popular movements. Under those
conditions, where profound inequities and political,
economic and social exclusion converge, a process
aimed at transforming the prevailing order emerges and
seeks economic and political changes and alternatives,
allowing participation and the opening of new spaces
and means of expression, which imply, in short,
demands for fundamental rights.

Notwithstanding those common elements, the
transformations and processes have followed very
different courses in the various countries of the region,
and this is why we need to analyse each case on its
own merits. The response of the international
community to the challenges and opportunities that
arise from that process have been centred around
prevention and the cessation of violence and violent
repression against civilian populations crying out to
have their fundamental human rights and freedoms
respected. That includes the freedoms of election and
association, the recognition of the rights of women and
gender equality, the rights of minorities, as well as
access to economic opportunities.

In a region that is as complex as it is vital for the
maintenance of international peace and security, the
authorities encounter major difficulties and limitations
in their response to the demands and expectations of a
population eager for reforms. In order to overcome a
past of authoritarianism and sectarianism, it is not
enough to simply hold periodic elections. There needs
to be a gradual establishment of political parties, a
strengthening of civil society organizations and
ideological pluralism, free access to information and
the exercise of fundamental freedoms and human
rights. That requires time for learning and the decisive
support of the international community for national
efforts. The transition towards societies that are more
democratic and representative requires the convergence
and participation of all sectors of society around
common principles and purposes. Sound and suitable
institutional arrangements are required in order to
channel the various social demands and, at the same
time, avoid polarization, while building the institutions
and legal framework that will encompass relations
between citizens and their Governments.

The international community is astonished to see
how disproportionate force is being used against the
civilian population in Syria. Systematic violations of
fundamental freedoms and human rights have been
witnessed, and extremes have been reached that must
be qualified as crimes against humanity. That is
unacceptable and must be categorically condemned,
particularly by the Security Council, using the means
that it has at its disposal.

Colombia has resolutely supported and
participated in the efforts of the international
community aimed at putting an end to this unheard of
situation and all forms of violence and violations of
human rights and at promoting a transition to a
democratic and pluralistic system. In order to avoid
situations such as this the Security Council should
stress the use of the instruments of preventive
diplomacy that it has at its disposal in order to reduce
the threats posed by armed conflicts and their
associated human costs. We must use all the peaceful
means available to us to protect civilians from
violence, in accordance with the principles and
objectives of the Charter of the United Nations and in
full respect for the principles of territorial integrity,
national unity, sovereignty and the political
independence of States.

The Council must maintain close cooperation
with regional organizations and give priority to
strategies aimed at preventing conflicts through
mediation and good offices. The League of Arab States,
the African Union, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Gulf Cooperation Council have a
privileged position, with unique access to key players
and with knowledge and experience of the situation in
the region that are exceptional, and their participation
as strategic partners is, therefore, key for developing
actions that are appropriate for the particular
circumstances and needs of each country of the region.
My country naturally gives all of its support to the
actions of those organizations.

Our support and that of the international
community in such situations will be more effective
and sustainable if we are able to recognize political and
cultural contexts and if the Governments and peoples
continue working together towards consolidating the
progress achieved. The spontaneous movement that is
the Arab Spring opens the way for the progressive
establishment of States and Governments based on
respect and the genuine implementation of democratic
principles and the rule of law. Those recently formed
Governments should anchor their legitimacy in respect
for the rights of the population, the provision of basic
social services, the generation of employment and the
creation of conditions promoting sustainable economic
development, the benefits of which will be a tangible
reality for all citizens without distinction.

