Mrs. Senewiratne (Sri Lanka): My delegation warmly congratulates Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February, and we are confident of a fruitful tenure, based on the country's known diplomatic skills. We thank the three briefers for their informative exposes. Sri Lanka aligns itself with the statement made by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. As the Council is aware, after nearly three decades of brutal separatist terrorism, Sri Lanka is presently at a juncture of transition to an era of reconciliation and sustaining hard-won peace. We believe, therefore, that the deliberations of today's open debate could have some relevance to Sri Lanka's envisaged path to reconciliation. Sri Lanka's engagement today is in keeping with the Government's vision for a country that embodies the universal values of human rights, justice,the rule of law and good governance, while ensuring economic dividends to its people. Members would no doubt agree that the post- conflict milieu of each country is unique. There are no two post-conflict situations in which similar prescriptive remedies can be applied. The comparative experiences of countries that have traversed the path of post-conflict transition and reconciliation provide much evidence of deliberate efforts to maintain a balance between the speed of the transitional justice process and the desired standard, including inclusiveness, comprehensiveness and sustainability. The basic tenet of a transitional justice process is the application of its theoretical principles to State obligations. It is the State that needs to pursue truth, justice, reparations and guarantees of non-recurrence. Sri Lanka is one of the oldest democracies in Asia. The newly elected President of Sri Lanka, His Excellency President Gotabaya Rajapaksa, in his address to the nation at the seventy-second independence celebrations, pledged to work to guarantee the human rights and political and economic freedom of the people in a truly democratic country. In that context, he espoused that every citizen of Sri Lanka has the right to live freely and securely, holding independent opinions, following the religion of choice and freedom of association and assembly, as they are rights of human beings that no one can challenge. It is pertinent to reiterate that the action taken by the Sri Lankan security forces during the conflict was in opposition to a group designated as a terrorist organization by many countries - even described as ruthless by some - and was not aimed at any community in the country. The modus operandi of suicide attacks by that terrorist group, which for the first time in recent history deliberately targeted civilians, has now been adopted expansively by similar groups globally. It is therefore appropriate that, when seeking mechanisms of transitional justice, simplistic theories should take cognizance of the various historical, cultural and religious sensitivities involved. Furthermore, timelines for achieving stated objectives that have evolved externally would only hinder the process of reconciliation, since they would be bereft of any genuine understanding of the situation on the ground. Promoting a peaceful, just and reconciled society is not only an objective in itself but also a prerequisite for a sustainable and inclusive approach to development that leaves no one behind. As a sovereign State, Sri Lanka will continue to establish its own priorities to that end. In our experience, while certain lessons can be learned from others, it is imperative to chart our own path to reconciliation in order for it to be sustainable. Sri Lanka is therefore committed to finding innovative and pragmatic solutions that are driven by the domestic context in order to protect the country's national interests, guided by the provisions of the Constitution and the will of the citizens as expressed through democratic means. In that context, Sri Lanka looks forward to continuing its cooperation with the international community through capacity-building and technical assistance in mutually agreed areas, in keeping with domestic priorities and policies.
