Ms. Sapag Mufioz de la Pefia (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): As we have mentioned on other occasions,
it is once again a pleasure to see a woman presiding
over the work of the Security Council, even though her
presidency is coming to an end.

We highly welcome the briefings by Mr. Jan
Eliasson, Mr. Ging, Mr. Simonovic' and Ambassador
Apakan. We also welcome the participation and
presence in the Council today of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Lithuania and Ukraine.

We wish to express our profound misgivings in the
light of the resurgence of tensions in various localities
of Donetsk. In particular, we are tremendously worried
about the failure to observe the ban on using heavy
weapons - a point already raised by previous speakers.
Faced with that reality, it is imperative and urgent to
preserve the ceasefire.

As we have indicated previously, we believe that
full compliance with the ceasefire, to be monitored
and verified by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Special Monitoring Mission
to Ukraine, in line with the provisions of the Minsk
agreements and the dialogue between the parties, is the
only way to achieve lasting peace. We call upon the
parties to refrain from actions incompatible with the
Charter of the United Nations, international law and
international humanitarian law.

We are particularly troubled by the multifaceted
fallout from the crisis and its impact on the civilian
population, particularly in those areas under the
control of illegal armed groups. We urge the parties
to unconditionally respect human rights, including the
rights of minorities, and to ensure that those responsible
for such violations and abuses are brought to justice.
Moreover, accountability is another way to support the
implementation of the Minsk agreements.

The humanitarian situation is an unavoidable
issue. The situation of internally displaced persons and
civilians in need of protection is of further concern. In
that connection, we note in particular the elderly, as
Mr. Ging mentioned today. Access for humanitarian
assistance remains a core issue that must be guaranteed.
The worsening weather conditions as winter sets in will
seriously affect the population in need of assistance,
especially children and other vulnerable groups. The
international community must be ready to respond to
relevant humanitarian appeals and to strengthen efforts
to implement public health measures.

This is a moment when it is crucial that the Council
send a new message to the parties on the importance
of creating the conditions that can enable the Minsk
agreements to be effectively implemented. The facts
show that apprehensions about the precariousness of the
compliance may be justified in a context of structural
tension. Only by ensuring a political dialogue within
the Minsk framework can such cycles of violence be
overcome.

