Mr. Lewicki (Poland): At the outset, let me join
other colleagues in thanking Under-Secretary-General
Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his detailed briefing and in
expressing our deep appreciation for the way the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
and its leadership have handled this very serious and
difficult situation.

We note with great concern the existence, as
confirmed by UNIFIL, of tunnels along the Blue Line,
which were discovered by the Israeli Defense Forces
in northern Israel. Let me echo a number of other
delegations that stressed at this meeting that the tunnels
constitute a violation of resolution 1701 (2006). The
construction of the tunnels is also a violation of Israel's
sovereignty and a potential threat to its citizens. It also
threatens Lebanese stability.

We commend the swift action by UNIFIL in
examining the claims regarding the existence of the
tunnels. Let me emphasize UNIFIL's special role under
the current circumstances and commend the mission's
peacekeepers for their participation in maintaining
stability in Lebanon. We also recognize the decisive
role of the Lebanese Armed Forces in responding to
security challenges.

Poland condemns any actions that may further
undermine security and threaten peace in the region.
We urge all parties to abide by their legal obligation to
respect fully the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006)
and the mandate of UNIFIL. We urge the parties
to show restraint and maintain close contact and
cooperation with UNIFIL with a view to preserving
calm and stability. Bearing in mind the highly positive
role of the tripartite mechanism, any actions should be
consulted between the parties through that platform to
prevent an escalation of the conflict. In that context, we
call upon all sides to avoid any unilateral actions.

In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and political
independence of Lebanon and its efforts to insulate
itself from the damaging effect of the Syrian conflict.

