Ms. Vogt: It is an honour to introduce the seventh
report of the Secretary-General (8/20 1 2/3 74) on the work
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in the Central African Republic (BINUCA). The report
presents the main developments in the Central African
Republic during the first half of 20 1 2 - the achievements
and, more important, the challenges confronting
the Government and people of the Central African
Republic - and makes recommendations for the critical
action required to address some of those challenges.

While 2011 ended on a note of optimism and
expectations for the continuing stabilization of the
political landscape in the Central African Republic,
2012 opened with a number of critical developments
that dampened that enthusiasm. Four leaders of two
politico-military groups were arrested on charges of plans
to relaunch the rebellion, and the consultation between
the Government and the political parties, including the
opposition, on the revision of the electoral code was
suspended before a consensus was reached and a bill
on a permanent electoral body was sent to Parliament
for adoption. Fortunately, the case against the arrested
leaders was subjected to legal proceedings. They were
granted provisional freedom, and one of them returned
to his role as Vice-President of the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Steering Committee;
he oversaw the completion of the disarmament of the
Armee populaire pour la restauration de la democratic
(APRD), one of the politico-military groups, the Union
des forces de la resistance and the Front democratique
du peuple centrafricain in the north-central area of the
country, as well as the dismantling of the APRD as a
rebel group in May.

In April, the Bureau of the National Assembly
returned the bill on the permanent electoral body to
the Government because of several irregularities and
unconstitutional provisions, despite the near domination
of the National Assembly by the ruling Kwa Na Kwa
(KNK) party. BINUCA and the international community
continue to encourage the authorities, political parties
and civil society of the Central African Republic to
reach a consensus on this matter, which is crucial to the
stability of their country. It is equally important that the
Government remain engaged in this review process, and
that consensus be reached on the electoral reform process
and the structure of a permanent electoral management
body. We were very encouraged that the parliament
showed independence in spite of the criticism expressed
by many that it was dominated by one party, reaffirming
our View that it has remained very independent in its
modus operandi.

On 15 May, President Bozize' invited leaders
of the opposition to begin a constructive dialogue
at a date to be determined. Although the opposition
parties have expressed their satisfaction with the hand
extended to them by the President, they have a number
of prerequisites. Those include agreement on, first,
the nature and objectives of the dialogue; secondly,
identifying stakeholders; thirdly, determining the topics
of national interest to be discussed; and fourthly, the
signing of a comprehensive political agreement to be
endorsed by all stakeholders. Opposition parties and
civil society have also requested expertise and support
from active United Nations observers, as was done
for the last set of consultations. The Policy Mediation
Division of the Department of Political Affairs is
already on standby to provide that assistance once the
Government has officially requested it.

The Government continues to push for the
completion of the disarmament process. In April it
convened a meeting of friends in New York at which a
budget for completing the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process was presented for
support. The meeting was important for three reasons:
first, the Government was able to show its own
people - who had become very critical of the fact
that the disarmament process had been suspended for
lack of funds - that it was making every effort to seek
international support to relaunch the process. Secondly,
the meeting presented the international community
with a Clear budget for what was required and what the
Government itself had invested. And, finally, it clarified
the Government's commitment to completing the
process. The Council will recall that in previous years
the Government's political commitment to the process
was constantly being questioned; it has now been clearly
demonstrated.

The New York meeting was followed up by concrete
steps taken by the Government of the Central African
Republic towards ensuring the completion of the
disarmament process in the North. The Government
provided $440,000 from its own resources, which, in
addition to United Nations support, enabled disarmament
in the north-central area to be completed. Australia
has pledged $200,000 and Luxembourg has granted
€100,000 towards the continuation of the disarmament
process.

The Government has continued the consolidation of
the security situation in the Central African Republic,
and has focused on taking charge of the security situation
since June last year. The Government activated the Chad,
Sudan and Central African Republic tripartite agreement
and deployed a force to carry out an operation that has
led to the stabilization of the north-east.

Following the return of peace to the Vakaga region,
the tripartite force has pacified all of the north, including
the restive region in and around Birao, enabling the return
of the internally displaced population and a resumption
ofinternational access to the region. It will be important
to launch DDR operations in that region, the only
remaining sector where DDR has to take place, as soon
as possible, in order not to jeopardize the Government's
stabilization efforts. At this critical juncture, it is
important that the international community provide the
financial support needed to complete the DDR process.
We believe that the Government has done its part, and
it is now up to us to help complete the work still to be
done. Almost no section of the Central African Republic
is now inaccessible to us for security reasons, except
for pockets here and there, largely areas affected by the
Lord's Resistance Army.

In the area of security sector reform (SSR), the
new road map adopted in mid-February by the national
Security Sector Reform Steering Committee and
developed with technical support from BINUCA, marks
the revival of the SSR process in the Central African
Republic. It envisions the formulation of six sub-sectoral
strategies, which will be consolidated into a three-year
national SSR strategy.

The subsectoral strategy on the Forces armees
centrafricaines (FACA) and the gendarmerie was
recently completed and has been approved by the
Ministry of Defence. We have therefore completed
the subsectoral strategy for the FACA division and the
gendarmerie. A preliminary draft of the subsectoral
strategy on the police has also been completed and is
undergoing revision. The subsectoral strategy on the
democratic control of the security sector, completed in
January 2011, is being updated.

The drafting of a subsectoral strategy on the justice
sector is currently ongoing. Additional funds and
expertise are required to complete the work in the areas
of public finance, customs and decentralization, as well
as environmental protection. They are currently waiting
for BINUCA to provide them with the expertise needed
to advance work in that area. The completion of a broad
national security sector reform strategy will be an
important step forward and should help focus national
and international effort in that vital area.

However, local inter-ethnic tension resulting from
the most recent conflict in the Vakaga region, in the
north-east, persists, as do conflicts between farmers
and local communities over grazing rights. Tension
between the Muslim community, especially of Chadian
extraction, and local communities has also increased,
especially following the joint Central African Republic/
Chad offensive against the Front populaire pour le
redressement (FPR) in January, with many suspected
of harbouring fleeing FPR fighters. In that regard,
BINUCA plans to launch social cohesion projects, in
particular among women, to facilitate reconciliation in
Haute-Kotto following the deadly clashes of September
2011, which tore the Goula and Runga communities
apart.

BINUCA continues to encourage and enhance the
capacity of the National Council for Mediation (NCM).
The Council remains poorly resourced at the national
level, and is inexistent at the local level. In that regard,
BINUCA received funding from the extrabudgetary
funds of the Department of Political Affairs to help
enhance the Council's capacity and to establish local
councils for mediation.

Despite those positive developments among the
Central African Republic's political-military parties,
two foreign armed groups continue to pose a serious
threat to the peace process. The FPR, led by Chadian
rebel Baba Ladde, was dislodged following the joint
Central African Republic/Chad military strike launched
against the stronghold in the prefecture of Nana-Gribizi
on 23 January. The operation destroyed the command
centre of the group, resulting in the dispersion of its
fighters, who launched sporadic attacks and threatened
the free movement and security of the population. I am
happy to report that that situation has, fortunately, been
brought under control as the FACA, in a new wave of
enthusiasm, has shown great agility in containing FPR
fighters.

The reporting period also witnessed a spike in Lord's
Resistance Army attacks in the Central African Republic
in the prefectures of Mbomou and Haut-Mbomou.
However, there is now a new momentum in national
and international efforts to address the LRA challenge
in the Central African Republic, and in the subregion as
a whole. The coordination of the operations of Ugandan
and Central African Republic forces against the LRA has
been greatly enhanced with the support of United States
military advisers. That may have contributed to the
recent arrest of "Brigadier General" Caesar Achellam
and the defection of two LRA fighters.

BINUCA has formulated a multifaceted national
strategy that would complement steps being taken by the
Government of the Central African Republic and United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa in support
of the African Union Regional Cooperation Initiative on
the LRA. The Office intends to help the Central African
Republic to develop a better communication system so
as to improve reporting and warning time, replicating
the existing early-warning system developed by
MONUSCO in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Furthermore, BINUCA is working with national
and international partners to put in place a strategy
to encourage the defection of LRA fighters, as well
as a policy for repatriation to their home countries.
Parallel to the regional coordination efforts on a
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration (DDRRR) strategy, BINUCA is
facilitating the development of a national DDRRR
strategy in the LRA-affected areas of the country. In
order to strengthen our footprints in the south-east, last
month we deployed two international consultants to
Obo to work with the Joint Information and Operations
Centre. That deployment was undertaken by BINUCA
with very meagre internal resources. We count on the
support of Member States to help us continue with the
deployment.

The Government continued to experience budgetary
difficulties as a result of the stoppage of support by the
international community, but has continued to pay the
salaries of civil servants. In fact, the Government has
prioritized the regular payment of civil servants. From
4 to 19 April, an International Monetary Fund (IMF)
delegation held discussions in Bangui on a Government
economic programme to be supported by the Fund,
with concessional resources under the IMF's Extended
Credit Facility. During the discussion, the Government
committed to undertaking a number of reforms to
strengthen budget execution and to improve transparency.
The Government also committed to adjusting petroleum
prices to safeguard the budgeted domestic revenues, as
approved by parliament in December 2011. In fact, they
have already started obtaining some of that subsidy.

Subject to the resolution of a few pending issues, for
example, the clearance of payment arrears to members
of the Paris Club and the transparent accounting of
exceptional revenue from the exploitation of natural
resources, the authorities' request could be submitted
for approval to the IMF Executive Board before the end
of this month.

On the humanitarian front, the situation remains
highly precarious and is seriously impacted by the
lack of basic health-care infrastructure. Some 75,000
Central Africans remain displaced and living in
precarious conditions, out of which more than 20,000
were displaced by the LRA between 2008 and 2011. The
situation of those people is very worrisome.

The population of the Central African Republic
is constantly at risk because of the extreme level of
vulnerability that the country is facing. Two thirds of
the population does not have access to safe drinking
water or health-care facilities. The education system
is weak. One third of all children nationwide are not
attending primary school. An estimated 42 per cent
of the population is food- insecure. The HIV/AIDS
pandemic is on the increase, especially in Bangui and
in the conflict-affected areas. Women are more affected
than men, and boys more so than girls.

The Consolidated Appeals Process requesting
$134 million remains grossly underfunded, the latest
figure being 36 per cent. About 40 humanitarian
organizations are struggling to assist an estimated
1.9 million people in desperate need, which is nearly half
of the population. It is therefore vital that humanitarian
organizations reach people in need, in a country where
life expectancy stands at 48 years. I appeal to the
Council to sensitize the international community to help
address the Central African Republic's need for urgent
humanitarian assistance.

The report notes an upsurge in human rights
violations, including summary executions, torture,
arbitrary arrests and detentions perpetrated by the security
and defence forces, particularly by some members of
the presidential guard. Such abuses are often carried out
in detention centres, with total impunity. BINUCA has
been particularly worried by the non-observance of the
basic rights of presumption of innocence until proven
guilty.

The prolongation of preventive detention, the refusal
to grant access to legal counsel to the persons arrested,
and the non-compliance with the legal provisions on
the duration of custody also remain major challenges in
the Central African Republic. BINUCA has constantly
pressed the issue of such irregularities with national
authorities, including the Minister of Justice and the
High Commissioner for Human Rights and Good
Governance, but much remains to be done to observe
due process in detention and to prevent illegal arrests
and detention.

In conclusion, the Central African Republic is at
a critical juncture. I said the same thing last year (see S/PV.6687) and I am repeating it this year. It is therefore
essential, as reported in the Secretary-General's report,
to continue building on the momentum recently created
by the Government on the political, security and DDR
fronts. The dynamic of peace between the Government
and the politico-military groups and the dialogue called
by the President offer a real chance for the stabilization
of this beautiful country.

The population of the Central African Republic
sincerely hopes that it can count on the international
community's continued assistance and generosity to
help bring about lasting peace in their country through
the completion of the DDR process. On behalf of the
Secretary-General, may I also express my gratitude to
the members of the Council for their continued support.
We know that they are seized with bigger dossiers, but
the Central African Republic is a dossier that is doable.

In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to
Ambassador Jan Grauls, who has spared no effort in the
search for resources for sustainable peace and stability in
the Central African Republic. He remains a friend of the
United Nations family in the Central African Republic
and a friend of the Central African Republic itself
for what he has accomplished as Chair of the Central
African Republic configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

