Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Bangladesh
warmly welcomes Mr. Kouchner today to brief us at
the Council. We have listened with great attention to
his very important statement. We are heartened by the
achievements of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the
positive developments in Kosovo, but at the same time
feel that the pace of return to normalcy needs to be
accelerated. UNMIK has come a long way against
many odds in the six months since the Security Council
mission visited Kosovo, where we had occasion to see
first hand the enormity and complexity ofthe issues.

I would make the following points today on the
report (S/2000/878) of the Secretary-General and the
presentation of Mr. Kouchner.

First, regarding the elections, we welcome the
steps taken by Mr. Kouchner for holding the municipal
elections in Kosovo on 28 October. These elections
will be the first major step towards the development of
democracy. The timely completion of the civil
registration process, particularly of the ethnic Albanian
community, is a big step forward. We regret, however,
that the vast majority of the Kosovo Serbs and some
other minority communities could not participate in
registration due to intimidation by hardline elements.
We emphasize the importance of full participation by
all in the local administration in order to restore
effective peace.

Secondly, regarding the participation of moderate
Serbs, we also welcome the participation since June in
the Interim Administrative Council (IAC) and the
Kosovo Transitional Council (KTC) of the Serb
National Council, under the leadership of Bishop
Artemije. This is a success for UNMIK in its outreach
efforts aimed at including minority communities in
democracy-building in Kosovo. We hope that others
will follow the lead and join together in the quest for
peace.

Thirdly, regarding the security situation, there
have been sporadic eruptions of politically motivated
violence in recent months in Kosovo. There is a
likelihood that such incidents will increase in the pre-
election period. Major efforts, including the
reassignment of resources, should be made to curb the
probability of any incidents that might disrupt the
electoral process. We encourage the high priority given
by UNMIK in deterring election-related violence and
in enforcing the election code of conduct. We are
disturbed by the continuation of incidents of civil
violence and unrest in different parts of Kosovo,
including Mitrovica. The leaders in Kosovo must do
more to end the cycle of violence. We call on all
Kosovars, irrespective of their ethnic origins, to unite
against those who disrupt peace and pose a threat to
building a safe, democratic and multi-ethnic future for
Kosovo. We encourage UNMIK in its continued efforts
to improve security, the rule of law and the return of
refugees and internally displaced persons.

Fourthly, the judiciary in Kosovo has been
dysfunctional for quite a long time, mainly due to the
lack of judges. We welcome the appointment last
month of an additional 136 professional judges and
prosecutors and 309 lay judges in courts of different
regions of Kosovo, thus bringing the number ofjudges
close to the target level. We observe in the report that
the reinforcement of the judicial system has resulted in
greater levels of activity for dispensing justice. This,
accompanied by an improved penal system, will
contribute greatly towards the establishment of the rule
of law.

Fifthly, we have referred to the problem of
missing persons and detainees quite a number of times
in the Council. It remains a major source of tension
between the different ethnic communities. Continuation
of this situation is counter-productive to attempts at
building inter-ethnic harmony. We have underscored
the appropriateness of the appointment of a special
envoy ofthe Secretary-General for missing persons and
detainees. In this context, we welcome the appointment
by the High Commissioner for Human Rights of
Ambassador Henrik Amneus as her Special Envoy on
persons deprived of liberty, including prisoners,
detainees and missing persons in the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. We hope that his role will make a
substantial contribution in resolving the fate of nearly
3,500 persons who remain missing and detained.

In conclusion, I would like to note that the
restoration of peace to a region which has been a
hotbed of conflict and inter-ethnic violence is a task of
immense complexity. The notable progress made thus
far shows that efforts are on the right track. I pay
special tribute to the untiring efforts of Mr. Kouchner
in leading the attempts of the United Nations in
establishing democracy, peace and security in Kosovo.
I commend him for carrying out a difficult job with
patience and persistence.

