Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank the United Kingdom
for organizing this open debate. I would also like to
endorse the statement made by the observer of the
European Union. To save time, I would like to briefly
summarize my statement, which will be circulated in
writing to delegations when I finish.

As a preliminary comment, I would like to say that
it is necessary to move firmly from a reactive culture
to a culture of prevention. Prevention should occupy a
central role in the efforts of the United Nations, and
the Security Council has a fundamental responsibility
in the area of conflict prevention. As some speakers
preceding the Spanish delegation have said, we need to
utilize all the tools available in the Charter of the United
Nations to contribute towards the effective prevention
of conflicts. Among such instruments, I would like to
mention such important ones as commissions of inquiry
and sanctions, which can also play an important role in
prevention.

Spain has placed mediation at the heart of its
foreign policy. It is crucial, in our view, to devote
special attention to the root and structural causes
of conflicts and to their risk factors in order to work
towards their prevention and to ensure the sustainability
of the solutions achieved. For that reason, I am going to
focus on the tools in which my delegation has invested
considerable political and financial capital, namely,
mediation and peacebuilding.

We are committed to preventive diplomacy and
mediation as tools for the prevention and resolution
of conflicts and peacebuilding. We are therefore a
founding member ofthe Group of Friends of Mediation,
and we contribute to the Mediation Support Unit of
the Department of Political Affairs. In addition, along
with our friends from Morocco, we have launched an
initiative for mediation in the Mediterranean that we
are currently in the process of developing further.

As the Secretary-General has observed in his
reports, in order for mediation efforts to succeed, three
conditions must be met. First, mediation must be based
on a profound understanding of the local context. It is
important to listen closely and with sensitivity to the
local players. Secondly, there needs to be a spirit of
local ownership; imposed mediation rarely works. And,
thirdly, there needs to be coherence, coordination and
complementarity among the concerned actors.

The second instrument in which Spain has
invested considerable political and financial capital
is peacekeeping. Peacekeeping operations and special
political missions play a fundamental and invaluable
role. I cannot fail to mention the important role played
also by the Peacekeeping Commission, in which Spain
actively participates, as well as the various regional
entities. As several delegations have observed, we fully
support better and more fluid interaction between the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Security Council.

Finally, several delegations have also mentioned
the responsibility to protect. It is important for us to
continue to promote the excellent principle of the
responsibility to protect, in particular in its second
pillar, namely, the commitment to provide assistance to
countries in order to enable them to effectively prevent
atrocities.

To conclude, I wish to express my delegation's
gratitude to you, Sir, for organizing this debate, and
above all for today's adoption of resolution 2171 (2014),
which represents a good step in the right direction.

