Mr. Danon (Israel): I would like to start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming
your role as President of the Security Council. Your
leadership and moral clarity have already had a
palliative effect on the work of the Council, and I am
sure that they will continue to do so.

I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing, and I also
thank Ms. Raemer for sharing her touching story with
us today. Her courageous testimony was moving and
enlightening. I hope that Council members will take it
to heart.

Ms. Raemer's testimony illustrated how Iranian-
funded Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad have been
terrorizing civilians living on the border of the Gaza
Strip for more than a decade. An entire generation has
never known a life without having to be aware at all
times of where the closest bomb shelter is located. An
entire generation suffers from the trauma caused by
the fear that the noise heard at night is that of a terror
tunnel being dug under the bed.

We have been reminded by Council members today,
as we have been reminded many times before, that it is
also hard to live on the other side of the border, and they
are right. It is indeed hard to be a civilian in the Gaza
Strip. In fact, it is hard to be a civilian in all places
where the Iranian regime's tentacles of terror have
reached. The Iranian regime is dedicated to forcing
a radical and dangerous revolution on the region.
Central to that strategy are its proxies. Wherever they
are, they spread terror and violence against innocent
civilians. The regime's proxies do not care about the
host countries' civilians. They use those civilians as
shields in the pursuit of Tehran's extremist ideology.
They traumatize the innocent and hurt the vulnerable.

That is why it is hard to be a civilian in Israel next
to the border. It is hard to be a civilian in the Gaza Strip,
Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen and Syria. The Iranian regime
abuses civilians on both sides of the border of the Gaza
Strip. It funds Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad. It
directs them to aim rockets at Israeli civilians. It helps
Hamas use the funds provided by some members of the
Council to build terror tunnels and rockets, instead of
hospitals and schools.

Just last week, the 2020 humanitarian response
plan was issued in this building, with the aim of
providing hundreds of millions of dollars to the Gaza
Strip. We hope that it will go to help the people of Gaza.
It will not. Instead, I can assure those present that it
will once again be wasted on furthering an extremist
agenda through terror tactics and harming civilians,
Israelis and Palestinians alike. While there is a need for
funds in Gaza, we can be sure that the money will not
serve its purpose, so long as Hamas is in power with the
support of Iran.

Nineteen-year-old Amir Abu Oun was one of
thousands who took to the streets in Jabalia to protest
against Hamas' policies in March. On his first day of
peaceful protest, he was beaten by Hamas forces. On the
second day, he was detained for five days, during which
he was deprived of food and, once again, beaten. The
Islamic Republic does not care about the civilians of the
Gaza Strip; it cares only about its extremist ideology.

It is not only in Gaza that the Iranian regime
abuses civilians, but also in Iraq. Iranian Shiite militias
violently crushed the recent protests in Iraq. They
share responsibility for the death of more than 400
Iraqis and wounded more than 20,000. Those civilians
were protesting the economic conditions and corrupt
Governments that are the result of Iranian interference
in the country. Twenty-three-year-old medical student,
Ayat, tweeted that there were demonstrators on the
streets near Tahrir Square in Baghdad. Her patients
were teenagers. She said, "At any moment, they could
fire at us. At any moment, we could die." The Islamic
Republic does not care about the civilians of Iraq; it
cares only about its extremist ideology.

The Iranian regime abuses civilians in Lebanon.
The Iranian regime created Hizbullah in the 19805. For
over three decades, Hizbullah has worked to further
the extremist ideologies it shares with the regime.
Hizbullah leader Hassan Nasrallah has been quoted
saying that Hizbullah believes in Ayatollah Khamenei
more than it believes in the Lebanese Constitution.
Last month in Beirut, protesters chanted: "This is
Lebanon, not Iran". In response, they were beaten and
attacked by Hizbullah. The Islamic Republic directs
Hizbullah to use civilian homes and schools to store
rockets and to build tunnels into Israeli towns and
villages. Very critical for us is the fact that the regime
provides Hizbullah with kits to convert rockets into
precision-guided missiles that could provoke war in the
region - a war that would endanger Lebanese civilians
only to promote the regime's ideology. The Islamic
Republic does not care about the civilians of Lebanon;
it cares only about its extremist ideology.

The Iranian regime also abuses civilians in Yemen.
The regime funds arms and trains the Houthi forces.
The Houthis' flag bears the slogan: "Allah is the
greatest of all, death to America, death to Israel, curse
upon the Jews, victory to Islam". That is the exact same
rhetoric that comes out of the Islamic Republic. The
Iranian regime allows the Houthis to use weapons that
they provide them to arm young children. The Houthis
have over 18,000 child soldiers in their forces. Yemen's
humanitarian crisis is the largest in the world. Some
80 per cent of the population is in need of humanitarian
assistance, including more than 12 million children. The
Iranian regime's support of the Houthis is responsible
for prolonging that crisis. The Islamic Republic does
not care about the civilians of Yemen; it cares only
about its extremist ideology.

Syria is another example. The Islamic Revolutionary
Guard Corps ground forces, the Quds Force and
intelligence services have all been deployed to keep
Bashar Al-Assad in power, no matter the cost - billions
of dollars - although 400,000 Syrian civilians have
lost their lives in the civil war, many of them killed
by people who were trained by the Iranian regime and
were using the weapons that the regime had provided
them. I repeat again that the Islamic Republic does not
care about the civilians of Syria; it cares only about its
extremist ideology.

The Iranian regime abuses civilians even in its own
country. Iranian citizens recently took to the streets to
exercise their basic right to criticize their Government's
policies - policies that place the regime's expansionist
ideology over the well-being of Iranian civilians. In
response, the Iranian regime killed more than 200
civilians and injured thousands more. Pouya Bakhtiari,

a 27-year-old electrical engineer, was shot and killed
during the protests, which he attended with his mother
and sister on 16 November in Mehrshahr, Iran. Pouya
had an active Instagram account, with over 14,000
followers, on which, despite threats, he shared his
opinions on the regime. On his way to the protest,
during which he was murdered, he recorded a video
message for his followers, saying,

"People, do not miss this opportunity. Once
and for all, let us destroy this criminal and corrupt
regime that for 40 years has made the dear Iranian
people miserable."

While blood is flowing in the streets of Tehran,
cash continues to flow to the regime's proxies and
allies, causing further bloodshed across the region.
Meanwhile, it is expected that by March 2020, 57 million
Iranians will be living below the absolute poverty line.
It is therefore no wonder that protesters are chanting in
Iran: "No to Gaza, no to Lebanon. I give my life only
for Iran". But the Islamic Republic does not care about
its civilians; it cares only about its extremist ideology.

Wherever the Iranian regime's tentacles of terror
reach, civilians suffer. The Islamic Republic remains
the biggest threat to security and stability in the region,
yet many members of the Council and the international
community try to appease the regime. For years, Israel
has warned that the regime's nuclear and expansionist
ambitions pose a threat to the entire world. We have
warned that the regime will sacrifice everything, even
innocent civilian lives, to promote its agenda. Such
appeasement has done nothing to slow it down.

Today we heard from Ms. Raemer from Israel about
what it means to be a civilian affected by the Islamic
Republic for years. We could have heard today from a
civilian in Gaza, Iraq, Lebanon, Yemen, Syria or Iran,
and his or her experience of living under the influence
of the regime would have been similar. Civilians across
the Middle East are risking their lives to protest the
regime's presence in their countries. They are doing all
they can to hold back the regime's regional ambitions.

It is time that the international community took
action and join them. Let their courage serve as a
catalyst. More pressure must be applied on the Iranian
regime to stop its terror in the region and around the
world and to stop promoting its nuclear programme. We
must follow in the footsteps of our American ally, leave
the Iran deal and apply more sanctions. The Iranian
regime does not care about the civilians in the region,
but the civilians of the region are counting on the hope
that the Security Council does.

