Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Our congratulations go to you, Sir,
on your assumption of office and our thanks to the
Egyptian delegation for guiding us so successfully through
June.

The draft resolution before us correctly identifies the
steps which are necessary for a lasting peace in Angola and
we will vote in favour of it. The draft resolution extends
the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) to 11 October 1996. While we do
not generally favour short mandates, we believe a three-
month mandate is necessary to keep pressure on the parties
at this crucial stage in the peace process.

Angola is moving closer towards a secure and peaceful
future. We are pleased that an Amnesty Law has now been
promulgated and that the quartering of the rapid reaction
police has been completed. We welcome the continuing
withdrawal of the Angolan Armed Forces to barracks and
the recent reports that UNITA has released all remaining
prisoners. We are also encouraged that preparations have
now been made to quarter more UNITA troops.

These and other developments are, rightly in our view,
acknowledged in the draft resolution as positive steps in the
peace process. We urge both parties to ensure that these
efforts are not set back by a failure to follow through on
the remaining Lusaka Protocol commitments. It is
important, therefore, that the extension of the mandate of
UNAVEM. III to 11 October 1996 be used constructively.

Much remains to be done. In particular, we need to
see UNITA complete the quartering of its troops and hand
over its arms, heavy weapons, ammunition and other
equipment. This has to be matched by the incorporation of
UNITA military personnel into the Angolan Armed Forces
and of its civilian personnel into the State administration
and the national police. The broader process of
demobilization and reintegration also needs to be stepped
up, and it is essential that both parties agree soon on the
formation of a Government of Unity and National
Reconciliation. We urge President dos Santos and Mr.
Savimbi to meet as soon as possible to discuss the
outstanding issues.

We are concerned at recent reports that the
integration of UNITA into the Angolan Armed Forces
may have been suspended. We have commended the
integration process in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution.
It is clearly important, therefore, that the Government
clarify the situation so that the process can be resumed
without delay.

We hope that the Secretary-General will be able to
report by 1 October that these tasks have been completed.
They should be concluded promptly - delays in one area
risk undermining progress in other areas and could put the
entire peace process in jeopardy. It is worth noting that
UNAVEM. III is the largest United Nations peace-keeping
operation. As such, it remains an important test for the
United Nations as a whole.

Finally, I should like to pay tribute to the
achievements of the Secretary-General's Special
Representative, Mr. Beye, and to the men and women of
UNAVEM. III, who are working actively on behalf of the
international community to achieve a stable and peaceful
future for the people of Angola.

