Mr. Ripert (France) (spoke in French): I, too,
wish to thank previous speakers, in particular
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Somalia; Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Omaar, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Somalia; and Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, Commissioner
for Peace and Security of the African Union.

The Czech Presidency of the European Union
will be taking the floor shortly, and I obviously support
the statement that will be made.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2009/ 132)
and the presentations that we have just heard confirm
that a positive dynamic has begun in Somalia. The
expansion of parliament, the election of a President,
the formation of a unity Government and the inclusive
dialogue begun with all parties by the new Somali
President to urge them to join the Djibouti process are
all positive political signals. Moreover, the Secretary-
General's report indicates the initial return of internally
displaced persons to Mogadishu. That is also a sign of
confidence.

In addition, France highlights the fact that the
withdrawal of Ethiopian troops has not created a
security vacuum. In the end, that has not benefited the
most radical groups, instead making it possible to
marginalize them by removing their main argument for
continuing the violence. Somalis should be
congratulated on this progress towards peace and
reconciliation. Congratulations go also to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and, of course,
to his team on their tireless efforts vis-a-vis the parties.

However, every day that passes reminds us of the
extreme fragility of the situation. The humanitarian
situation remains very bad, with more than 3 million
people dependent on international aid and hundreds of
thousands still on the road to Afgooye. The conditions
are all the harsher because humanitarian workers are
being targeted, in constant violation of international
humanitarian law: in 2008, 34 were killed and
26 abducted; since the beginning of this year, three
World Food Programme workers have been killed and
four briefly kidnapped. In Mogadishu itself, attacks
continue against the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM). We have, in this Chamber, condemned the
deadly attack of 25 February against AMISOM
soldiers. Two days ago, another soldier was killed and
three others were wounded.

In the light of that situation, the international
community obviously has an essential role to play.
First, we must provide full political support to the
Somali authorities and encourage them to continue
their efforts to achieve reconciliation and dialogue
among all parties. We must also support the
establishment of a robust, well-equipped and trained
Joint Security Force and a professional police force. It
is important to reduce insecurity by directly controlling
the essential areas of the city of Mogadishu so that the
Government can establish its authority in Somalia and
make a real change in people's lives.

In parallel, we must strengthen the AMISOM
forces, who have fulfilled their mission with great
courage. Here, on behalf of France, I should like to pay
tribute to Burundi and Uganda for their actions and to
the African Union for its efforts to enable AMISOM. to
reach full deployment.

Strengthening AMISOM. requires additional
financial resources. Many donors already provide
significant aid to Somalia and AMISOM. - in
particular the European Union, the African Union's
leading financial partner, including through the African
Peace Facility. France has assisted in the training of
four AMISOM. contingents, and French officers are
currently in Uganda to help the parties prepare a
Ugandan contingent.

The Security Council, through resolution 1863
(2009), has taken the decisions necessary to ensure that
the United Nations can provide a logistical support

package to AMISOM. and establish a special trust fund,
making it possible to find additional resources to
support AMISOM. and strengthen the Somali security
forces. The Secretary-General has taken an emergency
measure by making available $50 million. The first
ships are beginning to arrive in Mogadishu. By the end
of this month, the General Assembly will debate an
initial instalment of funding. We hope that the donors
conference will be held soon.

The implementation of resolution 1863 (2009) is
a difficult task. Indeed, we must act swiftly and
pragmatically, first focusing on the logistical package,
a concrete measure that can be implemented quickly so
that AMISOM. can make an immediate difference.

I should like to stress that the duty of the
international community is not merely to deal with
security issues. In addition to the mechanism of
individual sanctions available to the Council, the fight
against impunity is an essential aspect that we must not
neglect, because the culture of impunity prevailing in
Somalia is a major obstacle on the path of peace.
France fully supports the approach of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in that regard.

Like some previous speakers, I should also like to
recall that, on more than one occasion last year, the
Security Council discussed the possible establishment
of a peacekeeping operation. We will resume that
discussion on the basis of the report of the Secretary-
General that is expected in mid-April. But we must not
lose sight of the fact that, in the interests of the Somali
people, what is important is a full and swift
implementation of resolution 1863 (2009).

This means that combating piracy is all the more
necessary. Since the first operation to protect World
Food Programme (WFP) vessels undertaken by France
in November 2007, the fight against piracy has greatly
expanded. The European Union, together with many
other international partners, is playing a major role,
through its Operation Atalanta, to secure the supplies
on which so many Somalians depend. Operation
Atalanta has allowed the secure transportation of more
than 100,000 tons of food aid. The European Union
High Representative for the Common Foreign and
Security Policy has expressed his support for the
protection of United Nations convoys.

It is on the ground in Somalia that the root causes
of piracy must be resolved, but the fight against piracy
is also a matter of urgency. We welcome the fact that
so many nations and organizations are participating in
this fight. Food deliveries by WFP quadrupled between
2007 and 2008.

I would like once again to express our full
support to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General. I would like to reiterate to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Somalia that he can fully count on
France to help his Government to respond to, as he so
eloquently stated, the need for peace and the will for
liberty that motivates his people.

