Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary
General, Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for his first briefing
to the Security Council. I extend my delegation's
congratulations to him on his appointment to this post.
We wish him and the entire United Nations family on
the ground best success in ensuring continuous support
to Afghanistan and wish that they may all stay safe. I
also thank the Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury Fedotov, for his
briefing and Ambassador Zahir Tanin for his statement.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement to be
made on behalf of the European Union later on.

In a few days, Afghanistan will turn another
page in modern history. As of 1 January 2015, the
responsibility for security in the country will be fully
in the hands of the Afghan people. It is time now to
quickly capitalize on the gains made during the last 13
years and advance in tackling the ongoing challenges,
be they in political, peace and security, human rights
or economic realms. Robust, visionary leadership from
President Ashraf Ghani and Chief Executive Officer
Abdullah Abdullah will be essential. Lithuania, as a
partner of Afghanistan for almost 10 years, was happy
to see the reform package presented by the National
Unity Government at the London Conference. It lays
a firm foundation for the country's development
during the transformation decade. We encourage the
two leaders to proceed promptly to appointing and
confirming senior Government officials. A strong
and truly united Government is needed to meet the
formidable challenges that lie ahead.

The economic situation, corruption and growing
levels of opium production in Afghanistan remain issues
of grave concern, challenging efforts to strengthen
the country's stability and spur its development. We
welcome President Ghani's initial steps, including
investigation into the Kabul Bank fraud case, which
show his determination to advance the rule of law.
Immediate action on the part of the Government is
needed to promote legal livelihoods and strengthen
Afghanistan's social, economic and political fabric.
That includes passing a credible budget, implementing
measures to increase revenues and pursuing specific
reforms aimed at improving the conditions for private
sector investment.

The past few weeks have once again been marked
by murderous attacks all over the State that have killed
Afghan soldiers and civilians, including one in Kabul
on the Institut Francais d'Afghanistan and Isteqlel High
School. We strongly condemn such brutal attacks on
the Afghan population, including children, offer our
deepest condolences and sympathy to all families of
the victims and wish the injured a speedy recovery.
The anti-Government elements attacking civilians
with improvised explosive devices and on ground
engagements, by means that include small-arms fire
and suicide and complex attacks, must not be allowed
to escape their responsibility under international
humanitarian law. All perpetrators of such acts of
violence must be brought to account.

We commend the Afghan National Security Forces
for the strong willingness they have demonstrated to
respond to the challenge of anti-Government elements.
Continued international support and commitments are
necessary to ensure that their capabilities are sustained.
As the mission of NATO's International Security
Assistance Force (ISAF) winds down, we welcome the
recent ratification of both the United States bilateral
security and NATO status of forces agreements, which
form a legal basis for post-2014 security assistance
to Afghanistan, and the Council's adoption on
12 December of resolution 2189 (2014). The resolution
constitutes a significant support to Afghanistan and
the post-2014 allies' engagements there. My delegation
thanks Australia for its leadership of the negotiating
process for the resolution.

Lithuania supports and remains committed to the
new NATO-led non-combat Resolute Support Mission.
My country's contribution to the Mission will be one
of its major commitments to the Alliance in 2015. My
Government had already confirmed a contribution of
$500,000 to the Afghan National Army trust fund for
2015, according to the financial pledges recorded for
the period 2015-2017. Lithuania is also contributing
national experts to the European Union Police Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We believe it is
important for UNAMA to take into consideration the
consequences of ISAF's withdrawal from the provincial
centres, as well as the changing security environment.
We expect the safety of personnel to be assured in the
new circumstances.

A strong security sector alone does not guarantee
lasting peace and prosperity, however. The fact that
President Ghani is emphasizing and prioritizing an
Afghan-owned and -led reconciliation process is a
welcome and much-needed step. The full inclusion of
men, women, young people, civil society and minorities
is key if reconciliation is to succeed. The meaningful
participation of women, in particular, in Afghanistan's
political and peace processes must be ensured. My
delegation welcomes the outcome of the elections to
the provincial councils, in which female candidates
won 21 per cent of the seats. President Ghani and Chief
Executive Officer Abdullah Abdullah's meetings with
women representatives of civil society are a positive
step towards women's greater inclusion in the country's
social, political and economic life.

During her visit to Afghanistan, Special Rapporteur
Rashida Manjoo noted with appreciation the political
will evident in the attitude to promoting and protecting
women's rights. Lithuania welcomes the launch of
the first gender-based violence treatment protocol for
health-care providers, as well as the training planned
for medical personnel on survivor-centred care in
Afghanistan. Despite such positive trends, deadly
attacks, such as that on women's rights activist Shukria
Barakzai, prove that there is still a long way to go before
women can become truly free and secure in exercising
their human and civil rights. Violence against women
remains a major source of concern. Comprehensive
and coherent data collection, as well as the effective
implementation of laws and adequate resources for
supporting women's shelters as a protective remedy,
should be ensured without further delay.

In a final point, which Ambassador Tanin himself
just raised, the positive engagement of Afghanistan's
regional partners, both bilaterally and by way of
regional initiatives such as the Istanbul Process, is
crucial to building a stable and peaceful Afghanistan.
We welcome President Ghani's emphasis on regional
cooperation. The continued support of the international
community through the efforts of UNAMA remains
essential if the transformation decade is to bring a
better life to each and every Afghan citizen.

