The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Cote d'Ivoire in which he requests
to be invited to participate in the consideration of the
item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite that representative to participate in
the consideration of the item without the right to vote,
in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Gate d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the International Working Group and
endorses its fifth final communique of 17 March
2006. It commends Prime Minister Charles
Konan Banny for his initiatives, taken in
cooperation with President Laurent Gbagbo,
which gave a new momentum to the peace
process, and reiterates its full support for him. It
also welcomes the efforts of Mr. Antonio
Monteiro and encourages the Secretary-General
to appoint a new High Representative for the
elections as soon as possible.

"The Security Council welcomes the
progress achieved in recent weeks, in particular
the meeting of the entire Cabinet, the
establishment of the Independent Electoral
Commission, the organization of exams in the
north, and the preparation of operations of
identification of the populations and of
the

disarmament.

"The Security Council urges Ivorian leaders
to fulfil all their commitments, in particular those
made in Yamoussoukro on 28 February 2006, and
to rapidly implement the road map, in good faith
and in a spirit of trust, in order to organize free,
fair, open and transparent elections by 31 October
2006. It underlines the urgency of progress in the
identification process, the establishment of the
electoral registers and the commencement of the
DDR programme.

"The Security Council calls on donor
countries to provide the Prime Minister all the
necessary support for the full and immediate
implementation of the road map.

"The Security Council, nevertheless,
reiterates its grave concern at the situation in the
west. It urges the United Nations Operation in
Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to continue its
redeployment in this region. It calls also for the
return of this region to civilian authority.

"The Security Council strongly condemns
the persistence of violations of human rights, the
attacks against members of the Government, the
obstacles to the freedom of movement of
impartial forces, and the incitements to hatred
and violence in the media. In this regard, it
requests the Ivorian authorities to guarantee, in
close liaison with UNOCI, that all steps be taken
to preserve the independence of Radio Television
Ivoirienne."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2006/14.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.50 p.m.

