The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now give a
statement in my national capacity.

We would like to express our thanks and appreciation
to Mr. Vladimir Voronkov for his insightful briefing.

We take this opportunity to welcome the Secretary-
General's reform by establishing the Office of Counter-
Terrorism in June 2017. It is one of the initial steps taken
by the Secretary-General to implement institutional
reform. Our view is that the reform will to a great
extent enhace the coordination of efforts and activities
to counter terrorism in the framework of the United
Nations and beyond, as well as to build the capacity
of Member States to combat this looming threat.
The United Nations and its agencies coordinate with
international organizations in their significant efforts
to counter terrorism. They take precautionary measures
to eliminate the terrorist groups. Those efforts,
combined with the efforts of the international coalition
to eliminate terrorism, succeeded in defeating terrorist
groups in some places. However, Member States face
challenges in their efforts to counter terrorism because
those groups have developed new ways and techniques.
That requires the Security Council and the Member
States to redouble their efforts, through dialogue,
information- and experience-sharing. We must also
implement the relevant Security Council resolutions
and work with the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the Analytical Support Group and other United Nations
bodies, along with relevant international organizations.

Kuwait welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2018/80), including its evaluation and analysis of
Da'esh, and the role of the international coalition
to combat its proliferation. Member States have
established control measures leading to the loss by
Da'esh of its capabilities and financial resources. At the
same time, the report underscores that Da'esh has the
ability to adapt itself to new situations notwithstanding
the scarcity of its resources, Da'esh is looking for
new resources and creating terrorist groups and cells
by using new methods. The report underscores the
importance of international cooperation with the
United Nations and its bodies to combat this scourge.

Terrorism persists and poses a threat to
international peace and security. That is why Kuwait
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
regardless of its motivation. Terrorism is a criminal
act and should not be linked to any religion, identity,
culture or ethnicity.

Fighting terrorism requires mobilization of all
international efforts in order to address this criminal
scourge. Measures must be adopted to strengthen
commitment to international humanitarian law, respect
of human rights, good governance and peaceful
coexistence among various religions. There should
be respect for the symbols of religions and their holy
places. Conditions leading to the proliferation of
terrorism, hatred and all manifestations of extremism
and violence should be addressed.

Moreover, we reiterate the importance of issues
involving youth and women with respect to international
peace and security within the context of terrorist
acts. We must increase women's participation in the
strategies pertaining to counter terrorism and violent
extremism that leads to terrorism. On 13 February, and
as part of the efforts that the State of Kuwait makes
at the international level, we will host a ministerial
meeting of the global coalition against Da'esh, with
the participation of 70 countries and four international
organizations. Its goal is to establish a strategy and
guidelines for combating terrorism. The conference
will be the first such event since the defeat of Da'esh
in Iraq.

In conclusion, we reiterate Kuwait's firm and
absolute condemnation of acts of terrorism in all
their forms and manifestations and regardless of their
motivation, location and perpetrators. They constitute
a deliberate threat to international peace and security
and a blatant violation of international law. At the same
time, we underscore the fact that strengthening the
culture of tolerance and coexistence among peoples
and nations is one of Kuwait's foreign policy priorities.
We fully support all international efforts aimed at
combating terrorism and stopping terrorist threats
throughout the world.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.

I now invite Council members to informal
consultations in order to continue our discussion on
the subject.

The meeting rose at 11.50 am.
