Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to warmly welcome you, Sir, and thank you
for convening and presiding over this debate. We
would also like to welcome the high-level
representatives who are with us today and to thank the
Secretary-General and the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime for their
very detailed and concise briefings.

West Africa and the Sahel region are in a critical
security situation that has been exacerbated by internal
and external factors. The presence of various forms of
transnational organized crime, as well as the spread of
small arms and light weapons and the threat
represented by an increasing terrorist presence, are
concerns that require international cooperation in
timely support of the efforts of States and the regional
and subregional organizations.

We share the concern - expressed in the report
of the assessment mission to the Sahel (see S/2012/42)
and reiterated by the Secretary-General - over the
combined effects of poverty, food insecurity and
natural disasters, together with institutional fragility
and limited access to basic social services, have
heightened the vulnerability of the Sahel communities
and increased their dependency on humanitarian
assistance. This picture confirms the need to adopt
effective mechanisms and measures to enhance
international cooperation and coordination among
States against the various manifestations of
transnational organized crime and to prevent terrorism
from finding a breeding ground in the region.

The Organization as a whole must act to provide
assistance, address the immediate problems and find
long-term solutions to structural problems. We agree
with the recommendations to approach these
challenges from an integrated perspective, respecting
the balance between efforts to enhance security and
those to promote the region's social and economic
development.

Similarly, we support the conclusion of the
United Nations assessment mission on piracy in the
Gulf of Guinea to the effect that any viable or lasting
regional strategy to combat piracy will also need to
include measures to reduce high levels of youth
unemployment, wide income disparities within society,

the prevalence of corruption, the uncontrolled
circulation of illicit weapons, and other structural
measures (see S/2012/45). As part of this integrated
focus, which enhances the coherence among the
political, justice, security, development and human
rights spheres in this and other situations on its agenda,
the Security Council plays an important role in
supporting the enhancement of the rule of law and
ensuring national capacity-building to promote
functioning institutions and the provision of basic
services.

We agree with Mr. Fedotov that the Security
Council must contribute to the important work being
undertaken by other United Nations organs. However,
the increase in organized crime can threaten the
achievements that have been made in enhancing
stability, governability and institution-building in
situations on its agenda.

It has to be recognized that transnational
organized crime in its various forms has a global
dimension. It generates billions of dollars, leading to
violence and corruption and affecting the international
community as a whole. The scope and complexity of
this phenomenon requires integrated, coordinated
efforts on the part of the United Nations system and the
international community. It is therefore necessary to
continue to emphasize the General Assembly's role as a
forum for discussion and establishing consensus to
address these issues and challenges.

We are concerned over the tendency to ignore the
agreements established within the framework of the
General Assembly with regard to transnational
organized crime and the global problem of drugs as
global concepts and the tools we need to confront
them. This trend could be a step backwards on previous
commitments established on the basis of shared
responsibility and the need to adopt a comprehensive,
balanced approach in the framework of international
cooperation.

At the same time, it is necessary for the
international community to address all criminal
activities with the same resolve. The Organization must
have binding instruments to improve control over the
trade in small arms and light weapons, explosives and
related material, and ammunitions and over the
marking, identification and prohibition their transfer to
non-State actors.

Other specific measures that could contribute to
improving the situation in the Sahel and West Africa
include enhancing border control by providing the
necessary technology and financial resources,
establishing cooperation agreements for effective
judicial systems, information exchange and assistance
in implementing relevant international standards.

Colombia is convinced that there is a need for
strategic alliances to ensure that we work together to
establish more secure societies, because isolated efforts
to address transnational and multidimensional crimes
are inadequate. The international community's goal
must be to eliminate all forms of organized crime in
the context of international cooperation.

We reiterate our commitment to working at the
bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. We are
participating in the West Africa Coast Initiative and
cooperating in capacity-building for the countries of
West Africa to combat international organized crime,
including drug trafficking, and to see that justice is
done.

