The President: At the outset of our meeting, I wish
to express, on behalf of all members of the Security
Council, our most sincere thanks and congratulations to
Ambassador Wisnumurti of Indonesia, who presided over
the work of the Council during the month of November in
a most exemplary and distinguished way. The wisdom,
savoir-faire and diplomacy he exercised in steering complex
issues in the Council showed us why he enjoys such high
esteem and appreciation in his country, in New York and
in the whole international community. The outstanding
leadership and professional skill of Ambassador Wisnumurti
and his collaborators were a major asset to the work of the
Council and set an example that I and my delegation will
try to follow during the current month of December.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Sierra Leone

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Sierra Leone, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jonah (Sierra Leone) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council warmly welcomes the
Peace Agreement signed by the Government of Sierra

 
Leone and the Revolutionary United Front in
Abidjan on 30 November 1996. The Agreement
brings to an end a bitter conflict which has caused
appalling suffering to the people of Sierra Leone.
The Council pays tribute to the courage and
determination of all those who have worked
tirelessly towards this end. The Council hopes that
the Agreement will provide encouragement to those
working for peace in other parts of Africa.

"The Security Council commends in particular
the role played by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire
whose commitment and determination in the
chairmanship of the negotiations between the parties
have been crucial to this successful outcome. The
Council also pays tribute to the support provided to
the negotiations by the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General in close coordination with the
Organization of African Unity, the Commonwealth,
the Economic Community of West African States
and other organizations and neighbouring countries.

"The Security Council continues to follow
developments in Sierra Leone with close interest.
The Peace Agreement is an essential first step
towards national reconciliation and reconstruction.
The Council will continue to support the
development of peace and democracy in Sierra
Leone. It notes in particular the need for a
successful process of demobilization and
reintegration of former combatants and stands ready
to assist in this process. It stresses the importance of
a coordinated international effort to alleviate the
humanitarian situation in the country.

"The Security Council requests the
Secretary-General to continue to monitor the
situation in Sierra Leone and to keep the Council
informed of further significant developments."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1996/46.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.55 pm.

