Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
listened carefully to today's briefing of the Council by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), on her twenty-sixth report on
the situation in Darfur, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1593 (2005). The report reviews a
number of challenges and observations regarding the
Court's performance in dealing the situation in Darfur
and States' cooperation with the Court so as to enable it
to implement its mandate. The report makes two main
points, the first being a request for facilitating financial
support through the United Nations to launch relevant
investigations in Darfur, and the second regarding
States' cooperation with the ICC to ensure that justice
is rendered. As we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her
briefing before the Council today, I would like to make
the following comments.

First, there is a unified African position on the way
the ICC deals with some African issues. That position
has been emphasized in successive resolutions adopted
at African Union Summits, including resolution 547 of
the twenty-fourth Summit, resolution 586 of the twenty-
fifth, resolution 590 of the twenty-sixth, resolution 616
of the twenty-seventh and, more recently, resolution
622 of the twenty-eighth. Those resolutions stress that
Africa is committed to fighting impunity. They call
on African States to maintain their commitment to the
African Union's relevant resolutions, in accordance
with article 23 of its Constitutive Act.

Secondly, those resolutions stress that the
International Criminal Court should respect the
provisions of international law on the immunity granted
to presidents and other high-level officials during
their mandate.

Thirdly, our position on the ICC has not changed.
We hope no steps that could thwart the security, stability
and sovereignty of African States will be taken. We
stress the importance of ensuring that no sanctions
are imposed on any African State on the pretext that it
did not take the necessary measures to execute an ICC
arrest warrant, especially given that some States have
reservations about the ICC and are not even party to the
Rome Statute of the Court.

