Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Senegal for convening today's meeting and
we welcome Foreign Minister Ndiaye as he presides
over today's meeting. We listened very attentively to
the statements by Assistant Secretary-General Wane,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Menkerios, Ambassador Antonio and Mr. Kaberuka.

The African Union (AU) is committed to African
countries' strength in unity, cooperation, solidarity
and to promoting the resolution of African issues in
African ways and safeguarding peace and stability on
the African continent. The international community
universally commends its efforts.

In recent years, the United Nations and the AU
have continued to advance cooperation in the area of
peace and security, jointly work towards a political
settlement of the questions of South Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, together deploy
forces in the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, engage in post-war reconstruction
in Liberia and Sierra Leone and play a positive role
in safeguarding peace and stability on the African
continent. China supports the strengthening of AU
and United Nations cooperation in the area of peace
and security and building partnerships of cooperation
to safeguard regional peace and security. China would
like to highlight the following points with regard to
strengthening the cooperation between the United
Nations and the AU in the area peace and security.

First, we should jointly uphold the purposes and
principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Security Council has the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. The
AU is an important platform for African countries to
collectively respond to threats and challenges in the
region. In accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the strengthening of cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations is conducive
to maintaining peace and stability in Africa. The
United Nations should continue to support the African
Union in its efforts to settle disputes through such
peaceful means as dialogue, consultation, good offices
and mediation, while respecting States' sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity.

Secondly, we should encourage shared notions in
promoting collective security. The countries of the
world are interdependent, with intertwined security.
Parties should adhere to a common, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable concept of security and
seek and promote security through cooperation.
The cooperation between the United Nations and
the African Union should be based on the concept
of common security. They must strengthen strategic
planning and engage in comprehensive cooperation in
conflict prevention, resolving regional hotspot issues,
safeguarding peace and peacebuilding so as to achieve
win-win cooperation and common security.

Thirdly, we should coordinate and cooperate better,
so as to promote the settlement of regional issues. The
African Union has ample experience with good offices
and mediation and advantages in geography, history
and culture. Therefore, it has a unique role to play in
resolving contentious issues in Africa. China supports
the United Nations in listening to the viewpoints of
the AU and African countries so as to ensure that all
parties, in the process of reaching political settlements
on contentious African issues, can make full use of
their respective advantages, complement each other,
strengthen their coordination, take into account the root
causes of regional hotspots, scale up the AU's input and
thereby develop comprehensive and targeted solutions
to issues.

Fourthly, we should support the AU in building the
capacity of its collective security mechanism. Scaling
up the AU's capacity-building in peace and security is
conducive to better efforts in managing good offices
and mediation and assuming more responsibilities in
peacekeeping. It promotes the comprehensive settlement
of regional issues. We hope that the United Nations
will provide more support to buildingthe African
Union's collective security mechanism in personnel
training, setting up institutions, logistical support and
funding, and that it will support building the African
Standby Force and rapid response force in combating
threats posed by terrorism and piracy in the region and
effectively enhance the capacity of collective African
security.

China attaches great importance and is strongly
committed to promoting cooperation with the African
Union in peace and security. So far, it has already
participated in 16 United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Africa, and there are 2,600 Chinese
peacekeepers in missions such as in Mali, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and
Darfur, and in the Sudan and Liberia.

At the summit commemorating the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations, Chinese President
Xi Jinping announced that within the next five years
China would provide $100 million to the African
Union in military assistance grants to support building
up the African Standby Force and the crisis rapid
response force. Last year at the Johannesburg Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, President
Xi Jinping and the African leaders unanimously
decided that the Chinese-African relationship would
be upgraded to a comprehensive strategic partnership
and highlighted that, in the coming three years, the
emphasis would be placed on implementing cooperation
plans in the following 10 areas: industrialization,
agricultural modernization, infrastructure, financing,
green development, trade, facilitating investment,
improving people's livelihoods, and eradicating
poverty, public health, people-to-people exchanges and
peace and security. China will continue to participate
in United Nations peacekeeping in Africa and will help
African countries to strengthen their capacity-building
in national defence, anti-terrorism, riot prevention,
customs management and immigration control.

The coordinators' meeting of the implementation
of the outcome of the Summit of the Forum on China-
Africa Cooperation was successfully concluded in
July in Beijing, which further promoted practical
cooperation between China and Africa in many areas.
China is willing to work jointly with African countries
and actively implement the outcome of the Johannesburg
Summit and safeguard peace and stability on the
African continent. We are committed to developing
a new type of international relations with win-win
cooperation at its core and building a community with
a common, secure and bright future for us all.

