Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2354 (2017). We express our
thanks and appreciation to Egypt for its important role
as facilitator, and to Council members for demonstrating
flexibility and a spirit of compromise in achieving
consensus on this important draft resolution.

There are a lot of measures taken in the areas of
law enforcement, intelligence sharing and cooperation
at different levels to counter the rise of terrorism and
violent extremism, but obviously these measures should
be adapted to the evolving and sophisticated strategies
that terrorist groups have employed increasingly to
pursue their extremist agendas. The propagation of
false and fallacious narratives, including through the
exploitation of the Internet and other information
communication technologies, has been one of the latest
strategies used by terrorists to recruit supporters and
foreign terrorist fighters, and to secure their finances.
It is in that context that the comprehensive international
framework to counter terrorist narratives was presented
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, in
accordance with presidential statement S/PRST/2016/6,
adopted by the Security Council on 11 May 2016.

The resolution we have adopted today welcomes
the comprehensive international framework to counter
terrorist narratives, with recommended guidelines and
good practices to effectively counter the ways in which
terrorist groups use their narratives to encourage,
motivate and recruit others to commit terrorist acts.
It takes into account the three core elements of the
framework: legal and law enforcement measures, public-
private partnerships, and counter-narrative measures.
It also strengthens transitory provisions in different
resolutions in the field of counterterrorist narratives.

We believe that the resolution will help to facilitate
greater cooperation in countering terrorist narratives,
and that is why we decided to vote in favour of and
co-sponsor it. No doubt, the involvement of relevant
stakeholders, such as religious and community
leaders, youth, women, victims of terrorism, civil-
society organizations, private-sector entities and the
media, is critical to efforts in this regard. The role that
education can play in countering terrorist narratives is
also significant.

Finally, we believe that Member States and all
relevant United Nations entities should respect the
principle of non-interference in the internal affairs
of other Member States in developing and executing
counter-narratives.
