Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this debate. We are very
grateful to United States Secretary of State Pompeo for
taking the time to be here today. This debate comes at a
very important moment. The world is an unpredictable
place right now. The developments that we are going to
discuss today risk making it more so. I would also like
to join others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
and the Dutch representative and his team for all their
work concerning resolution 2231 (2015).

Today's agenda is the implementation of that
resolution, which was an endorsement of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Yet,
throughout the negotiations and at the adoption of the
resolution, we were clear that the Council was not only
addressing nuclear issue, but continuing to impose
binding restrictions to curb Iran's ballistic missile and
proliferation activity because it threatens the region
and beyond.

I want to stress that ballistic missile proliferation
is not solely about nuclear missiles, although there
is a link with nuclear capability. Any conventional
payload would cause extensive harm to civilians and
infrastructure, and Member States in the region will
naturally be deeply concerned about confronting such
a threat from Iran. It heightens instability in the region
and increases the risk of miscalculation. As Secretary
Pompeo said, the international community has been
trying to curb that activity since at least 2006.

IfI may, I would like to set out the policy of my
Government towards Iran. We are motivated by three
objectives - first, and most critical, to uphold the
global non-proliferation regime and prevent Iran from
achieving nuclear capabilities that would threaten the
Middle East region and Europe beyond; secondly, to
constrain Iran's destabilizing actions in the region; and,
thirdly, to encourage Iran to normalize its economic
and diplomatic relations with the region and the West
and assume its rightful role as a responsible Power
constructively engaged.

The United Kingdom participated in negotiations
on a nuclear deal with Iran to secure the first of those
objectives, and we believe the JCPOA has done so.
It remains critical for our national security and, we
believe, for the shared security of our partners and
allies. I agree with what the French Ambassador said
with regard to the way forward. We were also clear
that the nuclear deal contained elements designed
to encourage Iran on a path to normalcy in its trade
and diplomatic relations with the outside world. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1089) records
that Iran continues to comply with its nuclear-related
obligations, as confirmed by the International Atomic
Energy Agency in its 12 November report. We expect
that commitment to continue, and we look to Iran to
continue to fully abide by its obligations under the deal.

Because our first objective continues to be met,
the United Kingdom - together with France and
Germany - has been working to ensure that Iran
continues to receive the economic benefits from
sanctions relief agreed as part of the nuclear deal. To
that end, in September we announced the creation of a
European special purpose vehicle to help facilitate that.
That work continues and we hope to announce further
progress soon.

There remains, however, much work to do
towards the second objective - the ending of Iran's
destabilizing regional behaviour. No one should have
any doubt about the strength of our concern and our
commitment to tackling that issue. Compliance with
the JCPOA, important as it is for all of the reasons
that the French Ambassador set out, is not a license to
engage in destabilizing behaviour elsewhere, whether
or not that has a nuclear link.

Iran cannot expect to improve its relations with the
rest of the world or ensure its economic prosperity and
security while pursuing its current path. Businesses will
not invest there, and public finances should be spent at
home, not diverted to adventurism abroad. The Under-
Secretary-General's briefing today was very clear, and
the findings in the Secretary-General's report should
continue to trouble the Council. As the report notes,
the United Kingdom, along with its E3 partners France
and Germany, raised concerns about the recent Iranian
ballistic-missile launches into Syria in a letter to the
President on 20 November (S/2018/1062). Since then, as
the Security Council discussed on 4 December, Iran has
tested a medium-range ballistic missile with a capability
that falls under category I of the Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR). Like those referred to in our
letter, that latest launch is inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015).

We heard a number of arguments when we met to
discuss this issue in consultations, and I am sure we
will hear many of them again today, so I would like to
address them briefly now. Some colleagues have made
the point that the language in paragraph 7 of resolution
2231 (2015), and in paragraph 3 ofthe resolution's annex
B, is not binding. The second part of that argument is
that the Council should therefore not concern itself with
Iran's behaviour because we argue that it is inconsistent
with it.

We believe that this is both an extraordinary and
a flawed argument for two reasons. Leaving aside the
question ofwhetherthe language is legallybinding ornot,
the Council has the power to make recommendations to
Member States with a view of resolving any matter that
threatens the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is clear that those recommendations should
be taken seriously by Member States rather than openly
flouted. The call to Iran to comply with the request not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons has a clear
purpose, and that purpose is to reduce international
and regional tension. In defying the Council's clearly
expressed view, Iran is not contributing to the stability
of the region, to say the least, but is rather ignoring the
Council's express wishes. Tendentious arguments that
seek to diminish the Council's voice in that regard serve
only to undermine its prerogative and authority and
encourage other States to disregard its resolutions. We
should all be deeply concerned about such irresponsible
behaviour.

Another fallacious argument that I am sure we will
hear today is that the MTCR is irrelevant and is only an
arms-export regime. The MTCR is itself an important
part of international efforts against proliferation. Its
category I describes a platform of first-generation
nuclear weapons commonly defined as capable of
delivering a payload of at least 500 kilogrammes to
a range of at least 300 kilometres. So it matters that
Iran test-fired a ballistic missile with a capability that
falls under MTCR's category I. Those missiles are not
harmless tools of self-defence. They are a source of
concern and they are included in resolution 2231 (2015)
because if Iran were to develop a nuclear weapon, those
missiles would be its delivery vehicle. They therefore
threaten not only the region but Europe, and potentially
others beyond. Testing them is provocative and the
Council should respond. We therefore demand that Iran
cease the activity that defies resolution 2231 (2015)
and that it and all Member States fully comply with
the resolutions prohibiting the proliferation of missile
technology to and from Iran - and by the way, there is
no doubt that those are indeed legally binding.

On our second objective, we note with deep regret,
and also concern, that Iran continues to play a negative
role throughout the region in support of non- State actors
that undermine the stability of its neighbours. In Syria,
Iran has been the key supporter of Bashar Al-Assad's
murderous seven-year campaign. Militias funded and
controlled by Iran have been integral to Al-Assad's
military campaign to retake opposition-held territory,
committing gross abuses ofhuman rights in the process.
Iran has proactively shipped weapon systems into
Syria, inflaming tensions with its neighbours as well as
violating the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). For
example, in just the past week, Israel has had to take
action to prevent Iranian-backed Hizbullah militants
from tunnelling under its borders. Those Hizbullah
activities are a clear violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and are further evidence of Iran's destabilizing
activity. The United Kingdom condemns the existence
of those tunnels, which threaten the security of Israel
and Lebanon. The violation of Israeli sovereignty is
deeply worrying, and moreover it literally takes Iran's
destabilizing activity to new depths.

In Yemen, we are watching the ongoing talks in
Stockholm carefully and we welcome the attendance of
the Houthi delegation. I accept the fact that it is important
to note that Iran has expressed its strong support for the
talks in Sweden, but the situation in Yemen remains
of serious concern and the Secretary-General's report
today includes information about ballistic missiles
fired at Saudi Arabia by the Houthis as well as anti-tank
and surface-to-air missiles recovered in Yemen. Those
weapons had characteristics and components consistent
with those known to be manufactured in Iran.

In the course of my work I have recently been to
Tehran to discuss many of those issues with the Iranian
leadership. I have made it clear every time that Iran's
habit of testing weapons that threaten its neighbours,
and defying the Council by exporting weapons and
militias around the regions, makes it very difficult to
see how Iran can play a constructive role in its region
and means that its complaints when the Council puts
such behaviour on its agenda have no legitimacy.

I have long said that Iran has legitimate security
interests in the region. We recognize that, but the way
Iran goes about pursuing those interests is leading to
increasing destabilization and is simply not legitimate
in the modern world. Iran has a different approach
available to it, one that concentrates on reintegration
into the global economic community and into diplomatic
engagement. We support Iran in its quest to benefit
from economic development and we want it to fulfil
its undoubted potential as a vibrant economy and an
important Power. But those are not unconditional goals.
Iran can never achieve them without a vital change in
its approach to the issues that I have mentioned. It must
take steps to address the Council's concerns seriously
and recognize that its expeditionary and expansionist
security doctrine will only provoke more challenge
and lead to greater instability within the region. That
is why, together with its European partners, the United
Kingdom continues to participate in the JCPOA. We
will continue to work with everyone to convince Iran
to take a radically different approach to the region and
help secure a more prosperous future for itself.

