Ms. Niamke (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
Welcome to New York, Mr. President.

My delegation commends Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his detailed briefing on the latest
developments in the situation in the region, including
the Palestinian question.

cote d'Ivoire remains concerned about the
ongoing stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. The hope created by the Oslo Accords has
been eroded, giving way to radical rhetoric and its
corollary of episodic violence that contributes only to
the deterioration of the situation in Gaza and the West
Bank. The lack of a viable framework for dialogue
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides within which
they could resolve their differences leads to further
mistrust, which fuels outbreaks of violence. In the light
of that impasse, my country encourages the parties
concerned to listen carefully to the calls for dialogue
launched by the international community.

C6te d'Ivoire remains convinced that just and
lasting peace is not possible without a negotiated
political solution and compromises on the most complex
issues. To that end, it is important that both sides refrain
from any actions that could lead to a resurgence of
deadly clashes, which would ruin hopes for peace and
undoubtedly plunge the region into a spiral of conflicts
with disastrous consequences.

cote d'Ivoire has faith in the virtues of dialogue
and urges the international community to intensify its
mediation efforts in order to bring both parties back
to the negotiating table for further peace talks without
preconditions and under the auspices of the United
Nations. This is the opportunity for my country to
reaffirm its commitment to the security of the State of
Israel and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and, consequently, our support for
a solution involving two States, coexisting peacefully
within the framework of the 1967 borders.

The humanitarian situation in Gaza continues to
deteriorate, while the ongoing opposition between
Fatah and Hamas further complicates the development
of appropriate responses to the many difficulties faced
by the Palestinian people. The estimated unemployment
rate of 53 per cent, the drastic decline in the supply of
decent housing, school and hospital infrastructure and
the continued decrease in basic social services, such as
drinking water and electricity, are all vulnerabilities
that deserve the attention of development partners and
humanitarian agencies.

Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its call for a convergence of
views among Council members and encourages them
to work to mobilize the necessary assistance to meet
the essential needs of those affected. My delegation
also urges international partners, as providers of
humanitarian assistance, to continue their support
for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East, whose crucial role
in alleviating the suffering of the Palestinian people is
well established.

My delegation commends Mr. Mladenov on his
resolute commitment, which clearly illustrates the
mediation efforts of the United Nations in the quest
for a negotiated political solution to the current crisis
between Israelis and Palestinians. Cote d'Ivoire
would like to reiterate its support and encourage
him to continue his good offices with the parties to
the conflict. The Council also has an urgent duty to
overcome differences and work towards peace, security
and stability in the Middle East.

