Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On
13 November, Daesh committed an act of war against
France. In launching its deadly attacks in Paris and
Saint-Denis, Daesh sought to strike more than a
capital - it sought to strike at what defines our nation.
The toll was particularly heavy, as we all know - 130
people were killed, more than 600 were injured, and
193 are still hospitalized, many between life and death.

But that day Daesh did not attack only France and
the French. It sought to strike far more. It assailed the
entire world in the cosmopolitan city of Paris. Among
the dead, 24 nationalities have been identified to date.
And I recall that before Paris, Daesh attacked Lebanon,
Iraq, Turkey, Tunisia, Russia and many other countries.
It wanted to undermine the ideal of our freedom and our
shared humanity - an ideal that is the United Nations.

President Hollande spoke Monday before the
French Parliament, meeting in a joint session, to mark
the absolute determination of France to fight Daesh
with all means necessary. And in its relentless fight
against the terrorism practiced by Daesh, France wants
to be true to its values. As a founding Member of the
United Nations, France is deeply committed to the
raison d'etre of our Organization. The United Nations
represents the primacy of law and collective security. It
is therefore to the Security Council that the President
of the Republic has naturally turned to organize and
mobilize our international action.

In adopting resolution 2249 (2015), the members of
the Security Council have acted unanimously to live
up to their responsibilities. The resolution we have
just adopted recognizes the exceptional nature of the
threat posed by Daesh. It calls on all Member States to
take all necessary measures to eradicate the sanctuary
that Daesh has created in Syria and Iraq, and to thwart
its radical ideology. The resolution frames our action
within the framework of international law and in
respect for the Charter of the United Nations, which is
our common good i indeed, I would say our common
treasure. It also offers the guarantee of an effective
fight against transnational terrorism.

As I said, the events 0f13 November were an armed
aggression against France. Our military action, of
which we informed the Security Council from the outset
and which was justified as legitimate collective self-
defence, can now also be characterized as individual
self-defence, in accordance with Article 51 of the
Charter of the United Nations. On the basis of this
historical resolution ofthe Security Council, France will
pursue and strengthen its efforts to mobilize the entire
international community to defeat our common enemy.
France will play its full part in this effort. Militarily, the
President of the Republic announced an intensification
of air strikes against strategic Daesh targets in Syria.
This intensification is under way. In the coming days,
France will increase its strike capability threefold with
the arrival of the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaalle.
Politically, the fight against Daesh will be effective
only if it is based on a political transition that will end
the Syrian conflict, which has served and continues to
serve as a nursery of terrorism.

The resolution creates the conditions for an
international mobilization. In that context, we appeal
to Europe. My country has sought and obtained this
week from the European Union the first activation
in its history of the mutual solidarity clause, because
France has paid a heavy price in its struggle against
the terrorism of Daesh in Syria and Iraq and that of
Al-Qaeda in the Sahel. We expect Europe to actively
engage with us on behalf of our shared security and that
of the neighboring countries of Syria.

We also call on all members ofthe Security Council
and beyond. It is in that spirit that the President of the
Republic will travel next week to Washington, DC,
and Moscow. We have contacted our many partners
and will continue to do so. Indeed, we are determined
to achieve the broadest possible mobilization. Against
Daesh, we have our common humanity. We, the peoples
of the United Nations, have a duty to defend it.

