Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to extend my greetings and thanks
to Mr. Haile Menkerios and President Benjamin Mkapa
for their briefings on the voting in the referendum in
Southern Sudan. They have done a praiseworthy job
and are both brilliant sons of Africa. We offer them our
appreciation and gratitude.

We listened to their affirmations that the voting
process was free, fair and transparent, highlighting the
extensive cooperation between the two parties to the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and reflecting the
wisdom and commitment of the Sudanese leadership to
its undertakings, which were apparent during voter
registration and the voting process itself. We in the
Sudan and Africa as a whole can be proud of the fact
that we established a model of civility that can be used
as a guide to others.

As regards the outcome of the referendum, I
should like to emphasize the spirit and letter of the
statement made by President of the Republic Omer
Hassan Al-Bashir on his visit to Juba, the capital of
Southern Sudan. He stressed his full commitment to
respecting the outcome of the referendum and went
even further in expressing his willingness to offer all
possible assistance to Southern Sudan in building its
own State in case of secession. I reiterate here in this
Chamber the full commitment of the Government of
the Sudan to respecting the results of the referendum.

We look forward to enjoying the international
community's assistance to both parts of the Sudan if
secession should take place. The most important
contribution the international community can make to
Southern and Northern Sudan alike is to cancel the
debts burdening the country and constraining its
economic rebirth. In that way, the United Nations can
do us a true favour and make a positive, praiseworthy
gesture that will promote peacebuilding in the Sudan.

As regards the voting and its outcome, I wish
now to share some of my thoughts about Abyei. Many
speakers have referred to the clashes that took place in
Abyei at the time of the voting, but it is important for
me to make clear that these clashes were between
members of the Misseriya and Ngok Dinka tribes; they
were not between the armed forces of the Sudan and
members of the Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA). That, too, is a demonstration of the wisdom of
both parties in respecting their agreements.

There is, however, a lesson to be learned here,
and I hope for the Council's undivided attention in
describing it. We have often warned of the dangers of
clashes between members of the two tribes, and noted
that, unless an acceptable, positive and practical
solution that accommodates the facts on the ground in
Abyei can be found, there will be no peace. If there
should be war, it will be started by members of the two
tribes, and not by the SPLA or the Government of the
North. I therefore commend the calls on both
communities, made in every statement I have heard
today, to avoid taking any unilateral decision
concerning the special situation in Abyei. In that
regard, I appeal to the Council to assist the two parties
to the Agreement in finding an acceptable solution so
as to ensure the sustainability of peace in both the
South and the North.

I should also like to share some of my thoughts
about Darfur. Before I do, however, I wish to commend
and offer my deep gratitude for the efforts of the
United Nations, through its mission in Darfur, led by
Mr. Alain Le Roy, and of the Secretary-General to
promote the peace process and to find a sustainable
solution to the situation in Darfur.

I also wish to say frankly that we in the Sudan
often hear expressions of concern and denunciation
here in the Security Council regarding events in
Darfur, but see little action to help the Sudan to find a
lasting solution to the conflict there. We look forward
to such action. The Council has the ability to persuade
the insurgent movements to come to the negotiating
table. The Government of the Sudan has affirmed its
resolve, interest in and commitment to a stable and
sustainable settlement in Darfur through negotiations.
Why does the international community delay in
prevailing upon those who are reluctant to come to the
negotiating table, thereby squandering billions of
sorely needed dollars that the United Nations could
direct elsewhere? Instead, approximately $3 billion are
spent every year on the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. Greater political effort and
more pressure are needed to encourage the insurgent
movements to come to the negotiating table under
United Nations and African Union auspices. The
parties cannot be forced to accept a solution that is not
satisfactory to them. We are willing to engage in a
process of give and take until an acceptable solution
can be arrived at. Merely addressing the symptoms of
the conflict in Darfur would be in vain. I know that the
Council is sincere in its desire to achieve peace and
security throughout the world, and I appeal to it to help
us to address the root causes of the conflict.
20

In this regard, I would like to share with the
Council the fact that the Government, in its
commitment to addressing the problem, has also
adopted a comprehensive strategy for settling the
conflict in Darfur. The strategy will be implemented
simultaneously with the Doha negotiation forum.

Some may ask what the strategy is, so I will
review some of its features. It seeks to include all
parties in Darfur in the peace process, especially in the
light of the general elections held there, as a result of
which provincial parliaments have been constituted in
Darfur's three states. It has thus become reasonable
and conceivable for the democratically elected
parliamentarians to participate in the peace process,
particularly since the insurgent factions are numerous
and their members do not represent all the people of
Darfur. We do not want to rule them out, however, and
we do not believe in a policy of rooting them out. By
the same token, however, we want the peace process to
include all those who were elected democratically, as
well as members of armed movements, members of
civil society and tribal leaders. The rationale for that is
to ensure sustainable peace in Darfur. Peace in the
Sudan is integral to peace in the region and in Africa in
general.

In conclusion, I would like to inform the Council
that we in the Sudan wish to proceed with constructive
relations with the United Nations in general and the
Security Council in particular, as one of its most
important organs. We extend our hand to the Council in
cooperation, and ask to be judged by our actions. We
do not wish to remain a captive of the past.

