Mr. Adom (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): This
briefing gives me the opportunity to speak on behalf
of the African members of the Council - Equatorial
Guinea, South Africa and Cote d'Ivoire - to express
our views on the topic of the Group of Five for the Sahel
(G-5 Sahel) and issues related to peace and security in
the Sahel region and West Africa.

Before I do so, I would like to welcome His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Barry, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Burkina Faso, whose country holds the
presidency of the G-5 Sahel, and to thank him for his
illuminating briefing.

On behalf of the three African members of the

Council, I would also like to thank Ms. Bintou Keita,

Assistant Secretary-General for Africa; Mr. Koen

Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa ofthe European
External Action Service; Ambassador Fatima Kyari
Mohammed, Permanent Observer of the African Union
to the United Nations; and Ms. Assitan Diallo, President
of the Association of African Women for Research and
Development, for their detailed briefings,

The three African Council members are seriously
concerned about the continuing deterioration of the
security situation in the Sahel. Indeed, the persistent
destabilizing acts perpetrated by terrorist groups in Mali
and Burkina Faso are compounded by the exacerbation
of intercommunal violence and the undeniable threats
it poses to coastal West African States. Sad and
tragic illustrations of that can be seen in the attacks
perpetrated on 30 September and 1 October in central
Mali, as well as those carried out against the Burkinabe
army in the Koutougou incident on 19 August, which
resulted in several dozen dead or disappeared. The
three African members of the Council condemn those
heinous attacks in the strongest terms and pay tribute
to all who have died and express their sympathy and
unflagging support for the Governments and brotherly
peoples of Mali and Burkina Faso.

Faced with ever-changing security threats, these
two countries devote about 25 per cent of their budget
on military expenditures, despite the difficult economic
situation. Mali and Burkina Faso now serve as the
ultimate dam which, in the event of a breach, would
allow the terrorist and jihadist outpouring, better armed
and endowed with resources derived from drug and
human trafficking, to engulf the entire West African
subregion. That is evidenced by the kidnapping, in May,
of two tourists on the border between Mali and Benin.

Despite this bleak picture, the African countries
elected to the Council remain optimistic, noting the
encouraging progress made in the operationalization
of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, with the support of the
G-5 trust fund. Efforts to further support the Force are
further testimony to the resolve of member States to
address the challenges they face. The situation in the
Sahel fully justifies the presence of the Joint Force in
the fight against terrorism, transnational organized
crime and trafficking in human beings, as well as in
its contribution to the establishment of a regional
environment conducive to peace and development.

In that regard, it is imperative that the support of
the international community and the Security Council
be harmonized with the efforts and determination of
member States, which has been amply demonstrated.
We stress the importance of international support
in reducing the current financial deficits that are
limiting the capacities of the G-5 Sahel member States.
Those deficits hinder the full operationalization of
the Joint Force and hamper their ability to assume
their sovereign responsibilities to ensure basic social
services. That is why, while we fully appreciate the
financial support provided to date by international
partners, the three African Council members urge them
to adapt their financial contributions to the scale of the
current challenges.

The three African Council member States are also
concerned about the spread of this instability to other
West African countries. We therefore welcome the
decision taken by the Heads of State and Government of
the Economic Community of West African States at their
recent extraordinary summit, held in Ouagadougou on
14 September, to mobilize $1 billion to fight terrorism
in the subregion.

The three African members of the Council fully
support the unique partnership between the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force, aimed at restoring peace and stability in Mali
and the wider Sahel region. As recognized by the
Council, this partnership offers a model for constructive
cooperation between a United Nations peacekeeping
operation and an African peace operation.

Despite the ongoing assistance MINUSMA
provides the Joint Force, we reiterate our call for
predictable and sustained funding to allow the Joint
Force to effectively carry out its mandate. The United
Nations must pay close attention to that requirement at
a time when terrorist groups have substantial financial
and material resources.

While we deplore the continuing violence in a region
that is so dear to us, we also commend local authorities
on their readiness to further promote frameworks for
dialogue within affected communities in order to create
the conditions for a peaceful resolution of their disputes
and to bolster mutual trust, unity and social cohesion.

The increase in the number of internally displaced

persons, the worrisome deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and obstacles to the delivery of humanitarian
assistance are all major sources of concern that must be
addressed. We note with satisfaction the efforts made
by the G-5 Sahel to implement the human rights and
international humanitarian law compliance framework,
as international support for the Joint Force remains
dependent on respect for international humanitarian
law and human rights. That is why we believe that the
measures taken to adequately train troops will improve
civilian security and mitigate the risk of human
rights violations.

In conclusion, the African members of the Council
reiterate their urgent appeal to all development partners
to follow in the footsteps of the African Development
Bank and to support its Desert to Power initiative,
endorsed by the G-5 Sahel.

