Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
should like at the outset to thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting of the Security Council on the
situation in Kosovo. I should like also to bid welcome
to the Deputy Prime Minister of Serbia, Mr. Covic, and
to thank him for the statement he made earlier.

The shooting incident of 13 August that took
place in the Pec region, which resulted in the death of
two young Serbs and the hospitalization of several
others, who were seriously wounded, was a horrendous
and inadmissible act which is of great concern to my
delegation. We convey sincere condolences to the
bereaved families.

Our condemnation of this deadly incident is all
the more resolute given that it comes shortly after the
heinous murder on 3 August of Commander Satish
Menon of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) police, who was killed in
cold blood while carrying out his duties in the
Mitrovica area, in the north of Kosovo. We recall also
the murder on 4 June of three people in the city of
Obilic and the many acts of vandalism carried out on
ethnic grounds. Cameroon wishes to reiterate its strong
condemnation of these acts, which run counter to the
process of normalization of the situation in Kosovo and
to the creation of the structures of a new Kosovar
society endowed with functioning democratic
institutions, in a secure and prosperous framework of
tolerance in which people accept each other's
differences and respect one another.

On 3 July, my delegation said, in this very
Chamber, that it was pleased at the important progress
made in Kosovo in the political and institutional areas.
Unfortunately, however, the same cannot be said of
security-related issues. We fear that, if we are not
careful, such unacceptable acts could form part of a
strategy aimed at undermining the dialogue that the
international community has tirelessly been advocating
for the Kosovo parties. This would make it more
difficult, if not impossible, to restore confidence in all
its aspects.

The people there are more than ever in need of
the presence of, and an additional impetus from, the
international community, in order to help them to keep
alive the hope, and make a reality, of a peaceful
society- a unified society living in harmony with
itself and with its environment.

The process of the return of displaced persons
and of refugees - for which an appeal was launched
on 2 July, to the great satisfaction of the international
community - could be the principal victim of these
murders, which exacerbate fear, hatred, injustice and
violence. I therefore welcome the appeal made by the
Deputy Prime Minister for Serbs to remain in Kosovo.

I should like to say here also that my country is
committed to the principle of standards before status.

A few days ago, a delegation from my country
visited Kosovo and took note of the excellent work
being done there by the United Nations and by the
international community as a whole. We have read the
latest report of the Secretary-General on Kosovo, and
we have also noted the fragility of the achievements
registered in the context of the serious problems
stemming from questions of identity, which pose a
major obstacle to the building of a truly multi-ethnic
society.

In this context, my delegation fully agrees with
what Mr. Holkeri, the new Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, said on 13 August:

"We cannot allow a few extremists, of
whatever ethnicity, to undermine the secure and
hopeful future of Kosovo that so many have
worked to build here. Such incidents will only
strengthen our determination to establish the rule
of law for the sake of all people in Kosovo."

More than 450,000 illegal arms of all calibres are
circulating today in Kosovo. This poses an ongoing
threat to peace and security in the province and to the
efforts of the international community, as is made clear
by these recent regrettable events. It is therefore with
great satisfaction that we welcomed the decision to
launch a weapons amnesty programme in Kosovo from 1
to 30 September, to enable the voluntary disarmament of
the people until the latter date, after which they will face
legal action. My delegation urgently appeals to all
sectors of Kosovo society massively to support that
programme, which has opened up a new window on the
highway to peace and reconciliation.

My delegation once again calls on political and
administrative leaders and civil society in the province
to avoid any action that could inflame emotions and
thus create new obstacles to the process of building a
multi-ethnic and multicultural civil society. They are
all responsible for the security of all the people of
Kosovo and thus have a role to play in combating that
type of incident and in combating impunity. Their firm
commitment is essential.

My delegation is convinced that direct dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade could defuse all kinds of
declared and potential tensions or at least prevent their
exacerbation. The rapprochement of the two capitals
should be encouraged and continued.

The current situation in Kosovo indicates that
much remains to be done if we wish to attain our goals.
But it is possible, as demonstrated by the success of the
civilian Kosovo Police Force, which is multi-ethnic and
incorporates gender mainstreaming. The Police Force
has the difficult task of enforcing the law in Kosovo and
combating extremism and all other forms of crime.
Initially, it is being given significant assistance from the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in

Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR). In
that context, we hope that UNMIK's efforts will
speedily result in the perpetrators of those recent crimes
being found and brought to justice.
Only the commitment of all Kosovans to a culture
of peace will restore peace in hearts and minds and
make it possible to build a truly multi-ethnic and
multicultural society founded on universally
recognized democratic values. That is the challenge
faced by Kosovans, and by the entire international
community as well. The international community long
ago decided to meet that challenge and is patiently and
tenaciously striving to do so. Now, it is up to the
people of Kosovo to prove that they are committed to
that path.

