Mr. Somavia (Chile) (interpretation from Spanish):
Chile has felt particularly concerned over the tragedy the
people of Burundi are experiencing. During recent months
we have repeatedly emphasized the need for the Council to
move towards more resolute action in order to save lives in
Burundi and to help all the parties find peace and
reconciliation. This feeling has intensified since the coup
d'etat of 25 July 1996, which put an end to the
constitutional order and overthrew the legitimate
Government of Burundi.

We are deeply troubled by the silent genocide that for
years has been developing in Burundi, and we want to help
put an end to it and stabilize the political situation through
Security Council action.

 

We are concerned that the international community
does not yet consider it timely to affirm that a genocide
of major proportions is taking place in Burundi and to act
accordingly. What can be considered genocide? Is it when
15,000 persons die, or 30,000, or 60,000 or 120,000?
How much longer must we wait? Over 150,000 persons
have already died in Burundi: in other words,
approximately 3 per cent of the total population of that
country. If we were to make a proportional calculation,
this would represent about 1.5 million persons in France
or in the United Kingdom, 7.5 million persons in the
United States or 450,000 persons in Chile. This is the
magnitude of what has already happened in Burundi, and
we do not yet consider it appropriate to call it genocide.

One of the most tragic signs of these killings is that
the military are killing primarily civilians of the opposite
side. Both the regular Army and the armed bands are
killing primarily civilians; they are not fighting each
other. Every weapon that reaches Burundi is intended
primarily to kill an unarmed civilian. This is why we
believe it is necessary to establish a truly effective arms
embargo, applicable to all the factions in Burundi. We see
this much more as a way of saving human lives than as
a political measure.

We are not passing moral judgement in referring to
the genocide and the killing of civilians in Burundi. In
this respect, no one - and I really wish to stress, no
one - can cast the first stone. Unfortunately, throughout
history, in all parts of the world, without exception, there
have been atrocities, barbarities, acts of genocide and
crimes against humanity. We are therefore not moved to
action by a moral judgement, but rather by a profound
humanitarian sensibility. We believe, in spite of all
historic precedents, that the atrocities of the past in
various regions cannot justify the atrocities of the present.

We are discussing this issue today in the Security
Council because the situation in Burundi affects
international peace and security. It is necessary to develop
progressively certain shared rules and standards that
represent the collective feeling of a universal conscience,
one that rejects and repudiates certain aberrant acts. It is
essential that violations of international law not continue
to go unpunished.

Problems such as the one that we are dealing with in
Burundi cannot, however, be resolved in the long run
only from a humanitarian perspective, although this does
make it possible for us better to understand such
situations. We also need capability, resolve and, above all,

 

political will. Unfortunately, this political conviction on the
need to act with determination on behalf of the people of
Burundi has not been fully present thus far in the Security
Council. We hope that this attitude will soon change.

In the light of the coup d 'etat in Burundi and of the
actions adopted by the African countries at Arusha on
31 July, the Security Council is faced with the need to act
decisively to turn events in the right direction. The
indecisiveness of the past year, as we see it, cannot go on.
It is obvious that this is a very complex and difficult
situation for which there are no obvious solutions.
Nevertheless, it is clear that inaction is becoming the worst
possible course of action.

Governments and international public opinion expect
the Security Council to take a clear position and to exercise
its authority under the Charter of the United Nations to help
alleviate the suffering of the people of Burundi, to put the
country back on the path of democracy and to contribute to
the stability of the Great Lakes region. The Security
Council must meet this challenge.

Towards that end, a great lesson in political
determination has been given us by the African leaders of
the Great Lakes region. They have displayed their capacity
for immediate action and a commitment to democracy
which contrasted strangely with the vacillations of those
who have rightly preached the benefits of democratic
systems.

The underlying foundations of Chile's position in this
matter are the following. First, we condemn the coup d 'e'tat
and all those who incite violence and genocide, regardless
of the source: factions, groups or parties. The violence in
Burundi is not going to resolve that country's political
problems.

We give our fullest support to the African regional
leaders, to the Organization of African Unity and especially
to former President Julius Nyerere and his commendable
efforts to reach a peaceful political settlement in Burundi.
We support in particular the Arusha decisions of 31 July.

We consider it urgent that political negotiations
without conditions begin and that all political parties and
factions, including civil society, participate in the quest for
a comprehensive and sustainable political agreement.

It is also necessary that the parties - beginning with
the military regime in Bujumbura - begin to display their
good faith. This can be accomplished through a unilateral

 

cessation of hostilities and through guarantees for the
protection of international humanitarian personnel and the
officials of the former constitutional Government. We
must help put an end to the spiral of violence and
impunity in Burundi.
Although we are aware of the serious consequences
that certain sanctions adopted in the region may have on
the population of Burundi, we feel that it is essential to
establish humanitarian corridors that ensure free access to
humanitarian assistance for the entire population of
Burundi, and that the Secretary-General report to us on
the humanitarian implications of the sanctions.

The Security Council must call for an immediate
initiation of negotiations whose objective would be a
comprehensive political agreement. Once that is done, the
next step is to call for effective international cooperation
for Burundi.

From the reports of the Secretary-General and from
what we have been told by Burundians themselves, that
African country has many needs to meet, and the
international community must seek a way to cooperate
towards that end in order to support a political agreement.
Together with the economic problems, there are important
structural reforms pending, such as those in the judicial,
educational and public institutions.

Furthermore, if in due course all the parties in
Burundi, following political agreement, so agree and so
request, it might be possible to approve a conventional
peace-keeping operation that would contribute to
consolidating a cessation of hostilities, help maintain
stability during the negotiation process and, later, provide
guarantees to all parties during the implementation of a
comprehensive political agreement.

The message that must come out of the Security
Council is that there are many ways through which the
international community can support the spirit of
cooperation and understanding between the parties in
Burundi. The Security Council wants there to be
agreement between the parties in Burundi. Once such
agreement exists, we will be willing, and the international
community must be willing, to lend support in all
areas - economic, political, judicial and others - in
order that Burundi may once again be able to stand on its
own two feet and face its future with dignity.

If the parties do not begin negotiations within 60
days, which is a reasonable period of time, then the

 

Security Council must be prepared to consider measures,
under the United Nations Charter, aimed at those leaders
who continue to promote violence and who obstruct peace
agreements. It must be understood, once and for all, that
when the agreements are not implemented, those who are
mainly responsible are the leaders who are not leading their
peoples towards the necessary agreements.

I want to conclude by saying that the military coup
d 'etat introduces a new situation, and there are three
reasons why we must act decisively, now.

The first is that although it was impossible to put it
into practice, there was before the coup d 'etat a
governmental understanding that was derailed by the
military coup. In addition to that, former President Nyerere
was making mediation efforts, which obviously suffered
setbacks with this serious event.

Secondly, the regional community in Africa has
reacted, as we know. Chile favours regional solutions and
listens principally to what regional leaders think on African
topics. Furthermore, it is a historical fact that there has
again been a strong condemnation of a military coup in
Africa by African leaders themselves, and this is something
that cannot be overlooked. We cannot and must not send a
signal that is at odds with the line of action being imposed
in Africa.

Thirdly, this is an opportune moment. The coup d 'e'tat
in Burundi is a negative milestone, but it cannot be
disregarded; it is a fact. This is the time for the
international community - through the Security Council in
this case, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) at the
regional level, and all Governments concerned that are
taking steps to help Burundi make real progress - to act
with resolve and with the same objectives. I believe that the
main task that lies ahead for all of us is to see to it that the
international community speaks in unison and that it
promote solutions tending in the same direction, so that
Burundi will receive a single message from outside with
regard to the positive aspects and the risks involved if a
positive agreement is not achieved.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize that we give our
most whole-hearted support to former President Nyerere for
the tasks that lie ahead. He is the person who has the
political weight, the moral stature and the regional and
international respectability needed to achieve a
comprehensive political settlement in Burundi. Whatever
the Security Council does must be in support of his
endeavours.

 

We also want to thank the European Union for its
latest statements of support for the African initiatives, and
in particular we thank Mr. Aldo Ajello for his tireless
efforts for peace in Burundi.
Our appreciation also goes to Mr. Howard Wolpe,
who, on behalf of the United States, is trying to
contribute to a meeting in the country at an early date.
We also thank the Government of Belgium for its
traditional presence in the region.

We give our support as well to the Secretary-General
and to Mr. Faguy for their efforts. There are many people
of good will and many countries trying to contribute on
the ground to the achievement of a return to democratic
processes.

In Burundi there are many who are responsible: the
leaders of the various parties and factions, military
officials, those who have access to lesser or greater shares
of power. Among them, Mr. Buyoya and those who
control the military regime have a special responsibility,
stemming from the fact that they decided to carry out the
coup d 'etat on 25 July. Having decided to take that
measure, they have the primary responsibility to see to it
that the country progresses towards peace.

All of them must bear one thing in mind: whatever
action the Security Council takes in representation of the
international community - action that we hope will be
reflected in the nearest possible future - has as its sole
objective to create an opportunity for the children, the
parents and the families of Burundi to grow, live and,
above all, to coexist, in a climate of peace, security and
development. Those children, and history, will pass
judgement on the parents who held political or military
responsibility in the Burundi of today. At present the
international community is holding a hand out to Burundi,
offering cooperation and understanding if Burundians
reach agreement; but at the same time it is telling them
that if they do not do so, it will not leave Burundi all
alone.

