Mr. Laing (Belize): I wish to thank the members
of the Security Council for granting our request to
participate in the discussion on the important item before
the Council tonight. In this regard, I have the honour to
address the Council on behalf of the 12 States of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM) which are Members
of the United Nations: Antigua and Barbuda, the
Commonwealth of the Bahamas, Barbados, the
Commonwealth of Dominica, Grenada, the Republic of
Guyana, Jamaica, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the Republic of
Trinidad and Tobago, and my own country, Belize, and
also on behalf of the Republic of Suriname.

As the Council is aware, the Governments and the
peoples of the CARICOM. States have been active parties
in the efforts to create a just and democratic order in
Haiti. With deep fraternal concern, our Governments
participated actively in the efforts for international
monitoring of the democratically elected Government of
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, and we repudiated the
actions that removed him from power. We were therefore
proud to be able to contribute, to the extent that our
limited security capabilities permitted, in the formation of
the Multinational Force (MNF) authorized under
paragraph 4 of Security Council resolution 940 (1994).

 

The deployment of the Multinational Force in Haiti, on
19 September 1994, represented the first phase in the
international community's delicate and difficult undertaking
to restore to office the democratically elected Government
of President Aristide and to assist that Government in the
economic, social and institutional reconstruction of its
devastated country.

The Governments of the CARICOM. States and the
Republic of Suriname were greatly encouraged by the fact
that the deployment of Multinational Force into Haiti took
place under peaceful circumstances. We continue to be
encouraged by the effective manner in which it has carried
out its important mandate in the four months that it has
been on the ground in Haiti. Our Governments have
concurred with the assessment of the Commander of the
Multinational Force that a secure and stable environment
now exists in Haiti, and we have been pleased to join other
participants in the MNF in recommending that the Security
Council determine that it is appropriate for the United
Nations Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to begin assuming its
full range of functions.

We therefore fully support the decision concerning this
matter contained in the draft resolution before the Security
Council. Many of our Governments will also participate in
the next phase, under the aegis of UNMIH, in testimony of
our deep commitment to the process of creating the
conditions necessary to ensure that the fledgling Haitian
democracy is maintained and strengthened.

The current situation in Haiti gives us much cause for
hope. At the same time, however, there is no room for
complacency. In his report to the Council, the Secretary-
General has stressed that the relative security currently
enjoyed by the Haitian people remains fragile and that the
political and social environment now prevailing contains
many factors that could lead to future instability. It is vital
that the present security situation in Haiti should be
sustainable after the departure of the Multinational Force
and the full deployment of UNMIH. For this reason,
CARICOM. Governments and Suriname feel compelled to
stress the need for effective deterrence to continue after the
hand-over to UNMIH and to respond to any residual
subversive threats to the Government of Haiti. A capability
for swift, coordinated and overwhelming action anywhere
in the country is therefore a necessity. In this regard, we
note the indications given in the Secretary-General's report
that the military component of UNMIH will include a
quick-reaction force. We trust that it will be of a strength
and capacity adequate to satisfy this vital security need.

Many crucial steps remain to be taken to achieve the
political, economic, social and institutional reconstruction
of Haiti and to provide for the Haitian people a peaceful
and stable future based on democracy, respect for human
rights and the rule of law and on economic and social
justice. CARICOM. member States and Suriname are
committed to playing a constructive role, to the extent of
their means, in this critical part of the process.

