Mr. Al-Hussein (spoke in Arabic): I am delighted
to return to the Security Council in my new role as the
new High Commissioner for Human Rights and I thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to brief the
Council on the situation in Iraq.
It is forbidden in Islam to oversimplify sharia
matters and ignore established Islamic sciences. It is
forbidden in Islam to ignore the reality of contemporary
times when deriving legal rulings. It is forbidden in
Islam to kill the innocent. It is forbidden in Islam to
kill emissaries, ambassadors and diplomats; hence
it is forbidden to kill journalists and aid workers. It
is forbidden in Islam to harm or mistreat in any way
Christians or any "people of the scripture". It is obligatory
to consider the Yazidis as people of the scripture. The
re-introduction of slavery is forbidden in Islam; it was
abolished by universal consensus. It is forbidden in
Islam to force people to convert. It is forbidden in Islam
to deny women their rights. It is forbidden in Islam to
deny children their rights. It is forbidden in Islam to
torture people. It is forbidden in Islam to disfigure the
dead. And it is forbidden in Islam to declare a caliphate
without consensus from all Muslims. Those are among
the points in a letter authored by 126 Muslim scholars
drawn from all parts of the world that they addressed to
Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi two months ago. I will return to
the letter shortly.

(spoke in English)

So monstrous are the crimes being committed by
the takfiris in Iraq - not just in violation of sharia
but of customary law, to which sharia is a significant
contributor - the world is staggered by them. On the
face of the broad evidence now existing, particularly in
respect of the Yazidis, and subject to the determination
by a competent court of law, it is possible that 3 out of the
5 offenses falling under the crime of genocide, as listed
in the Genocide Convention and the Rome Statute, have
been perpetrated by the individuals within the takfiri
leadership of what is also known as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL), which is also known as the
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and as Daesh. Out
ofthe 11 offenses defined as crimes against humanity in
the Rome Statute, they are likely guilty of involvement
in up to nine of the offenses. As for war crimes, their
commission is also virtually undeniable on any number
of offenses where the relevant context is applicable.
The authors of those crimes are people whose actions
are nothing but disgusting, and whose consciences have
demonstrably been annihilated.

This takfiri group now controls a large swathe
of Iraqi territory, and seems bent on subjecting every
woman, man and child in it to its razor-thin, almost
blank, world-view. The scale and violence of ISIL's
brutality towards civilians shreds every principle
relevant to human rights. And yet their fanaticism
has flourished in part because of the damage wrought
by years of conflict in Iraq, rhe early ruthless
attacks on the Shia population by that other takfiri
group - Al-Qaida - beginning in 2003, the equally
brutal counter-attacks by the Shia militia against
parts of the Sunni population. the subsequent clear
marginalization and persecution of large segments
of the Sunni population, targeted killings and and
cold-blooded attacks on innocent passers-by, many
perpetrated by Shia militias acting with impunity.

The people of Iraq have also endured discrimination,
corruption, rampant impunity, a lack of inclusive
participatory processes and failure to promote and
protect their economic, social, cultural, civil and
political rights. Their resulting widespread poverty and
unequal access to basic services constitute silent human
rights violations. Moreover, respect for the standards
of due process and fair trials and for the international
prohibition of torture has been, and continues to be,
problematic.

These must be considered root causes ofthe current
crisis. However, the new Iraqi Government is starting to
break with this pattern and is becoming more inclusive
in its policies. This is to be welcomed.

As I just noted, severe and apparently systematic
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights laws have been perpetrated by ISIL and associated
armed groups in northern Iraq. Victims have reported
wanton killings and summary public executions;
abductions, rape and enslavement of women and young
girls, with reports of girls and women being openly
sold at slave markets; brutal violence against children,
and the forced recruitment of children as young as 12;
denial of all fundamental freedoms; and the deliberate
persecution of ethnic and religious groups including
Turkmen, Shabak, Christians, Yazidis, Sabea-
Mandeans, Kaka'e, Faili Kurds, Arab Shia and other
Sunnis.

Women and girls have suffered extremely grievous
violations of their rights. Many who have escaped
captivity report physical and sexual assault, sexual
slavery, trafficking and forced marriage. They are
literally sold in open markets. During a mission to Iraq
in October, my team led by Assistant Secretary General
Ivan Simonovie met girls as young as 13 who had been
kidnapped and raped before managing to escape. They
said many others, of the same age, remained captive.

Children have been viciously tortured by ISIL, and
many others have been forced to watch and participate
in barbaric executions and torture. Boys as young as
12 have been recruited and forced to form front lines
during combat to shield older ISIL soldiers.

It seems ISIL-controlled areas have been largely
emptied of ethnic and religious minorities, whose
members have fled, been captured or killed. Currently,
at least 1,500 captive members of persecuted ethnic
and religious groups are in ISIL hands, and their fate
is of extreme concern. The perpetrators of these crimes
must be brought to justice.

Iraqi Security Forces and affiliated armed groups
have also violated human rights, according to reports
received by my Office and the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The Office ofthe
United Nations High Commisioner for Human Rights
and UNAMI continue to receive reports of violent
attacks, harassment and the illegal arrest ofjoumalists.
The anti-terrorism law of 2005 is another continuing
concern, in that it fails to respect binding international
commitments regarding the administration of justice
and the prohibition of torture. My Office is preparing a
report on that issue.

The conduct of particular military operations,
including air strikes and shelling, may have also
violated the principles of distinction and proportionality
under international humanitarian law, and should be
investigated.

In the past, armed groups affiliated with the
Government have killed, abducted and threatened
civilians, particularly Shia armed groups such as Asaib
Ahl Al-Haq. These intolerable practices must not be
allowed to continue, and the Government should end
the impunity under which these groups operate.

Accountability for violations is above all the
responsibility of the State. But, as I have said, the
crimes committed in Iraq are of such scale and gravity
that in all likelihood they qualify as international
crimes, subject to the jurisdiction of the International
Criminal Court (ICC). I call upon the Government to
accede to the Rome Statute and, at the very least, to
accept the ICC's jurisdiction over the current situation
under article 12 (3). International crimes such as war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide could
also be included in the Iraqi criminal code.
Following a lengthy delay of two months in
obtaining an urgent allocation of resources from the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions, my Office is now also in a position to
dispatch a fact-finding mission to Iraq, as mandated by
the Human Rights Council on 1 September.

National and international strategies to counter ISIL
have so far concentrated on a security approach. The
Council has adopted an important resolution aimed at
stunting inflows of ISIL recruits from around the world.
There has also been a significant military effort. But
little attention has been paid to the underlying struggle
for minds. It is also disturbing how few to non-existent
have been public demonstrations of anger in the Arab
and Muslims worlds over the crimes being perpetrated
in Iraq, notwithstanding their clear condemnation by
many Arab and Islamic Governments.

The takfiri movement is gripped and driven by a
distinct ideology, and it will destroy everything that
is contrary to what it believes should exist. For the
takfiris there is only one acceptable manner in which
to live. Alternative viewpoints - indeed, any form
of individual thought outside their closed, unyielding
logic - are rejected by them. Those humans who
dissent must be murdered, their memory, their culture
and every shred of their existence destroyed. According
to their thinking, every single person in this Chamber
is eligible for death.

The leaders of the organization known as ISIL of
course want to establish an ideal, a caliphate. In doing
so, they exploit a general yearning shared by many
non-takfiri Muslims the world over for a caliphate, for
an ideal, though for everyone else the ideal is not built
on the back of abominable crimes, as the takfiris would
have it - or any crimes, for that matter. And yet by
cleverly blending fantasy with claims of victimization,
the takfiris attract adherents. That method, in which
the end justifies the means, in which an ideal is built
in a group's own mind and then reached for, come what
may i including through lies and the commission of
atrocities - is, of course, not new. As Isaiah Berlin
wrote in his famous credo 20 years ago, reprinted in
The New York Review ofBooks only three weeks ago,

"the search for a single, overarching ideal because it
is the one and only true one for humanity invariably
leads to coercion. And then to destruction,
blood - eggs are broken, but the omelette is not
in sight, there is only an infinite number of eggs,
human lives, ready for the breaking. And in the end
the passionate idealists forget the omelette, and just
go on breaking eggs."

I therefore question whether it is possible to bomb
an ideology such as this into submission, or hope that
it can just vaporize at the end of a judge's gavel. ISIL
may weaken or wither, it is true, but it will likely be
replaced by another takfiri group. Nine years ago, we
talked at length about Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi and his
group in this very Chamber, and here we still are, with
a different group and the same ideology - only now it
is worse. And no matter how inhumane the takfiris are,
as long as they can sow confusion among Muslims by
exploiting a broadly shared Muslim yearning, they will
likely survive.

Thought must therefore be undermined by thought.
And takfirism must be thwarted by an approach to
life couched in those principles and laws that bind
all of us - a system that will be more successful and
enriching because it is open to the multiple realities
of all human beings. Two months ago, when the 126
prominent Muslim scholars wrote the letter I mentioned
earlier, with the aim of refuting ISIL's spurious claims
to speak on behalf of Islam, it did not, sadly, receive the
worldwide attention it so thoroughly deserved. To me,
that concerted effort to strip ISIL, point by point, of
its argument is a promising approach. And the scholars
could not have been clearer when, in conclusion, they
wrote to Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi,

"You have misinterpreted Islam into a religion of
harshness, brutality, torture and murder. This is a
great wrong and an offense to Islam, Muslims and
the entire world."

I implore the Council to support such efforts to
overturn ISIL's ideology of violence and death, for the
sake of the rights of all in Iraq, irrespective of ethnic or
religious identity, whether men or women, old or young.
Ultimately, support given to the ideological front may
be more effective than air strikes in bringing an end to
the longstanding suffering of the people of Iraq.

