Ms. Lind (Estonia): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for having organized this open
debate today. We also offer our warm thanks to
Mr. Martin for his briefing and to him and his team for
their dedication.

Estonia, as a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group, fully
endorses the statement delivered by the representative
of Switzerland earlier today. Estonia, together with
Costa Rica, has been at the forefront of the ACT group
on the "T" - that is, transparency - issues. I would
like therefore to emphasize a few points on this topic.

Estonia cannot speak from first-hand experience
about the complicated daily work of the Security
Council since we have never served as a Council
member. But we truly believe in the positive impact
of open and inclusive processes. Furthermore, and
as was already expressed in the 2005 World Summit
outcome document, the main goal should be increased
ownership of the Council's work by all countries and its
accountability to the membership.

We have closely seen the importance of effective
and substantiated communication between the Security
Council and the wider United Nations membership in
the recent process of appointing the Secretary-General.
In this regard, Estonia, acting on behalf of the ACT
group, sent letters to the Secretary-General and to the
Presidents of the General Assembly and of the Security
Council on lessons learned. Our conclusions were
recently published as document S/2017/846. Although
there is still time until the peak of the next Secretary-
General selection cycle, I would like to draw Council
members' attention to a few suggestions from our
"lessons learned" document for future reference.

First, the ACT group believes that the interaction
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
needs to be improved to live up to the expectations of
the membership and the new standards of openness and
transparency. In that regard, we encourage the Security
Council to review its working methods, building on
the discussions held among Council members during
the latest selection. Secondly, the ACT group recalls
the collective responsibility of the Security Council to
reach consensus on a recommendation to the General
Assembly for the appointment of the Secretary-
General. In that connection, ACT believes the use of
colour-coded ballots during straw polling should be
discouraged and that the equal rights and role of all
Council members in the process should be upheld. Last
but not least, the ACT group calls for regular public
briefings by the Security Council on developments in
the nomination process and for open communication
with regard to straw poll results.

Overall we are glad to witness that the members of
the Security Council are more often speaking in the open
Chamber and contributing to increased transparency.
We are fully aware that there are discussions and
situations that need to be dealt with behind closed
doors, but we encourage Council members to hold open
meetings whenever possible and to seek interaction
with the wider membership and other organs, as well as
with civil society.

In closing, I would like to express our gratitude for
the work done by Japan in the Informal Working Group
and wish all the best to Kuwait for its chairmanship in
the next two years.

