Mr. Favre (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland warmly welcomes the holding of this
Security Council open debate on mediation and the
peaceful resolution of conflict.

Switzerland fully supports the efforts of the United
Nations in peacefully settling disputes. In the light of
our long experience with the use of our good offices
and our partnership with the United Nations in the
field of mediation, I want to focus on the following
three points.
First, mediation is a valuable tool for conflict
resolution, but experience shows that it cannot be
considered a cure-all. It cannot work effectively unless
certain conditions are met. Above all, it is voluntary,
and the parties to the conflict themselves must be
willing to participate. In addition, mediation initiatives
should be launched at the right moment, when a conflict
is ripe for resolution. It is equally important to ensure
that mediation processes are truly inclusive, so that
parties with a vital role to play in the peace agreement,
and those affected by its consequences, are consulted
and involved throughout the negotiation process.
Mediation is a tool that can be used at several stages
of a conflict, including before violence has broken out
and after agreements are signed, in order to contribute
to sustainable peace.

Secondly, the Security Council is a key player,
capable of strongly influencing the conditions
needed for good mediation. In that regard, as was the
case during the conflict in Yemen in 2011, a careful
warning from the Security Council announcing the
potential imposition of United Nations sanctions may
help a mediator to convince the opposing sides to
sit down at the negotiating table. Sectoral sanctions
targeting sources of funding essential to parties to a
conflict can influence their cost-benefit analysis and
thereby contribute to their decision to participate in
negotiations. However, Security Council sanctions
can also complicate mediation efforts. For example,
sanctions on entire groups can stigmatize them and
complicate the task of mediators, who will find it more
difficult to communicate with them. Furthermore,
sanctions imposed on specific parties to a conflict can
sometimes affect perceptions of the impartiality of the
United Nations and acceptance of the mediators whom
it mandates. It is important for the Security Council to
carefully evaluate the impact of its sanctions in conflict
situations where the United Nations is also conducting
mediation activities, so as to ensure complementarity
between the sanctions and mediation processes.
Switzerland is currently giving support to academic
research on the link between mediation and sanctions.

Thirdly, we strongly believe that mediation's
effectiveness lies in the professionalism of the mediator.
We are making a concrete contribution to achieving that
objective, specifically thanks to the master's degree in
mediation in peace processes offered by the Federal
Institute of Technology in Zurich with the support of
the Governments of Switzerland, Finland, Germany
and Sweden.

We welcome the progress that the United Nations
has made in the past decade in enhancing the
effectiveness of its mediation efforts. We especially
welcome the establishment of the Mediation Support
Unit within the Department of Political Affairs, which
is enabling the United Nations to become an effective
and professional global mediator, and we propose that
it be further strengthened in the future.

