Mr. Yel'chenko (Ukraine): We welcome the format
of today's meeting, and we thank Mr. Annabi for his
comprehensive briefing.

My delegation welcomes the progress report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Ukraine
is largely satisfied with the work done by the Mission
over the reporting period, in particular in the fields of
police restructuring and reform and the reform of the
judicial system. With regard to the restructuring of the
police, we recognize the particular importance of effective
implementation of the data collection project on police
trends in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the establishment of
the inter-entity Ministerial Consultative Meeting on Police
Matters (MCMP) and the progress made towards setting
up court police.

At the same time, my delegation is concerned about
the reported instances of obstruction and delays in the
integration of Bosniac and Croat police officers in Mostar
and other parts of canton 7, as well as the establishment
of the State Border Service. No obstruction or resistance
to achieving these goals should be tolerated, and more
assertive measures on the part of UNMIBH are to be
considered. In this context, we support the imposition by
the High Representative of the State Border Service Law
following another failure by the Parliament to pass the
necessary legislation.

 

The inauguration of the Breko District Police Service
is of great importance. We hope that it will contribute to
the implementation of the Dayton Agreement, as far as
Brcko is concerned, to the satisfaction of both entities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like to be familiarized
with the final version of the new draft Breko District
Statute before its entry into force. In this regard, we would
like to request the Secretariat to provide us with a text as
soon as the draft is completed.

My delegation is encouraged by the report of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
implementation of the New York Declaration. The very fact
that this report was submitted to the Security Council is
quite remarkable, given the problem of cooperation between
the Members of the Presidency in the past. The report cites
a number of important steps the Presidency took in
implementing the New York Declaration, specifically the
establishment of a joint secretariat, the organization of the
Council of Ministers and the establishment of the first
civilian police joint unit for United Nations operations.

We believe that further progress in the peace process
will be achieved after adoption by the Bosnian Parliament
of the electoral law and changes to the law on passports,
which will pave the way to the introduction of a single
national passport.

While we welcome the report of the Presidency, we
acknowledge the existence of serious difficulties in its
activity as a single body representing all the peoples of the
country. An indicator of these problems is the position of
one Member of the Presidency regarding the process of
deconstituization of Croats in Bosnia, as stated in the letter
of 29 February 2000 addressed to the Secretary-General.

We also have taken note with concern of some
negative and quite dangerous tendencies to revise the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement advocated by some officials
of the country. This relates to the letter of 9 February 2000
to the Council from the co-Chairman of the Council of
Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Silajdzie,
containing a "Memorandum on Change". We believe that
it is high time to deploy multiple and joint efforts to
complete the implementation of the Dayton Accord rather
than attempt to revise it.

It is generally recognized that the progress achieved in
bringing peace to Bosnia and Herzegovina has been
significant. Peace is putting down deep roots, but its
foundation is still shaky. There is still a long way to go to
make the peace process in Bosnia irreversible. The
international community and the United Nations should
spare no effort to this end. We should also think of how
to better coordinate these efforts in order to avoid any
mistakes rather than always placing the blame on different
entities of Bosnia.

For its part, Ukraine, as a member of the Peace
Implementation Council and a police contributor to the
International Police Task Force (IPT F), stands ready to
continue its support for the activities of UNMIBH and to
contribute further to the peace process in Bosnia.

