Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to commend the Bolivian presidency
for organizing this important meeting. I should also
like to thank the Under-Secretary-General for his
comprehensive briefing of the fifth report of the
Secretary-General on the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) (S/2017/467).

It appears that significant progress has been
achieved in the struggle against ISIL, in particular
in Iraq, Syria and Libya. That reflects the significant
efforts undertaken by Member States to contain the
terrorist threat with a view to ultimately stamping it
out. Clearly, the contribution of the United Nations
Secretariat to that progress has been decisive, thanks
in particular to the efforts of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) and of the
Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team
aimed at bolstering international cooperation in
counter-terrorism.

However, as is underscored in the report, the
challenges posed by international terrorism remain
concerning. That was tragically underscored in the
attacks that took place recently. The Senegalese
delegation would therefore like to reaffirm its firm
condemnation of the terrorist attacks that recently
took place through the world, in particular in London,
Kabul and Tehran. Those acts reveal the perpetrators'
enduring capacity to cause harm and only heighten our
concerns with regard to the consequences of the use
of international organized crime for the financing of
terrorist activity. It also reflects the degree to which
it is critical to implement resolution 2195 (2014) and
2347 (2017).

The persistence of the challenge of international
terrorism is a further reminder of the overriding need
to redouble efforts to counter the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters, whose return poses a grave
threat to international peace and security, especially in
areas of conflict where the State is struggling to assert
its authority. The persistent challenge of terrorism
furthermore requires an urgent establishment of peace,
security and stability within countries and regions in
crises, which have become safe havens for terrorists.

With regard to the African continent, the situation
in Libya has been marked by a deadlock in the political
process, which, more than ever before, remains troubling
in the light of the threat being posed throughout the
Sahelo-Saharan strip. The same applies to the Lake
Chad basin, which remains unstable despite significant
progress reported in combating Boko Haram. However,
in Somalia, Al-Shabaab remains a major threat to peace
and security throughout the Horn of Africa.

All of that is to say that we must undertake even
greater efforts in countering terrorism financing, in
particular by seeking better cooperation with regard to
financial intelligence in counter-terrorism strategies. In
that regard, I welcome the cooperation of the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team with Senegal,
which has led to the holding, in Dakar in December
2016, of the second meeting of intelligence service
directors of West Africa, Central Africa and North
Africa with a view to strengthening their coordination.

It is also critical to adopt reintegration strategies
for former foreign terrorist fighters in order to put an
end to the phenomenon of violent extremism, which is
a real phenomenon and exists even in prisons. In that
regard, the recent adoption by the Council of resolution
2354 (2017) is an important tool to stamp out extremist
rhetoric and discourse and a decisive step forward
in the right direction. Likewise, the joint briefing
(see S/PV.7936) held last month by the Committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
is an important example of a synergy of action in a
context punctuated by the pressing need to step up
international cooperation to prevent and combat the
possession of weapons of mass destruction by terrorist
organizations, but also to ensure the protection of critical
infrastructure against terrorist attacks. In that regard,
I would like to reiterate Senegal's firm condemnation
of the use of chemical weapons in Syria and recall the
need to conduct the necessary investigations in order to
ensure accountability for the perpetrators.

In conclusion, I commend the ongoing commitment
of States members of the Council to combat terrorism.
I would like to take this opportunity to reiterate the
firm determination of Senegal to remaining steadfastly
engaged in this common cause.

