I would like to thank Special Representative La Lime and Mr. Jacques Letang for their briefings. Their detailed information is helpful in identifying the core issues affecting Haiti and paving the way for the upcoming renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH). We welcome the measures undertaken by the Haitian Government to assist the population and prevent the spread of the pandemic. Likewise, we commend all Haitian political actors and civil society for joining efforts to combat this scourge. In that regard, the Haitian and Dominican Heads of State met virtually on 19 May to discuss synergies in their response to the pandemic. Likewise, the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of our two countries have held periodic video-teleconferences to discuss that issue and others of common interest. We hope that this pause in the political process caused by the pandemic offers some opportunities for reflection and generates momentum for the country's leadership to pursue open and inclusive dialogue that breaks the political deadlock, thus allowing for the creation of a road map and timeline for the pending and future political processes. In addition to the challenges posed by the pandemic, the Dominican Republic also remains concerned about the persisting insecurity resulting from gang-related activities and the proliferation of illicit weapons and ammunition. The broad circulation of over 270,000 illicit firearms in civilian hands and the illicit traffic of small arms and light weapons are contributing to the outbreak of new civil unrest. We therefore reiterate that it is essential that the flow of small arms and their ammunition be urgently addressed. In that context, we value the leadership role of the Haitian National Commission for Disarmament, Dismantlement and Reintegration in its quest to help reduce community violence. We also commend the efforts made by BINUH and the United Nations Development Programme in the areas of peacebuilding, arms control and conducting a baseline assessment on the life cycle of weapons and ammunition in Haiti. In February, even before the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis, more than 40 per cent of Haiti's population required humanitarian assistance. The acute levels of malnutrition among the population make the country one of the most food insecure in the world. That already dire situation could deteriorate further during the hurricane season. In that context, we believe it is necessary to work hand in hand with the Haitian Government in order to put in place risk-assessment mechanisms and design more concrete plans and strategies to strengthen core sectors and institutions. Information and collaboration channels with local communities should also be improved to expand early-warning mechanisms in order to prepare for the impact of climate- related shocks. We commend the international community and other partners for their pledge to mitigate the humanitarian situation in the country. The 2019-2020 Haiti humanitarian response plan amounts to $253 million. As of 8 June, Haiti has received only $29.9 million. In addition to the humanitarian challenges, the Haitian economy is facing multiple hardships that will exacerbate the socioeconomic situation and slow the recovery process post-COVID-19. In that context, the Dominican Republic calls for an urgent and coordinated regional and global response to the pandemic. We echo the Secretary-General in his appeal for additional financial support to help Haiti overcome its development and health challenges. In conclusion, we commend BINUH and the country team for their integrated response and continued work to assist Haiti under these extraordinary circumstances, which further hamper the fulfilment of the mission's mandate. We concur with the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic and Social Council in urging the United Nations system, the international community and international financial institutions to take joint action to prevent the spread of COVID-19, mitigate its humanitarian and socioeconomic effects and promote sustainable development and resilience to future shocks in Haiti.
