Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation welcomes and appreciates the presence
of the Secretary-General at this important meeting of
the Security Council.

Mexico appreciates the efforts made by the
members of the Security Council to reach the
agreement reflected in the revised draft resolution just
adopted, which was sponsored by the United States and
the United Kingdom and which was the result of
several weeks of intense negotiations in New York and
in capitals around the world. It is now resolution 1441
(2002).

The pace of those negotiations enabled the
Council to draft a text that adequately reflects the
concerns of its member States about the need for Iraq
to comply with its disarmament obligations and to
renounce weapons of mass destruction. Should Iraq fail
to comply, the Council's response will be defined on
the basis of its own determination as to the existence of
a threat to international peace and security.

The Council's unity in this morning's vote on the
resolution sends a clear and unambiguous message to
the international community, in response to the
Secretary-General's repeated calls. Mexico believes
that the Council's decision serves to preserve the
legitimacy, effectiveness and relevance of this body in
the fulfilment of its mandate to maintain international
peace and security. It also strengthens the Council, the
United Nations, multilateralism and the building of an
international system of norms and principles. All of
these elements will continue to guide Mexico's action
in the Security Council.

The resolution just adopted is the result of
negotiations in which those who called for automatic
recourse to the use of force agreed to give Iraq one last
chance to voluntarily, immediately and unconditionally
comply with Security Council resolutions. Iraq now has
an obligation to the Council and to the international
community to comply fully with its international
obligations. Similarly, this resolution also constitutes
progress, as it eliminates the concept of automaticity in
the use of force in response to a serious violation
without the explicit agreement of the Council.

We welcome the fact that the two-stage approach
has been accepted. That approach has had the explicit
and specific support of Mexico since Minister Jorge
Castaneda spoke in the General Assembly on 13
September. Under that approach, any decision in
response to possible material breach by Iraq with
regard to the relevant resolutions will have to be taken
on the basis of two prerequisites.

In effect, my country proposed that the Security
Council's response should be based on two clearly
differentiated stages. The first stage would entail a
credible process to evaluate Iraq's true military
capability and its intention to use its weapons or the
ability of terrorist groups to have access to them. The
second stage would entail the agreement of the
Security Council and other States involved on the
measures to be adopted if the evaluation process
detects a threat to international peace and security.

However, another virtue of the resolution we have
just adopted is the fact that the changes made in the
revised inspection regime give inspectors a renewed
mandate for the timely and effective discharge of their
tasks. The fact that the Council must at all times
preserve its authority to determine the composition of
the inspection teams and their rules of operations,
while avoiding the imposition of armed inspections or
having inspectors accompanied by representatives of
permanent members, was duly taken into account. The
resolution also guarantees the neutrality and
impartiality of the United Nations Monitoring,
Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC)
and strengthens the principle that inspectors must
report to the Council as a whole, and not to individual
countries.

Mexico would like to reiterate its full agreement
with the inspection arrangements established by
UNMOVIC and the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We also trust in the integrity,
professionalism and independence of Mr. Hans Blix
and Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei.

We also welcome the possibilities provided by the
success in these negotiations to assure Iraq's full
compliance with Security Council resolutions. We
emphasize the importance that Security Council
decisions taken in this connection must continue to
comply with the principles of the Charter and
international law on the basis of objectively verifiable
facts.

We reiterate the belief reflected in the agreed text
that the possibility of the use of force is valid only as a
last resort, with prior explicit authorization required
from the Security Council.

To sum up, the resolution stipulates that should
Iraq fail to comply, it will be the inspectors who will
report to the Council. This multilateral body will then
determine the nature of that failure to comply, judge
whether international peace and security have been
imperiled, and then decide what is appropriate under
the United Nations Charter.

For all of the aforementioned reasons, Mexico
has voted in favour of this resolution in the conviction
that it is an important step towards the peaceful
solution of a crisis that can imperil international peace
and security.

Mexico is gratified that all the members of the
Security Council have fully shouldered their
responsibilities, as incumbent upon them under the
United Nations Charter. They have preserved the unity
and authority of the Council and strengthened the
highest interests of the maintenance of international
peace and security.

