Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): Open debates of
the Security Council are an important means of
enabling the Council to hear the view of other Member
States and thus to truly act on their behalf, as foreseen in
the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that that
practice is of particular importance when the Council
tackles, on an exceptional basis, issues in the area of
standard-setting and lawmaking, as is the case with the
subject matter before us today. We thus welcome this
debate, and we hope that it will influence the shaping
of the draft resolution that the Council will adopt at a
later stage. Given the scope of the draft, its acceptance
and effective implementation can be ensured only if the
views of the wider membership are taken into account.

The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMD), including to non-State actors, undoubtedly
poses a very serious threat to international peace and
security. The Council has already recognized this threat
in the past, and its effective prevention requires a
sustained common effort by the international
community as a whole. It is thus our hope that the draft
resolution to be adopted will prove to be a useful tool
to prevent non-State actors from gaining access to such
weapons, related technology and hazardous material.

In connection with the draft resolution under
consideration, we wish to emphasize the following points.
First, the existing regime of multilateral treaties must
constitute the basis for our work in the area of non-
proliferation. Full implementation, universal acceptance
and, where necessary, strengthening of the existing
instruments - particularly in the field of verification and
monitoring - are indispensable elements of our long-
term efforts to work towards the elimination of WMD.

Secondly, non-proliferation, arms control and
disarmament are complementary elements of the
overall comprehensive effort we must undertake to
effectively tackle the threat posed by WMD. The draft
resolution under consideration would therefore benefit
from the inclusion of a stronger reference to
disarmament.

Thirdly, it is essential to maintain the multilateral
character of measures taken with respect to non-
proliferation. Possible enforcement action must
therefore be based on a decision taken by the Security
Council. In the same spirit, we support the
establishment of a monitoring committee - preferably
with a clear time limit and a review mechanism - to
engage in a transparent and open dialogue with the
membership. Regular and interactive briefings of the
chair of such a committee should constitute one
important aspect of its work. Furthermore, such a
committee should work to implement the resolution
while taking fully into account the existing treaty
obligations of States, in full cooperation with the
relevant institutions, such as the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons and the Security Council's Counter-
Terrorism Committee.

We believe that, as a rule, endeavours in the area
of non-proliferation and disarmament should be the
result of multilateral negotiations. Nonetheless, we
believe that the draft resolution under discussion can
make a valuable contribution to the crucial issue of
non-proliferation if drafted in a precise and balanced
manner that reflects all aspects of this complex topic. We
are also of the view that the international community,
while addressing with resolve the threat posed by
weapons of mass destruction, must not lose sight of the
fact that most of the massive and large-scale human
suffering and loss of life we have witnessed in the
recent past has been the result of the use of sometimes
very unsophisticated and widely available weapons. We
have an obligation to address this very concrete threat
and sad reality with equal determination.

