I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity to address the Council on the subject of cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, and the role of the International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF) in this context. This is a particularly opportune time to look at the partnership with the OIF, as both our organizations are celebrating important anniversaries this year: 50 years for the OIF and 75 years for the United Nations. Today, together with the OIF, we are working to promote international peace and security, particularly through early warning and conflict prevention, and peacekeeping and peacebuilding. We are also partnering in promoting sustainable development, good governance, democracy, the rule of law, human rights and the inclusion of women and youth. Our partnership is anchored at the highest level, as demonstrated by today's meeting of the Security Council and by the General Assembly's regular adoption of resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the OIF, the latest of which was adopted on 15 April 2019 (resolution 73/290). Furthermore, contacts between the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Secretary-General of the OIF, Ms Louise Mushikiwabo, are constant. In addition, interactions between the Secretary-General and the Secretariat, on the one hand, and the Group of Francophone Ambassadors to the United Nations, on the other, are equally frequent. Allow me to focus today on our collaboration in the area of peace and security. Since our cooperation is rich and multifaceted and the time available for this briefing is limited, the examples I will cite are merely illustrative and not exhaustive. First of all, I would like to commend the joint work of the United Nations and the OIF in the areas of early warning and conflict prevention, and in electoral assistance and observation of electoral processes. Recently, the United Nations and the OIF have cooperated in those areas in Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Comoros, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Gabon, Guinea, Madagascar and the Central African Republic. The quadripartite meeting on Cameroon of the United Nations Secretariat, the OIF, the Commonwealth and the African Union, held on 20 July, is an example of expanded cooperation in early warning and prevention. Also in the area of prevention, the OIF played an important role in the establishment of the Francophone Network for the Prevention of Violent Radicalization and Violent Extremism that Could Lead to Terrorism to mobilize Francophone expertise on this topical international issue, which is a considerable contribution, particularly in the Sahel. Conflict prevention is also based on promoting fully inclusive societies, especially for women and young people. It is a key area of collaboration between the United Nations and the OIF. Indeed, we need to redouble our efforts aimed at promoting the involvement of women and youth in conflict prevention, management and resolution, as well as in electoral processes. This commitment is part of the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which celebrates its twentieth anniversary this year. It is also in line with resolution 2250 (2015) on youth, peace and security. The imperative need for the just inclusion of women and youth in all aspects of the life of society and the international community is inescapable. In the French- speaking world alone, with some 274 million male and female French speakers across 54 States, women inarguably represent half of the population and young people under the age of 30 represent the majority. Our partnership with the OIF for the implementation of the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy, adopted in January 2019, aimed at strengthening the number of French-speaking women in uniform, is a modest contribution to this effort. Secondly, I welcome the strong support that OIF member States are providing to peacekeeping operations in the spirit of partnership anchored in the Action for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative. In A4P, the OIF co-sponsors and supports the theme of performance and accountability. To this end, we are making joint efforts together with the OIF to increase the level of French-speaking civilian and uniformed personnel in peacekeeping operations deployed in French-speaking host countries, including through French-language training. We encourage OIF member States to continue their efforts aimed at building the capacity of francophone civilian and uniformed personnel, including to enable them to reach senior positions in peacekeeping operations and beyond. Moreover, working with the OIF, we strongly support the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), notably through our support for the G-5 Sahel Priority Investment Programme and the G-5 Sahel Joint Force. The Joint Force, in particular, continues to grow in strength and deserves enhanced international support. Finally, it is important to underscore the important role the OIF plays in the area of peacebuilding, in cooperation with various organizations, each of which also plays a unique and essential role. In particular, I welcome the OIF participation in the work of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) on Burundi, Guinea, Guinea- Bissau and the Central African Republic, as well as in ad hoc meetings of the PBC on other conflict-affected francophone countries. In all aspects of our partnership with the OIF in terms of peace and security, we jointly support and promote multilingualism. Indeed, we subscribe to the idea that diversity, particularly linguistic diversity, is one of the riches of the cultural heritage of humankind. We therefore work together to celebrate and protect that diversity. The coronavirus disease pandemic has highlighted the need for enhanced and renewed multilateralism in order to meet the challenges of our times. Cooperation within and among international organizations is one of the pillars of multilateralism. The close partnership between the United Nations and the OIF is fully in line with that objective. In that connection, I welcome the Security Council's open debate via video-teleconference on cooperation with regional and subregional organizations, particularly the OIF.
