I am devoting my regular briefing on the situation in the Middle East to the sixteenth report on the implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2020/1234). The written report, which members have already received, covers the period from 21 September to 10 December 2020. I will begin by providing an update on developments since the submission of the report to the Security Council. On 15 December, the Palestinian Prime Minister and the Acting Humanitarian Coordinator for the occupied Palestinian territory launched the 2021 humanitarian response plan, which includes an appeal for $417 million to help 1.8 million vulnerable people over the coming year. The latest humanitarian needs assessment found that 2.5 million Palestinians - some 47 per cent of the population - currently need aid. Settlement-related developments continued after the submission of the written report. On 13 December, the Israeli authorities announced a tender for 290 housing units in the settlement of Gilo, in East Jerusalem. On 16 December, in a preliminary vote, the Israeli Knesset advanced a bill that sets a two-year time frame for the legalization of 65 outposts and mandates that they should be treated as authorized settlements in the interim, with their residents receiving all municipal services. Also since the submission of the written report, violent incidents continued throughout the occupied Palestinian territories. On 11 December, a Palestinian man from Nablus, who was deaf and mute, reportedly died from complications resulting from an injury sustained from live ammunition. The man was shot by private security guards on 17 August at the Qalandia checkpoint, north of Jerusalem. Israeli security forces previously stated that an investigation was opened into the incident. On 13 December, in the context of clashes, the Israeli security forces injured two Palestinians, including a 15-year-old, in Al-Shawabka, north of Tulkarm. The boy was reportedly shot in the knee with live ammunition. On 14 December, Israeli forces at the Gaza perimeter fence fired one shell that landed near the Al-Bureij refugee camp, causing damage to a house. Israel Defense Forces said that the incident was accidental and have also opened an investigation. I would like to focus on some observations concerning the implementation of the provisions of resolution 2334 (2016) during the reporting period. I remain deeply troubled by continued Israeli settlement expansion in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Over the past year, Israeli authorities advanced controversial settlement plans that had been frozen for years. The total number of units advanced in 2020 are on a par with 2019 numbers, despite an eight- month hiatus this year. Some 50 per cent of them are deep in the West Bank, in areas crucial for the contiguity and viability of a future Palestinian State. In the strategic location of E-1, plans for some 3,500 units were advanced after an eight-year delay. If implemented, the E-1 plan would sever the connection between the northern and southern West Bank. Similarly, a tender was issued for some 1,200 units establishing a new settlement in Givat Hamatos that threatens to further disconnect East Jerusalem from Bethlehem and the southern West Bank. If either project moves forward, it would significantly undermine the establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian State as part of a negotiated two-State solution. Israeli settlements in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, constitute a flagrant violation of United Nations resolutions and international law. Settlements entrench Israel's occupation and undermine the prospect of achieving a two-State solution. The advancement of all settlement activity must cease immediately. The continued demolition and seizure of Palestinian structures, notably humanitarian projects and schools, is deeply concerning. I call on Israeli authorities to end the demolition of Palestinian property and the displacement and eviction of Palestinians and to approve plans that would enable those communities to build legally and address their development needs. The continuing violence, attacks against civilians and incitement to violence are unacceptable. All perpetrators of violence must be held accountable. I am appalled that children continue to be victims - with a particularly troubling series of incidents over the past month in the occupied Palestinian territory. Children should not be the target of violence or be put in harm's way. I reiterate that security forces must exercise maximum restraint and may use lethal force only when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life. Israeli and Palestinian authorities must carry out thorough, independent, impartial and prompt investigations into all instances of possible excessive use of force. The indiscriminate launching of rockets and mortars towards Israeli civilian population centres by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and others is prohibited by international humanitarian law, and Palestinian militants must cease that practice immediately. I am deeply concerned at the continued settler-related violence in the occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. I call on Israeli authorities to abide by international law, protect Palestinians from violence by Israeli settlers and ensure that farmers can access their land freely and safely. Regrettably, the fate of two Israeli civilians and the bodies of two Israeli soldiers held by Hamas in Gaza remains an important humanitarian concern. I call upon Hamas to release them immediately. I also remain concerned at the continued Israeli practice of holding the bodies of killed Palestinians and call for the return of withheld bodies to their families, in line with its obligations under international humanitarian law. Human rights defenders and peace activists continue to be subject to pressure and arrest; authorities have an obligation to respect the freedoms of expression, association and assembly and to facilitate and promote an enabling environment for civil society to function in the occupied Palestinian territory. Since Gaza courts continue to hand down death sentences, in violation of Palestinian law and the State of Palestine's international obligations, I call upon Hamas in Gaza to impose an immediate moratorium on executions and cease the use of military tribunals to try civilians. The financial situation of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) remains a serious concern. With support from partners and a loan from the Central Emergency Respond Fund, a disruption of vital services was averted last month. Unfortunately, despite that support, there is a funding gap of $88 million in December. That includes some $22 million to pay salaries to nearly 30,000 front-line education, health, social and other workers directly assisting Palestine refugees. The income forecast for UNRWA in January 2021 is worse and may well require more drastic measures to prevent a financial collapse of the Agency in the months to come. The Agency is not only a lifeline for millions of Palestine refugees and fully engaged in the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) but is also critical for regional stability. Sufficient funding is essential for the Agency's continuity, and I renew my appeal for support. The situation in Gaza remains fragile amid the immense suffering of the people. The risk of a major escalation remains. While taking into consideration its legitimate security concerns, I urge Israel to ease the restrictions on the movement of goods and people to and from Gaza. Only by fully lifting the closures, in line with resolution 1860 (2009), can we hope to sustainably resolve the humanitarian crisis. It is deeply regrettable that agreement has not been reached on the holding of long-overdue Palestinian presidential and legislative elections. I continue to encourage the parties to overcome outstanding differences, in line with Egyptian- led intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts. With regard to the wider peace process, I join the Secretary-General in urging Israelis, Palestinians, States of the region and the broader international community to take practical steps to enable the parties to re-engage. Such steps must also be accompanied by concrete actions to restore a legitimate political horizon to end the conflict. The Middle East Quartet - alongside Arab partners - and Israeli and Palestinian leaders must work together to return to the path of meaningful negotiations. I hope that recent developments will encourage Palestinian and Israeli leaders to restart meaningful negotiations, with the support of the international community, and will create opportunities for regional cooperation. As we have seen in statements from around the world, the commitment to the two-State solution, in line with United Nations resolutions, international law and bilateral agreements, continues to be affirmed by broad regional and international consensus. I would like to highlight some progress and opportunities following the Palestinian Authority's decision to restart civilian and security coordination with Israel, which I briefed the Security Council on last month (see S/2020/1128). The Palestinian Government has received some $900 million in back- revenues vital to the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic and the deteriorating financial situation. In meetings with leaders on both sides, I have strongly encouraged them to seize this moment to begin a process of updating their economic and administrative relationship. I am encouraged by recent technical-level exchanges between the Ministries of Health and encourage high-level discussions between the Ministries of Finance. Anagreement on relevant reforms would not only have notable humanitarian, economic and development benefits but also represent an important first step on the path back to meaningful negotiations. I again encourage Israel to maintain its commitment to backstopping the Palestinian Authority's finances up to a minimum monthly transfer of revenues for the duration of the emergency and to take concrete steps, such as granting permits to Palestinians from Gaza to work in Israel and the West Bank when adequate health precautions are in place. It remains vital to also ease dual-use restrictions for imports into the Gaza Strip and grant construction permits in Area C of the occupied West Bank. Similarly, I reiterate my call on the Palestinian Authority to take important steps towards mitigating future risk to its banking sector and revenues by aligning its expenditures with the recommendations made by the World Bank and the United Nations Special Coordinator's Office (UNSCO) in June, including for the introduction of a single basic income support scheme. I note President Abbas' decision to form a committee on that issue. Reforming the system of payments to Palestinian prisoners, their families and the families of those killed or injured in the context of attacks would not only mitigate risk but could remove a significant obstacle to some donor support and talks on more substantive steps to modernize the economic relationship. All sides can take immediate steps to facilitate the movement of goods in and out of Gaza and to allow trade to increase between the Gaza Strip, Israel and the West Bank. The support of the international community is vital. In addition, it is important to ensure support to the inter-agency humanitarian response plan and the socioeconomic response plans of the United Nations country team and the Palestinian Authority. I have also encouraged donors to support a few critical initiatives that could be implemented immediately and would create some 20,000 jobs in Gaza for at least 12 months; accelerate critical infrastructure initiatives in the water, sanitation, energy and health sectors; and support small and medium-sized enterprises. Daily violence has continued throughout the occupied Palestinian territory. Settlement expansion and the demolition of Palestinian-owned structures continue unabated, raising tensions on the ground and further undermining the viability of a two-State solution. Intra-Palestinian division remains unresolved. The humanitarian, economic and health crisis in Gaza has grown increasingly dire amid debilitating closures, political division and militant activity. In that context, we must persevere in our efforts to prevent violent escalation and encourage leaders on both sides to takes steps towards enabling a return to negotiations, not a re-establishment of the conflict. We remain guided by the clear and unwavering United Nations position that only a two-State solution that realizes the legitimate national aspirations of Palestinians and Israelis, in line with United Nations resolutions, international law and previous agreements, can lead to sustainable peace between the two peoples. In addition, over this past year, the pandemic has upended life around the globe and has exacerbated many of those negative trends, bringing crucial economic and humanitarian systems to the brink of collapse. I wish to thank and commend the front-line health workers on the ground and my United Nations colleagues for their tireless commitment to helping the Palestinian people weather yet another storm. While the cost in lives and livelihoods has already been too great, I am certain that, without the swift and robust interventions by health authorities, civil society organizations, donors and United Nations agencies, the crisis would have proved deeper still. I remain hopeful that next year we will not only turn the corner on the pandemic but, by facing that challenge together, find renewed confidence in the path towards a sustainable solution to the conflict. As this will be my last briefing to the Council, I would like to share a few parting thoughts. Israelis and Palestinians, Jews and Arabs have lived with conflict for too long. The painful reality of their struggle has affected every single family for generations. Loss and displacement are part of the personal history of every single household. Palestinians have been upended from their homes and forced to seek refuge across the region. Jews have been upended from across the region and forced to seek refuge in Israel. The conflict is not only a conflict over land, since both peoples have the right to call Israel and Palestine their home. It is not only a conflict over history - personal and collective - but also a conflict over the very right of two nations to co-exist. In 1994, the leaders of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization agreed on something that has rarely been done in the troubled history of the Middle East - they agreed to end the conflict not through war, not by declaring one side a winner and the other side a loser, but through peaceful negotiations. That was clearly not an easy decision but one that faced opposition from all sides. Yet it was a decision that was so bold, so visionary and so fragile that the international community immediately came together to protect it, nurture it and help the leaders advance it. Sadly, today that vision remains unachieved. It is a vision that has been marred by intifadas, continuing occupation and a rapidly diminishing will to reach an agreement that is just and sustainable. Over the course of the past five years, I met almost no Palestinian who did not believe that negotiations are only a facade for the loss of more land. Neither did I meet an Israeli who did not believe that every round of negotiations will lead to more violence and terror. Security Council members know the realities of the conflict only too well. Our monthly Council briefings serve as a testament to the situation on the ground. As I depart this Office, [remain firmly convinced that the world cannot leave the situation unattended. Over the years, the Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions that consider key aspects of how the conflict can be resolved. Bilateral agreements were signed and ratified. The Middle East Quartet was created. In the past two years, the United States put forward a vision, albeit different from the broad consensus in the Council. Despite the differences, no one in the international community has questioned the fundamental premise that any resolution of the conflict must be based on two States, with the appropriate security and economic arrangements, achieved through direct negotiations and facilitated by the international community. Despite all our collective efforts, the only way forward out of the one-State reality that we increasingly face on the ground is through engagement between the parties, not through violence. Perhaps today is not the time for big international initiatives but the time for steps - sometimes small, sometimes bold - that protect that goal of two States, living side by side in peace and security, and create the conditions for agreement. Perhaps today is not the time for grandstanding or symbolic victories. Perhaps today is the time to admit that both Israelis and Palestinians must look inward and see what they can do, both in coordination and independently of one another, to protect the goal of sustainable peace. In 2016, the United Nations, together with its partners in the Middle East Quartet, produced a joint report (S/2016/595, annex) on what some of those steps might be. I encourage Council members to look at that report again, as its recommendations remain valid. Perhaps today is the time to admit that there are real opportunities for agreement, which flow from the fact that we face a global COVID-19 pandemic and we all need to work together to protect our societies from radicalization, religious extremism and economic implosion and to build on the new opportunities created in the region by the Abraham accords. It is not going to be easy. In fact, it will be extremely difficult, painstaking work to stitch back together what is necessary to allow the leaders on both sides to engage in a meaningful process. Yet, for all the goodwill in the world on which the Palestinian and Israeli peoples can count, rekindling the hope that the conflict can be resolved through peaceful negotiation cannot be imposed from outside. It must come from within, from both peoples and from their freely elected leaders. In the absence of meaningful negotiations, I have worked to uphold the international consensus that the goal is a two-State solution. I have warned of the dangers of eroding the status quo, supported intra-Palestinian reconciliation efforts and, above all, focused on preventive diplomacy. Together with Egypt and with the critical support of Qatar and others in the international community, the United Nations has played a pivotal role in preventing another devastating war in Gaza. I have spoken out against injustices. I have condemned terror. I firmly believe that the goal of a just and lasting peace between the Israeli and Palestinian peoples remains achievable through negotiations that can be mediated by the Middle East Quartet and critical Arab partners. I would like to thank Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas, their Governments, their civil servants and all interlocutors in Israel and Palestine for their open engagement with the United Nations. On many occasions we have certainly not seen eye to eye. However, their openness and willingness to engage have helped to put the United Nations in a unique position to mediate and talk to all parties to the conflict. I want to thank the Security Council for its relentless engagement and support for our work, and the Secretary-General and the services of the Secretariat for their steadfast guidance. Finally, I want to thank my colleagues at UNSCO for their outstanding professionalism and friendship. UNSCO is in an excellent position to deal with the challenges of the future and to use the opportunities presented to advance the goal of a just and lasting peace on the basis of two States, in line with United Nations resolutions. In January, my successor, Tor Wennesland, should take over this mission. He is one of the most capable diplomats with whom I have ever worked. I wish him every success in the years ahead and I hope that the Council will extend its full support to him, as it has done to me.
