Slovakia aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would like to share a few additional reflections in my national capacity. The current coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis not only raises global health and socioeconomic concerns, but also impacts the protection of civilians in armed conflict. Civilians in armed conflict are already vulnerable and the pandemic puts them at even greater risk. COVID-19 exacerbates the suffering caused by conflicts and can potentially lead to the emergence of new conflicts. The Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire is therefore timely and urgent. Slovakia strongly supports it and urges all parties to conflicts to do the same. We also appreciate other tools for Member States to ensure that human rights are at the centre of the response to the pandemic, including the policy briefs on COVID-19 and human rights, the impact of COVID-19 on women and children, and the guidance note on addressing and countering COVID-19-related hate speech. The Secretary-General's call to action for human rights, issued in February, is also key. We have witnessed the impact of COVID-19 on peace operations, including limitations of troop rotations and restrictions of movement in order to protect the health, safety and security of United Nations personnel. That unfortunately impedes their fundamental task of maintaining peace and security wherever deployed. Often, civilians pay the highest price. They remain at risk of conflict-related sexual and gender-based violence, which continues at shocking levels. The COVID-19 pandemic poses extreme risks for women and girls in fragile and conflict-affected situations, particularly as the pandemic makes it more difficult for protection to be provided and for humanitarian workers to reach vulnerable populations. Women and women's organizations should be at the centre of the pandemic response, and socioeconomic plans should be designed with the lives and future of women and girls in mind. As anactive troop- and police-contributing country to United Nations missions, Slovakia endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations in September 2018 and remains committed to working further on their implementation, including through the effective performance and responsible and disciplined conduct of our peacekeepers in United Nations missions and operations. We subscribe to the initiatives such as the Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians, the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, and the Secretary-General's voluntary compact to eliminate sexual exploitation and abuse. The President of the Slovak Republic, Ms. Zuzana Caputova, is one of the 87 members of the Secretary-General's circle of leadership on preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations peacekeeping operations. International law is essential for the protection of civilians, and strengthening compliance with its norms, including international humanitarian law and international human rights law, can significantly contribute to avoiding civilian deaths, suffering and displacement. All State and non-State parties to conflicts must abide by their obligations under international law. States should establish appropriate legislative and institutional arrangements to comprehensively address violations of international humanitarian law and hold accountable those who violate it. We strongly support the International Criminal Court (ICC) and its role in the fight against impunity and in bringing perpetrators to justice. Achieving the Court's universal jurisdiction would be a major step towards ensuring accountability for violations at the national, regional and international levels. We once again urge all States Members of the United Nations that have not yet done so to sign and ratify the Rome Statute. It is also important to highlight the role of the security sector. When reformed and well-governed, it can significantly contribute to political dialogue, arms control, the protection of civilians and respect for human rights, which are the foundations of all States. The security sector plays a key role in preventing the outbreak, escalation, continuation or recurrence of armed conflict, which is the most effective way to protect civilians. Slovakia is a long-standing supporter of the security sector governance and reform agenda and is fully committed to continuing to co-chair the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform, together with South Africa. The protection of civilians is incumbent not only upon warring parties, but also upon Governments, which must find the much-needed political will and support to ensure better todays and tomorrows for those unwillingly affected by armed conflict.
