Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like to thank Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan, for his briefing. I also thank the
staff of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their sacrifice in very
dangerous circumstances. I would also like to thank the
representative of Afghanistan for his comprehensive
statement.

Jordan is concerned about the volatile security
situation in Afghanistan and the increased number of
civilian victims, in particular women and children.
We strongly condemn all terrorist attacks on staff of
the various United Nations organizations present in
Afghanistan and those that target civilians and Afghan
security forces. We extend our sincere condolences
to the families of the victims and to the people and
Government of Afghanistan and the States whose
nationals died in those attacks. Jordan calls on States
and the entire international community to continue
to provide support and assistance to the Afghan
Government in the fight against terrorism and in
de-mining activities, not to mention the elimination
of explosive remnants of war. We must meet our
international commitments and provide assistance to
Afghanistan.

Jordan contributes to international efforts seeking
to establish a favourable environment for Afghanistan's
security, stability and development and to rebuilding
the State on the basis of our commitment to actively
participate in peacebuilding and humanitarian
assistance efforts. We have a duty to oppose any
attempt to take hostage the great religion of Islam,
distort its image or misrepresent its content. Islam calls
for tolerance and dialogue, respect for human dignity
and security.

Afghanistan is on the threshold ofhistoric elections.
We hope that they will strengthen the capacities of the
stakeholders to deal with the numerous challenges
that the country faces. In that regard, we welcome the
ongoing preparatory work for the elections, which are
on the right track and which we hope will take place
next month in accordance with Afghanistan's legal and
constitutional framework.

We are encouraged by the intensive political
activity within all political parties in the country. We
are also encouraged by the peaceful political statements
made by all of the candidates. We would call upon
the Special Representative to continue his meetings
with the stakeholders in order to ensure the integrity,
inclusiveness and fairness of the electoral process.

Jordan welcomes the reform efforts undertaken by
the Afghan Government, including the measures being
taken in the area of human rights, particularly the fight
against violence against women. We reiterate the need
for the Afghan Government to pursue its efforts to
strengthen human rights and the rule of law.

At the end of the year, Afghanistan will come to

a new crossroads. The international community's
message to Afghanistan under those circumstances
should be clear, namely, that the Afghan Government
and people will be able to count on the assistance of the
international community. We must strengthen the role
of the United Nations and deepen our partnership with
Afghanistan. None of us can countenance the effects of
a return to the past or a reversal of the accomplishments
made in the country to date.
