Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We express our deep
appreciation to Under-Secretary-General O'Brien,
Assistant Secretary-General Zerihoun and Ms. Fatima
Askira for their comprehensive briefings. We also
welcome the representative of Nigeria.

We would like to raise several points.

First, we take note of the situation in the Lake
Chad basin area, which we consider to be difficult
and volatile.

Secondly, Kazakhstan strongly supports the work of
the African Union aimed at enhancing the effectiveness
of the Multinational Joint Task Force on the fight
against Boko Haram. This terrorist organization is
threatening not just the Lake Chad basin area, but the
African continent as a whole. In the struggle against
Boko Haram, a global approach on the part of the
international community, with leading functions on the
part of the African countries, is needed.

Thirdly, Boko Haram remains a great threat to
the region, despite the recent achievements reported
by the countries of the region, which produced some
positive results through increased military cooperation.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns the deadly attack that
occurred last December, in which 57 people were killed
by two women suicide bombers in Maiduguri, Nigeria.
We commend the progress made by Benin, Cameroon,
Nigeria, Chad and other countries of the region in
terms of the geographical area of operational activity
and potential of this terrorist organization.
Fourthly, another aspect of this fight is the
deteriorating humanitarian situation. The humanitarian
crisis has worsened despite the military success against
the group and is now one of the largest in the world. More
than 7 million people in Nigeria, the Niger, Cameroon
and Chad are internally displaced as a result. As was
mentioned by the representative of the United Kingdom,
more than 11 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance. Moreover, we have to ensure respect for
the human rights of children, women, youth and all
other vulnerable groups in the region. The slogan of
our campaign to the Security Council included energy,
water and food security for all. We need to ensure such
important aspects of security for the region. We also
emphasize in this regard that significant numbers of
refugees and internally displaced persons add pressure
on host communities that are already insecure in terms
of those important pillars.

We therefore also support the Economic
Community of West African States initiative to create a
special fund of solidarity with the victims of terrorism.
As our ministers discussed two days ago, we are
convinced that the long-term stability and sustainable
peace can be achieved only by understanding the strong
connection between peace, security and development.
In this regard, we should address the root causes of
the crisis.

Fifthly, another problem is that some areas of the
region remain inaccessible to humanitarian actors
owing to the continued threat posed by Boko Haram.
We believe that Council members must focus on how to
increase the volume of humanitarian aid to the region
and ensure that it reaches its final destination in full.

Finally, we commend the efforts of and measures
taken by the United Nations, the African Union,
international organizations and Governments to
introduce peace initiatives in the Lake Chad basin
area, thus requiring a synthesis between bottom-
up approaches and top-down strategies in a way that
brings about transformation.

