Mr. Rishchynski (Canada): This debate comes
at the end of a pivotal year for Afghanistan. Over the
past 12 months, the international community has been
involved in a series of high-level discussions with
Afghanistan about its engagement there post-2014.
Through conferences in Istanbul, Bonn and Kabul,
the Chicago NATO Summit in May and the Tokyo
Conference in July, the international community
reaffirmed its commitment to the long-term security,
stability and development of a democratic Afghanistan
from the end of the transition phase in 2014 through the
transformation decade to follow.

Canada joined the international community at
the Tokyo Conference on Afghanistan in pledging its
support for Afghanistan, particularly in empowering
and enabling Afghan women to shape their destiny,
by announcing that we will contribute $227 million in
development assistance to Afghanistan from 2015 to
2017. That funding is in addition to the $300 million
in development assistance that Canada is currently
contributing through 2014. It also complements our
Prime Minister's earlier announcement at the NATO
Summit held in May of $330 million from 2015 to 2017
to help sustain the Afghan National Security Forces.
In addition, Canada disbursed over $20 million in
2011-2012 to key agencies providing humanitarian
assistance in Afghanistan.

The success achieved in the next decade will be
judged in large part by the extent to which Afghanistan
is able to establish a functional democracy, based on
credible and transparent elections, a professional and
efficient civil service, access to justice, respect for the
rule of law and the protection of human rights, including
freedom of religion.

In recognition of this, Canada is rigorously
monitoring the establishment and implementation
of the Tokyo Mutual Accountability Framework to
support the achievement of Afghanistan's governance
and development goals. Canada also appreciates
the ongoing efforts of the Joint Coordination and
Monitoring Board to ensure the effective delivery of aid
aligned with the Afghan national development strategy
and the Government of Afghanistan's national priority
programmes.

Canada also turns to the Afghanistan Independent
Human Rights Commission and other leaders of Afghan
civil society to ensure that the people ofAfghanistan are
seeing the results of what their leaders have promised
them. Transparency and accountability will be central
to ensuring that international funds are used effectively
and appropriately.

President Karzai's July 29 decree on Government
reform was a helpful first step, but meaningful reform
will require consistent and concerted commitment
from the highest levels of Government to eliminate
corruption and maintain confidence in the public
sector over the long term. There is much work yet to
be done. These measures will foster foreign investors'
confidence, helping the country to attain economic
independence, and we look forward to seeing the
Government of Afghanistan follow through on those
initiatives.

(spoke in French)

It is equally imperative that the Afghan Government
continue to work towards a truly inclusive, just and
fair society. In particular, the rights of women and
girls must not be overlooked. Rather, they must be
integrated through accomplishments that result in the
emergence of women leaders among Afghanistan's
political leaders, in the Afghan Supreme Court, in the
civil service and in civil society.

Canada's ongoing civilian programmes will fully
integrate infant and maternal health, increased access
to education and justice, and greater participation
of women in civil society and political life. The
Government of Afghanistan must also remain active
in its efforts to improve the lives of women and girls.
We encourage the Government of Afghanistan to
increase awareness and enforcement of the law on
the elimination of violence against women. We also
encourage Afghanistan to recognize the different
effects that conflict has on women and men, and to
increase women's role in decision-making with regard
to conflict prevention and resolution, in accordance
with Security Council resolution 1325 (2000). Women
must not be forsaken for the sake of stability.

It has been a challenging year for those who
are working on the ground to improve security in
Afghanistan. Although civilian deaths are down,
Taliban attacks on civilians continue to take a
devastating toll. More than 2,400 civilians have been
killed or injured by insurgents in the first half of 2012
alone. As a result of the conflict, a large number of
civilians cannot access basic services or humanitarian
aid. In addition, aid workers continue to be targeted,
and the rising trend of insider attacks, which have
taken the lives of 51 International Security Assistance
Force (ISAF) soldiers so far this year, is deeply
troubling. Nevertheless, Canada remains committed
to supporting the transition of security responsibilities
to the Afghan authorities, in particular as the second-
largest contributor of personnel to the NATO training
mission in Afghanistan and through our civilian police
deployment focused on training the Afghan National
Police.
However, Canada recognizes that the conditions
necessary for a sustainable peace cannot be achieved
through military means alone. That is why Canada
supports Afghan-led efforts to reach out to those who
renounce violence, respect the Afghan Constitution and
sever ties to all terrorist organizations, and to offer to
those who do meaningful alternatives to violence within
a peaceful and democratic society. It is only through
the establishment of an open and fair dialogue among
all Afghans that the country will reach a permanent
resolution to the conflict.

(spoke in English)

Canada understands that Afghanistan's challenges
cannot be addressed in a vacuum. Regional cooperation
to address issues related to security, customs
enforcement, counter-narcotics and effective border
management, including the movement of people, is
vital to solidifying the gains made over the last 10
years. Canada has played an active role in addressing
these issues by facilitating the Afghanistan-Pakistan
cooperation process to foster dialogue between the
two countries to improve cooperation on border
management. We will continue to work with both
countries to improve communication and coordination
going forward, but with a caveat. Canada calls for
effective implementation of the confidence-building
measures established by the parties to the Istanbul
Process in June. Those measures underscore the shared
responsibility of States for addressing regional issues,
including disaster management, counter-terrorism
and the commercial development of Afghanistan's
economic opportunities so as to make the country more
self-sufficient.

As we move forward from transition to
transformation, Canada remains committed to working
with the Government of Afghanistan, Afghan civil
society and regional and international partners to
sustain the progress that has been made over the past
decade and to help find long-term solutions to build
a sustainable peace. This cooperation will enable
Afghanistan to build a more peaceful, prosperous,
stable and secure country that respects human rights
and the rule of law and that will never again be a safe
haven for terrorists.

