Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): Georgia welcomes
this open debate on the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. I take this opportunity to commend the
Portuguese delegation's efforts in convening this
important meeting.

More than 10 years have passed since the first
debate was held in the Security Council on this issue,
yet armed conflicts still affect millions of persons who
are deprived of basic necessities and who are
vulnerable to violations of their rights, displaced from
their homes, targeted through indiscriminate attacks
and other violations. In many cases, the principal
victims of armed conflicts are women and children.

The United Nations must protect the dignity of
each and every one and uphold the rights of all those
who have been affected by conflicts. It goes without
saying that we need to do more at the international,
regional and national levels.
The August 2008 war has had devastating
consequences for civilians, especially for those who
have been ethnically cleansed from two regions of my
country, Abkhazia and Tskhinvali region. Since our
previous statements in the Council, nothing has
changed on the ground with regard to civilians living
under occupation in these territories. At least 20 per
cent of sovereign Georgian territory remains under
illegal foreign occupation in violation of the six-point
ceasefire agreement brokered by France on behalf of
the European Union. Hundreds of thousands of
internally displaced persons and refugees continue to
suffer. They are denied their right to return to their
homes and villages - a right referred to numerous
times in this very Chamber. The practices of forced
displacement, denial of property rights and other
massive, gross and systematic human rights violations
continue to occur there.

Safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
actors to people in need of protection and assistance is
another important element. Regrettably, the occupying
Power, in clear violation of the six-point agreement,
has continued to block the access of humanitarian aid
and international humanitarian actors to the Tskhinvali
region. Clearly, the denial of the access of
humanitarian personnel to victims of conflict amounts
to a flagrant violation of international humanitarian
law.

Almost a year has passed since Georgia
announced the non-use-of-force commitment. Although
the Charter of the United Nations authorizes us to do
so, Georgia has renounced military means in order to
restore its territorial integrity. The relevant letters have
been sent to the Secretary-General and to other
international organizations, but instead of a
reciprocation to that gesture of peace, the response we
have received has come in the form of the illegal
installation of an additional military contingent,
missiles and rockets in the occupied regions. We
believe that the geopolitical ambitions of one particular
country cannot stand in the way of international efforts
aimed at easing the plight of those suffering from
forced displacement and ethnic cleansing.

Although the topic I will touch on is not
technically part of the debate, it may affect the issues I
have highlighted. Earlier today, Georgia and Russia
signed a package of documents that pave the way for
Russia's accession to the World Trade Organization.
We hope that Russia can demonstrate the same level of
pragmatism it has shown during these talks when it is
faced with resolving other bilateral issues, first and
foremost the right of more than 400,000 men, women
and children to return to their homes in Abkhazia and
the Tskhinvali region in safety and dignity.

One of the purposes of today's debate is to see
the international community more engaged in
addressing all of the relevant challenges. In conclusion,
I wish to underline that Georgia fully supports and
encourages the continued efforts of the international
community in making the protection of civilians a
reality for all of those who are caught up in conflict.

