Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I am
heartened by the Secretary-General's decision to call a
high-level meeting with the regional organizations on
building a comprehensive approach to peace-building,
and it is an excellent idea to have the Security Council
and Member States feed their views into that meeting.
So thank you, Mr. President, for the initiative and the
preparation by your delegation.

The representative of Sweden will make a
statement later in our debate on behalf of the European
Union, and the United Kingdom fully subscribes to that
statement. But I would like to make some points in my
national capacity.

I have been arguing for some time that the United
Nations should take a more integrated approach to
tackling conflicts at their roots and in a coordinated
way. The Secretary-General has set out his views
clearly this morning, and I support his approach. But
the task goes beyond the ability ofthe Security Council
or the Organization as a whole. The entire international
system has to improve its professionalism if we are to
make a difference. Bilateral actors, United Nations
agencies, the Council and the General Assembly will
all have to play their part.

At the meeting tomorrow decisions will be
needed on how the regional organizations can develop
their key role. Cooperation should start with the
essential business of sharing information and analysis.
The capacity of regional organizations could be
extended by the double-hatting of special envoys,
exchanges of staff with the Secretariat and the
arrangement of specialist training and secondments. I
hope the high-level meeting will consider the full range
ofoptions.

In making the paradigm shift to a more integrated
approach among the international institutions, we have
to accept that the distinction so frequently drawn in
recent months between development and security is a
false one. Conflict and poverty feed off each other; so
must conflict management and development. We need
comprehensive and integrated policies that recognize
the links between resolving conflict, building peace,
reducing poverty, promoting education and improving
health.

The Secretary-General is right to point to a
distinction between developmental activities in the
shadow of conflict and normal development work. We
must consider this in greater detail. In the same
context, I warmly welcome his decision to appoint a
deputy special representative in Sierra Leone both to
oversee the economic and social aspects of the
peacekeeping programme, including disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, and to act as the
United Nations Resident Coordinator.

So how do we put this new approach to work?

The first task is to deepen our analysis. Our
means of identifying and responding to crises tend to
be superficial and haphazard. Analysis must stretch
beyond the immediate conflict into its roots. This was
why the Brahimi report's proposal for an Information
and Strategic Analysis Secretariat (EISAS) is in
principle right. It would allow a range of skills
available within the United Nations system to be
brought together under one roof, providing exactly the
sort of comprehensive analyses that this Council and
the Secretary-General so badly need. We should use the
coming months to put in place a properly thought-
through structure to achieve this, with a logic and a
resource cost which can win the support of all. The
countries or regions themselves affected by conflict
must be brought into the process. African leaders, for
instance, are beginning to indicate how strong their
interest is in a fully coordinated approach.

Second, the integrated approach must apply to the
critical work of the United Nations agencies and their
partner organizations in the field. The background
documentation for the high-level meeting gives details
on the strategic framework and common country
assessment mechanisms, which are designed to develop
a coherent and effective international response to a
particular country in crisis. This approach looks
promising; we would be grateful for more information
on how successful the mechanisms have so far been in
practice, and how they are going to be developed. We
are particularly interested in accelerating work on how
to reconstruct the rule of law in conflict-torn countries,
and the statement of the European Union spells this out
in detail. It is essential to get the police and the
judiciary functioning quickly again and to bring to
justice those who have committed atrocities.

Third, coordination on the ground has to be
matched by coordination at the centre. The Brahimi
report contains a key recommendation, in
paragraph 47 (d), that the Secretary-General should
draw up a comprehensive plan for strengthening the
United Nations peace-building capacity. This Council
should today be giving its views on what might go into
that plan.

The essential foundation is the idea of a
continuum of activities: conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peace-building are not separate
activities; they cross over and interact with each other.
Rivalries and jealousies between different players in
the United Nations system have to be broken down,
and regional organizations and donor countries must be
brought into the strategy. The Secretary-General's
leadership and activism in this respect are vital, and the
United Kingdom will support him. It would make
sense, for instance, in respect of each major conflict in
the developing world - and remember that 20 of the
38 poorest countries are or have recently been in the
midst of conflict - to establish a team approach at
Headquarters which brings all the main actors together
operationally.

This is why the United Kingdom has so strongly
supported the concept of Integrated Mission Task
Forces, also contained in the Brahimi report. It is a pity
that the Secretariat has not yet found an opportunity to
set one up, despite the endorsement of the Security
Council and the General Assembly. There are a number
of current missions that would benefit from such an
approach, not least the United Nations Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL) and, potentially, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The Security
Council itself could feed into such a process through its
Working Group on peacekeeping.

Here, let me depart from my text for a moment to
say a word about the Security Council itself in this
respect. The Security Council is, undoubtedly, a central
organization for peace-building, but it cannot achieve
results on its own. We are not particularly good at
implementation and follow-up. One of the main
purposes of the United Kingdom proposal to establish a
working group on peacekeeping was to deal with
exactly that issue: to interconnect with other parts of
the system and focus on implementation and follow-up.
There are some good ideas in the European Union
statement, as there were in that of Ambassador Levitte,
which we have already heard, on how we can proceed
with that. We have to remember that not following up,
not implementing what we put forward in our
resolutions, places a dead hand of inaction over the
whole United Nations system because of the central
role of the Security Council. We promote the centrality
of that role, but we do not fully carry out the
implementation process. We cannot go beyond our
remit; we have to coordinate. But to fail to act fully in
accordance with our remit puts a burden on the rest of
the system.

Fourthly, Member States must bear their own
responsibility for cohesion, both internally and with
each other. Foreign, finance and development
ministries must communicate. Recognizing this, the
United Kingdom Government has recently established
a Global Conflict Prevention Pool, funded from the
budgets of several departments. This represents our
own recognition of the need for a more integrated
response to conflict. We are keen to look at any
effective peace-building measures that might be funded
from it.

When I spoke at the Council's open debate last
July on the prevention of armed conflict, I said that it
was time to convert our fine words into action. There is
a long way to go, but I am encouraged to point to a
recent example of our beginning to get things right.
Here I shall abbreviate the comments set out in my
written text.

I refer to the experience of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
and the debate that we had on 26 January, when it was
clear, from Sergio Vieira de Mello's briefing, that a
process of coordinated developmental planning had
gone into the whole UNTAET operation. I think that
that experience is beginning to bear fruit. In that
meeting we did not focus only on the need for
capacity-building in East Timor; equally striking was
Jose Ramos-Horta's emphasis on the need for security
for East Timor if all of this effort is to have a lasting
effect. UNTAET is certainly far from a perfect mission.
It has faced, and will continue to face, some serious
problems. But we must also welcome the integration of
its approach. As we look ahead to planning a follow-on
mission there - which will certainly need a
peacekeeping element and civilian police, as well a
capacity-building function - we must also look to the
past and apply the lessons we have learned from East
Timor to the rest of our work.

The report on peace-building that will be issued
in March through the Executive Committee on Peace
and Security (ECPS) provides a good opportunity for
this sort of lessons-learned exercise. The United
Kingdom is committed to helping the report produce
practical, forward-looking conclusions, and that means
taking stock of where we have reached. We must make
sure that regional perspectives to conflict prevention
and peace-building are taken into account. We are
therefore supporting a series of worldwide seminars
over the next six weeks, led by the International Peace
Academy (IPA), which will help to develop this
thinking. The one that will take place in New York on
12 March will complete the series. The IPA and we will
be sending colleagues further details.

I hope this debate will help the drafters of the
ECPS report to focus on practical proposals to improve
United Nations peace-building strategies. What are the
key elements of peace-building? Which actors are best
placed to implement them? How can coordination
within the United Nations system be improved? What
roles are there for the ECPS and the Department of
Political Affairs peace-building unit? If clear answers
to these questions are provided by the report, we will
be in a much better position to take a significant step
forward in improving the capacity of the United
Nations in this essential area and in uniting all the
major players in the peace-building field into a
coherent whole.

