Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/20l4/68) and acknowledge the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif. We also welcome the presence of the Prime
Minister of Serbia, Mr. Ivica Dacie, and of Mr. Hashim
Thacic.

On the political front, we welcome the substantive
progress made in implementing the First Agreement of
Principles Governing the Normalization of Relations of
19 April 2013. The municipal elections of 3 November
were held successfully in most of Kosovo for the first
time under a single legislative framework, marking
an important step in strengthening the process of
normalization between the parties, which lays the basis
for an association/community of Serbian municipalities.

It is now time, in the post-election phase, to
consolidate the progress achieved. That means
that future elected representatives must continue
cooperating on the implementation of the Agreement
between Belgrade and Pristina. We call on the parties
to continue their efforts with regard to the application of
the Agreement, to adopt confidence-building measures
and to make progress in the process of reconciliation
between communities.

With regard to reconciliation, the parties must now
address pending issues. Those include determining the
fate of persons who were disappeared or kidnapped, the

protection of important religious and cultural sites in
the Kosovo region and the definitive reintegration of
internally displaced persons.

We reiterate the importance of continuing to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) at all levels so as
to guarantee women's participation in all areas of
decision-making and to ensure that their needs are
adequately met. In that regard, we highlight the need
for further strengthening provisions emanating from
that resolution, especially in the justice and security
sectors.
We underscore the central role and important work
carried out by the United Nations through UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights. The role of UNMIK is fundamental in this
new phase of the implementation of the Agreement. It
is important to continue mutual cooperation between
the Mission and various actors, such as the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo, the Kosovo
Force and the international community. But such
cooperation must always remain under the aegis
of UNMIK. European Union cooperation has been
crucial in facilitating the First Agreement of Principles
Governing the Normalization of Relations.

We are concerned by the occurrence of isolated
incidents of violence in northern Kosovo during
the elections and we condemn the assassination, on
16 January, oer. Dimitrije Janicijevic, a newly elected
member of the North Mitrovica Municipal Assembly.
Such acts risk jeopardizing the agreement reached
between the parties. We therefore support UNMIK's
efforts to play a role of mediation and facilitation
between municipal representatives and minority
communities.

It is also important that the progress made in
transitioning police structures in northern Kosovo be
matched with progress in the judiciary so as to establish
a unified judicial system. Likewise, efforts should
continue in all other areas of the rule of law.

UNMIK could redouble its efforts on outstanding
cases of disappeared individuals. That is a debt owed to
the relatives ofvictims. In addition, the lack ofprogress
with regard to accountability is striking in that context.
As indicated at the Council's open debate on war and its
lessons (see S/PV.7105), my country reiterates its offer
to share its experiences in the painful task of searching
for disappeared persons.
In conclusion, we underscore the importance
of resolution 1244 (1999) as a basis and applicable
guiding instrument for the Kosovo region to promote
reconciliation, stability and prosperity for its
communities.

