Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation welcomes the Secretary-General's report
(S/2011/772*) on the situation in Afghanistan. We
acknowledge the presence here of the Deputy Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and thank him for
his briefing. We also thank Under-Secretary-General
Ladsous and Mr. Staffan de Mistura for bringing us up
to date on the situation.

My delegation also welcomes the conclusions of
the International Afghanistan Conference that took
place in Bonn on 5 December, and we thank Germany
for that initiative.

My delegation would like first and foremost to
comment on the subject of the full implementation of
all the pillars of the transformation and transition
process through 2024. Afghanistan, which has resumed
responsibility for its own stabilization and
peacebuilding, must deal with the security challenges it
will face after the international forces leave. While
aware that 2011 has been a particularly difficult year
for Afghanistan, we commend the progress that has
been made in the political arena. The national dialogue
that we have continued to urge for is now a reality,
through an active parliament that is already preparing
to implement the Kabul process. That dialogue must
become more inclusive and more united. While we are
well aware that not all parties are participating
effectively, we continue to call on all parties to take
part in the transition process.

With regard to security, my delegation strongly
condemns the recent terrorist attacks on 6 December in
Kabul and Mazar-e-Sharif. Once again, we extend our
condolences to the families of the deceased and our
hopes for a speedy recovery for the injured. Such
attacks are unacceptable. But we want to encourage the
Afghan Government and people in their determination
and resilience, for the transition will have to endure
other security challenges. We continue to encourage
dialogue by means of existing instruments, particularly
the High Peace Council, and we urge the renunciation
of violence and terrorism. Similarly, we must
remember the importance of strengthening the capacity
of the Afghan local police in order to better protect
civilians, especially women and children, the most
vulnerable. Finally, we encourage respect for the rule
of law and call for the perpetrators of terrorist acts to
be brought to justice.

With regard to economic and social matters, we
encourage the Afghan Government to restore its
people's confidence in their State by strengthening
good governance. Afghanistan needs determined effort
in order to rebuild a sustainable economy. We
congratulate it on its good relations with its neighbours
and commend the various cooperation agreements
reached with those countries on trade, industry and
energy, aimed at restoring Afghanistan's economy and
improving growth.

We of course support the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and other United Nations bodies. As
Mr. Ladsous emphasized, it is important that we
continue to consider the future role of the United
Nations, particularly in the area of development. In that
regard, we should commend all the efforts undertaken
to meet the Millennium Development Goals,
particularly the finalization of the reproductive health
strategy plan and the successful polio vaccination plan
in southern Afghanistan. Finally, we welcome the
strengthening of the renewed partnership and
cooperation between Afghanistan and the various
international financial institutions, particularly the
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.

In conclusion, we would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de
Mistura, and to wish him all the best in his new
position at home. We also wish every success in his
mandate for his successor, Mr. Jan Kubis. We support
UNAMA and all renewals of its mandate needed to
reinforce the international community's efforts towards
transition and transformation.

We associate ourselves with and support the draft
presidential statement to be made later in this debate.

