Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At the

outset, I would like to join my colleague from the United
Kingdom in congratulating you, Madam President, on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
this month. China also thanks you for convening this
open meeting. I listened attentively to the briefings
delivered by our colleagues from the United Kingdom,
Kuwait and Peru.

With the concerted efforts of the Council members
and in close consultation with the countries concerned,
members of the Council recently visited Bangladesh
and Myanmar. They held conversations with leaders,
officials at various levels and the general public of both
countries, where they also made field visits.

China deeply appreciates the reception the Council
received by Bangladesh and Myanmar during its visit.
The visit demonstrated the commitment and actions
of the parties to resolve the issue through dialogue
and cooperation, and set an example of unity and
collaboration in the work of the Security Council. It
played a positive role in the pursuit of a solution to
the issue of Rakhine state. Through the visit, Council
members gained an intimate and deeper understanding
of the issue of Rakhine state, and its gravity
and complexity.

Council members have all expressed concerns
about the humanitarian situation of the displaced
persons. At the same time, they saw the sincere efforts
of Bangladesh and Myanmar to resolve the issue.
Bangladesh has made enormous efforts to respond
to the humanitarian crisis, and the Government of
Myanmar is ready for the return of the displaced
persons. China has noted that, following the Council's
visits, the countries concerned have made active efforts
to further alleviate the situation.

The statement by State Counsellor Aung San Suu
Kyi on 1 May made it clear that the Government will
sign a memorandum of understanding on the return
of the displaced persons with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the
United Nations Development Programme as soon as
possible. The State Counsellor herself visited Rakhine
state. Myanmar has built transit sites and reception
centres and settlement Villages, and taken a host of
measures to improve the conditions in Rakhine state.

Recently, the Government of Myanmar also sent a
high-level delegation to Bangladesh to meet with the
displaced persons and encourage them to return. The
active efforts made by the countries concerned to launch
the repatriation process should be fully recognized.
Living conditions in Cox's Bazar could worsen in
the wake of the imminent monsoon season. We must
pay close attention and do everything possible to
prevent a massive humanitarian crisis. The pressing
task is to push for substantive steps by Myanmar and
Bangladesh to implement the bilateral arrangement,
facilitate the timely return of the largest possible
number of displaced persons and credibly improve
the humanitarian situation of displaced persons in
Bangladesh. We hope that Myanmar and Bangladesh
will resolve any issues that might arise in implementing
the bilateral arrangement through bilateral dialogue
and consultations. The concerted efforts of Bangladesh
and Myanmanr to resolve the relevant issues are not
only in the fundamental and long-term interests of both
countries, but also in the interests of the countries in
the region.

Going forward, the international community
should increase humanitarian assistance to Myanmar
and Bangladesh. United Nations agencies should step
up consultations with the Governments of the countries
concerned and sign the relevant memorandum of
understanding as soon as possible. We should work
together to move forward the early implementation
of the bilateral arrangement to facilitate the return of
displaced persons. Efforts should be made to create
an enabling external environment for the countries
to properly resolve the issue through the bilateral
channel and ensure that it does not drag on, become
increasingly complicated or escalate.

This past week, the Security Council's press
statement (SC/13331) on its visit to Myanmar and
Bangladesh reaffirmed the Council's firm commitment
to the sovereignty, political independence, territorial
integrity and unity of Myanmar. It welcomed the signing
of the memorandum of understanding and the relevant
arrangement on the return of displaced persons from
Rakhine state between the Governments of Myanmar
and Bangladesh and the commitment made by State
Counsellor Aung San Suu Kyi on 1 May. It urged the
Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh to step
up consultations and cooperation and implement the
bilateral arrangement as soon as possible. The Council
should continue to encourage Myanmar and Bangladesh
to ramp up consultations and cooperation for the early
implementation of the bilateral arrangement.

As a friendly neighbour of both Myanmar and
Bangladesh, China has been following the situation
in Rakhine state very closely. We have been working
actively in response to emerging issues and have
provided emergency humanitarian relief for the proper
settlement of displaced persons. The three-phase
solution to address the issue of Rakhine state proposed
by Wang Yi, State Councillor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of China, during his visit to Myanmar and
Bangladesh in November 2017 has been endorsed
by both countries, and its implementation is well
under way.

China will continue to play a constructive role in
seeking a proper settlement to the issue of Rakhine
state, which involves a complex historical, ethnic and
religious background. Its solution requires long-term
efforts. The international community should play a
constructive role in creating the external conditions
needed for facilitating consultations and dialogue
between Myanmar and Bangladesh, thereby resolving
real problems, maintaining long-term stability and
achieving prosperity and development for Rakhine
state. Now is the time for action.

