Mr. Hachani (Tunisia) (interpretation from French):
First of all, my delegation would like to congratulate you,
Sir, on the way in which you have been carrying out your
work as President of the Security Council, and we wish you
complete success in the discharge of your important
functions.

We congratulate the Security Council on its decision
to hold this important formal meeting, with a debate open
to all Members of the Organization on the subject of
"Maintenance of peace and security and post-conflict peace-
building".

The wording of the agenda item makes clear one
fundamental fact that is becoming increasingly evident: the
close link between peacekeeping and post-conflict peace-
building through various actions aimed at making peace
sustainable.

Throughout its existence, the United Nations has built
up valuable experience in peacekeeping, having managed to
prevent numerous conflicts and restore and maintain peace
in various places throughout the world, in particular by
coming between belligerents so as to facilitate the
conclusion and implementation of peace agreements. The
Organization certainly has to its credit numerous successes
of which it can be proud today. That extensive United
Nations experience in peacekeeping, especially during the
past decade, nonetheless teaches us, among other things,
how vital it is after conflicts to ensure that all the
conditions are met so that peace can continue.

Hence the need to do everything possible to strengthen
confidence among the former parties to a conflict, to create
a new climate favourable to national reconciliation and to
encourage the resumption of economic and social activities
that improve the daily lives of the population by addressing
the underlying causes of conflict. Therein lies the
importance of post-conflict peace-building.

On the new international post-cold-war chessboard,
post-conflict peace-building is so important to the
maintenance of peace that it is an essential counterpart and
even a corollary to it. Peace-building has many facets.
These include crucial and complementary measures which
together contribute to the restoration of confidence, to the
re-establishment of normal life and to the rebirth of hope
among people; in a word, they contribute to a return to
normalcy in the country or countries ravaged by war,
depending on whether the conflict was internal or
between two State entities. Among these facets, it is
important to mention disarmament, demining, electoral
assistance, the repatriation and resettlement of refugees
and displaced persons and economic reconstruction.

These are the most important peace-building
measures, to whose implementation the international
community must actively and substantively contribute, in
particular through the Security Council, the General
Assembly and other bodies and agencies of the United
Nations, each in its own area of competence.

My delegation emphasizes the need to give post-
conflict peace-building programmes and their
implementation the greatest chance for success for the
benefit of peace. For that, we believe that certain
parameters should guide the international community's
action in this area.

We are thinking first of the urgency of the effective
implementation of peace-building programmes. For even
if in principle the concept of peace-building implies that
it will take place following the end of hostilities and upon
the achievement of a political settlement, the boundary is
not so clear-cut between a given United Nations
peacekeeping operation and post-conflict peace-building
activities. Thus, even before the end of a conflict, the
needs of the countries concerned should be identified and
the means for meeting them should be known. Some
peace-building activities, such as demining or
disarmament and electoral assistance, benefit from being
carried out before the end of the actual United Nations
peacekeeping operation, if there is one. It is also
preferable to begin operations to repatriate refugees and
displaced persons as soon as possible, as humanitarian
problems have a direct impact on all national
reconciliation efforts. Economic recovery activities should
also be undertaken without delay.

Secondly, my delegation considers that it is
necessary for all post-conflict peace-building efforts to be
coordinated with the various actors involved. All peace-
building programmes must reflect an overall integrated
and coherent strategy which takes into account the needs
and specific characteristics of the countries in question. In
addition to humanitarian programmes, we are thinking
here of activities such as those related to economic and
social reconstruction which require a contribution by

 

donor countries and by the United Nations and its various
organs and specialized agencies.

Thirdly, the international community should give
particular attention to the financing of economic recovery
as part of post-conflict peace-building. Two remarks are
appropriate here relating on the one hand, to the need for
rapid availability of these resources, and on the other hand,
to the necessary consideration of the degree of fragility of
peace in the country or countries concerned. This requires
flexible financial conditions which are as concessional as
possible, as suggested by the Secretary-General in his report
on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa.

Finally, we would like to repeat the importance to all
peace-building activity of the principles of the consent of
the parties involved to receiving assistance from the
international community, of respect for national sovereignty
of the countries concerned, and of non-interference in their
internal affairs.

Tunisia has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping activities since the beginning of the 1960s
through its contributions to various United Nations
peacekeeping operations. Today, my country is participating
in three of these operations by providing civilian police
contingents. This civilian police sector is a new post-
conflict peace-building activity which is being used
increasingly by the United Nations.

Tunisia is determined to continue to support this
United Nations work and is following with interest the
Security Council's deliberations on this matter, deliberations
which, in our view, should lead to a clearer concept of
post-conflict peace-building, to improvement in its practice
and to greater clarification of its link to peacekeeping.

