Mr. Karlsson: I am very pleased to have this
opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf
of the World Bank. This is the second time this year
that the World Bank has participated in a Security
Council discussion on the future of East Timor,
underscoring the close collaboration of our respective
institutions. I would like to express our sincere thanks
to the President of the Security Council for his gracious
invitation. I would also like to note our appreciation for
the report of the Secretary-General, the briefing by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and in
particular, of course, the substantive contribution of the
Chief Minister of the Transitional Government. The
United Nations and the Secretary-General have played
an unprecedented role in paving the way for East Timor
to become an independent, sovereign nation in the near
future. We are very proud to have been associated with
this process.

We all recognize that East Timor is at a turning
point. With general elections peacefully concluded, a
Second Transitional Government in place and the
momentum for independence gathering, the newly
established Administration faces many formidable
challenges. The greatest of these, undoubtedly, is that
of governing a new country with very limited human
resources. We duly acknowledge the substantial efforts
made, by United Nations agencies in particular, to
build institutional capacity in East Timor, a process
that has accelerated substantially in the past year. We
also recognize that capacity-building will be a long-
term process. The transfer of technical and managerial
skills to East Timorese must therefore follow a
strategic approach, with the coordinated support of
multiple donor organizations. However, there are
immediate skill needs that require to be filled, without
which there is a risk of Government collapse.

Security Council resolution 1272 (1999)
established a wide mandate for the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET),
including the establishment of a national civil
administration, the development of civil and social
services and support for capacity-building for self-
government. The report of the Secretary-General
presented here today recommends that a limited
number of civilian professional staff remain within a
successor mission to provide assistance to the new
Timorese Government, both in the area of training and
to ensure the continued daily functioning of the
administration.
The positions proposed are in the key State
functions of budget, tax, treasury, central payments,
justice and legal counsel, procurement, internal
administration, infrastructure management and land
and property. The World Bank's assessment of the
governance situation in East Timor and East Timorese
capacity indicates that the continued provision of
international staff in those positions is critical to avoid
a risk of collapse of State services in the period
immediately after independence. Before the August
independence ballot, supervised by the United Nations,
little opportunity existed for Timorese professionals to
develop relevant skills.

Good progress has been made since late 2000, but
strong management systems and skills will take much
longer to build than the short period between the
establishment of the East Timorese Transitional
Administration and independence. We estimate that,
without operational management support from
international staff, there would indeed be a risk of
paralysis in some of these functions. This has a
substantial knock-on effect across government. For
example, if medicines cannot be procured or health
workers paid, health services will collapse, even
though in all other ways public health management
may be quite sound and capacity to manage sector
ministries by the East Timorese generally is sound.

We note that the current proposal on the need for
United Nations funding is already based on strong
burden-sharing with bilateral and multilateral donors.
The Trust Fund for East Timor, for example, which is
administered by the World Bank through the
International Development Association (IDA), will
finance at least 30 international positions in the year
following independence. Bilateral donors are also
providing a good deal of technical assistance.

However, the nature of many of the functions
outlined in the Secretary-General's report is outside the
type of capacity-building more normally provided by
donors, in that the positions directly support the
ongoing operational management of government, often
in politically sensitive areas such as procurement or
legal counsel. In contrast, development assistance for
capacity-building is provided through training or
international staff engaged in development projects.

Lastly, and perhaps most importantly, the
aggregate external financing available for East Timor is
already overstretched to assist the East Timorese
Government in delivering basic services. The
UNTAET-administered Consolidated Fund of East
Timor and the IDA-administered Trust Fund for East
Timor currently have a combined financing gap of over
$14 million. In the post-independence period, we
estimate that East Timor will have some difficulty in
mobilizing the external financing required to bridge the
lean years between independence and the realization of
more substantial Timor Sea hydrocarbon revenues in
2005/2006, even after allowing for concessional
support through the international development banks.

Preparations are currently under way for the next
East Timor donors meeting in Oslo, from 11 to 13
December this year. This meeting, chaired jointly by
the United Nations and the World Bank, aims to
provide a platform to initiate donor discussions on the
medium-term programme of support for East Timor
after independence. An integrated approach between
this process and discussions of the assessed
contribution budget is desirable, since uncertainties
over the coverage of the assessed contribution budget
will inevitably affect donor discussions on the medium-
term aid programme.

East Timor is very important to the World Bank
Group because of the strong partnerships we have
forged with the Timorese people and with donors in
post-conflict reconstruction in a particularly
challenging environment. We will maintain this
commitment over the years following independence.
We look forward to working with the new East
Timorese Government, the United Nations and donor
partners to ensure that gains made in social and
economic recovery since the 1999 ballot are
strengthened as the first new independent nation and
Member State in this new millennium is born.

