Mr. Shawabkah (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, Madam President, I would like to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month.

Once again, the Council is meeting to take up the
conflict in the Middle East and Israel's continued
occupation of the Palestinian territories and of Arab
territories in the Syrian Golan and South Lebanon. The
Council is meeting at a time of intensive United States
efforts, with major international support, to create an
environment conducive to the relaunching of direct
negotiations between the Palestinians and Israel in
order to achieve the two-State solution through the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State
within the borders of 4 June 1967 and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, coexisting in peace and
security with the State of Israel and all other States of
the region. We in Jordan support these efforts and call
on Israel to respond positively to them by resuming
direct negotiations as soon as possible from the point at
which the previous negotiations stopped, and to
address all final status questions, including Jerusalem,
refugees, security and borders.

Such negotiations must be clearly time-bound and
subject to strict criteria to monitor the fulfillment of
obligations. All parties must evince their seriousness
by matching actions with words. Any demonstration of
a commitment to peace ipso facto requires a halt to all
unilateral Israel actions in the occupied West Bank 4
the heart of which is East Jerusalem - including
forced migration, deportation, the seizure of property
and land, and the policy of demolishing the homes of
Christian and Muslim Palestinians and evicting them.
There also must be an immediate stop to all
excavations and tunnels beneath and around the
Christian and Islamic holy sites.

Needless to say, such actions, over and above
being illegal and illegitimate, violate the norms of
international law and international humanitarian law
and constitute a flagrant breach by Israel of its
6
obligations as the occupying Power and of scores of
resolutions of this Council and hundreds of resolutions
of the General Assembly. These actions also hinder the
United States and international efforts.

The two-State solution is the only solution to the
question of Palestine, which is at the core of the Arab-
Israeli conflict. Attainment of such a solution and of
comprehensive peace in the Middle East in accordance
with established international terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative is of vital interest not only to
the nations and peoples of our region but to the entire
world. It also commands international unanimity.

Similarly, the Arab Peace Initiative - adopted in
2002 by the Council of the League of Arab States at the
Beirut Summit and reaffirmed in all subsequent Arab
summits, most recent of which was the Sirte summit,
held last March, and also endorsed by the Organization
of the Islamic Conference (OIC) at the summit level
and the ministerial level - reflects the depth of the
Islamic and Arab commitment to an even-handed,
comprehensive, permanent and just peace. Regrettably,
that important initiative has not been received with
commensurate acceptance or positive reaction by
successive Israeli Governments. It is high time for
Israel to respond positively to this balanced, committed
and significant initiative, which would create a win-
win situation for all parties.

That is because Israel's acceptance of the Arab
Peace Initiative would guarantee the end of its
occupation of all Syrian territories occupied since 1967
and the remaining Lebanese territories occupied in the
same year and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as its capital, and
because it would guarantee an agreed resolution of the
issue of Palestine refugees in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 194 (III) and would secure for
Israel peace agreements with all Arab States and
normal relations with 35 other Islamic States.
Moreover, Israel's acceptance and implementation of
the Initiative would put an end to the Arab-Israeli
conflict and guarantee the security of all States and
peoples of the region, including Israel. It would
integrate Israel into the region, replacing its recourse to
a citadel mentality, which does not bring about
security, stability, peace, good-neighbourliness or
cooperation.

Hence, we affirm and underscore the importance
of a holistic solution and of seeking as soon as possible
10-45934
to resume negotiations on the Lebanese and Syrian
tracks from the point at which the previous
negotiations stopped, within a frame of reference based
on the established peace process terms of reference and
the Arab Peace Initiative.

Allow me on behalf of my country to emphasize
the severity and gravity of the scope and implications
of the absence of peace and security in the Middle
East. When His Hashemite Majesty King Abdullah II
Bin Al Hussein consistently affirms the centrality of
the question of Palestine and its priority and
precedence over all other questions in the region, he is
proceeding from the firm conviction that the two-State
solution and the peace process constitute the only
approach that will enable us to effectively and
efficiently address the region's other challenges and
problems, including the threat of the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and manifestations of
intolerance, extremism, terrorism and violence.

In view of the uninterrupted historic role assumed
by His Majesty King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein and
Jordan as custodian of sacred Christian and Islamic
holy sites, I would like to acquaint the Council with the
gravity of Israeli actions in Al-Quds, which are
intended to create new realities on the ground and to
eradicate religious monuments, in particular Christian
and Islamic sites. This constitutes a flagrant breach of
international humanitarian law, which obliges the
occupying Power to preserve cultural, historic and
religious sites and not to undermine or demolish them.
The Council realizes that Israel's continuation of such
actions offends the feelings of hundreds of millions of
Christians and Muslims, not only in the region but all
over the world. Therein lies the real threat to the
international peace and security provided for in the
United Nations Charter.

The notable economic and security achievements
of the Palestinian Government in the Palestinian
territories are threatened by Israel's continued policy of
isolation, roadblocks, separation walls and closure.
Hence, this policy and these practices must be stopped,
and the Israeli blockade of Gaza must be ended
immediately.

Moreover, until the full and prompt lifting of its
blockade in accordance with its legal obligations and in
support of lofty humanitarian values, Israel must deal
positively with international attempts to extend a
helping hand to the Gaza Strip. The recent Israeli
10-45934
aggression against the freedom flotilla is evidence of
Israel's discriminatory and widely denounced approach
to the values of humanitarian relief, which bring
together humankind, regardless of religion, race,
culture or civilization. We call for a guarantee that such
denounced acts of aggression will not be repeated.

