Mr. Guterres (spoke in French): First of all, I would
like to express my thanks for this opportunity to speak
before the Council. Only four days ago, we saw the
entry into force of the first binding legal framework on
the rights of internally displaced persons - the African
Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of
Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, known as the
Kampala Convention. A number of countries in the
Sahel region, including recently Mali, have ratified this
milestone African treaty.

(spoke in English)

That means tangible progress on the legal level for
millions of uprooted people across Africa. The harsh
everyday conditions facing most internally displaced
persons on the continent today highlight the urgent
need to transform those positive legal developments
into reality on the ground. The Mali displacement
crisis, which has significant consequences for the wider
Sahel region, is a case in point.

Nearly 350,000 people have been forced from their
homes since the beginning of 2012, many of them
seeking protection in neighbouring countries. In a
region where drought and prolonged food insecurity
had already caused one acute humanitarian crisis, that
massive displacement has now created another acute
emergency. Almost 200,000 people are internally
displaced, the majority of them living with host
families or in spontaneous settlements. In the north,
both the displaced and the communities sheltering them
lack food. In the absence of State authorities to provide
essential social services, they struggle to meet their
most basic needs.

Insecurity continues to hamper access by
humanitarian agencies, creating calamitous
consequences for populations already drained by
months of hardship. Protection concerns are growing in
the face of widespread reports of serious human rights
violations, from sexual violence and child recruitment
to the stoning and mutilation of criminal suspects.
With the individual verification and so-called level 2
registration exercises soon to be completed, the number
of Malian refugees in neighbouring countries is now
estimated at more than 140,000.

But, as the Secretary-General has observed, we
cannot view the Malian crisis in isolation. It is essential
to take into account the context of the region - the
Sahel - which is facing enormous challenges that
range from food insecurity to institutional fragility in
some cases, and from widespread poverty to security
threats in others. It is the Sahel in its entirety, not only
Mali, that needs the attention and the support of the
international community.

The countries of the Sahel are among the main
victims of the accelerating effects of climate change.
While drought and desertification are not new in the
Sahel, their increased frequency and intensity are.
That situation will likely worsen in the future as a
potential source of conflict over scarce resources
and a new driver of forced displacement. In that
context, the international community, especially the
countries that contribute more to global warming and
its consequences, has a clear moral obligation to help
communities build resilience.

Resilience is key not only to better preventing and
mitigating the impact of natural disasters, but also
for adapting to the slow onset of desertification and
other processes that are destroying an environment
capable of sustaining human life. The countries of the
region - Algeria, Burkina Faso, Guinea, Mauritania,
the Niger and Togo - are to be commended for their
generosity and the unwavering commitment they have
shown to the principles of refugee protection. All of
them have kept their borders open throughout the crisis,
despite the enormous pressure that has put on their own
often vulnerable communities and scarce resources.

The refugee-hosting States need and deserve much
stronger international solidarity to help them manage
the additional strain created by the refugee influx. The
challenges facing UNHCR and its partners in assisting
displaced Malians in the neighbouring counties are also
significant. Most of the refugees are hosted in remote,
arid areas. It often takes several days of driving on very
poor roads to provide them with food, water and medical
supplies. In addition to access problems, insecurity,
including a high risk ofkidnapping, also hinders the aid
effort in several locations, forcing humanitarian actors
to move with armed escorts, with all the problems that
entails. With refugee sites located close to the border,
refugees are potentially exposed to forced recruitment
and other spillover effects of the conflict.

Assisting a largely nomadic refugee population
poses another set of unusual, complex challenges that
require humanitarian actors to adapt their strategies for
response in innovative ways that are better targeted to
the specific character of those communities.

The humanitarian challenges I have mentioned
are compounded by a number of complex, interlinked
factors that make northern Mali, in the very fragile
context of the wider Sahel zone, one of the potentially
most explosive corners of the world today. As has
been mentioned, an area bigger than the entire Iberian
peninsula, from which I come, is now without the
presence of any State authority and is controlled by
armed extremist groups. The region's remoteness,
poverty and vast, sparsely populated territories have
made it an ideal operating theatre for actors engaged
in highly lucrative organized crime, including drug
and arms trafficking, people smuggling and activities
linked to terrorism. That entails security risks at the
national and subregional levels and beyond, potentially
impacting all of West Africa, the southern rim of the
Mediterranean and, ultimately, Europe.

To be sustainable, a future political framework
must include, but also go beyond, the signing of
agreements with those elements of the insurgency that
are ready for dialogue. It must create the conditions for
all communities, regardless of their ethnic and social
composition and stratification - the Songhai, the
Tuareg, the Arab-speakers, the Fulani, the Peul and
others 7 to fully participate in a reformed Malian State
and in the socioeconomic development of the region.
In that regard, the ongoing mediation efforts need
full support. A lasting political solution can be reached
only with the full engagement of all countries in the
region and with a deepened and enlarged consensus at
national, regional and global levels. There are many
steps required that only the Malians themselves can
take. But for their efforts to succeed, the international
community will have to be fully engaged in an effective
future development strategy that is fair, equitable and
fully inclusive.

Poverty and underdevelopment, exacerbated by
desertification and the effects of climate change, are
being exploited by ideologies that are based either
on ethnicity or on religious extremism. As a result,
everyone stands to lose. That problem is exacerbated
in Mali today, but we cannot forget its regional
implications. If no comprehensive solution is found,
the current situation risks triggering something much
broader - a series of interlinked crises from Libya to
Nigeria and from the Atlantic Ocean to the Gulf of
Aden, thereby threatening the security and the stability
of several countries. The humanitarian consequences
of such a scenario would be unpredictable. I trust the
Security Council to do everything possible to prevent
that from happening.

We find ourselves today at a critical juncture for
the stability of the Sahel region as a whole. I would
therefore like to end by highlighting three key points
related to the activity of my Office. I hope that the
international community will take them into account
going forward.

First, Member States must give full consideration
to the humanitarian dimension of the crisis as they
consider the appropriate international response.
Assisting the displaced and other affected populations
is already highly challenging in the current situation.
We should not forget that, in any military intervention,
even when successful, tens of thousands more people
are likely to become displaced in the beginning, both
inside the country and across borders.

Secondly, I urge all actors in the conflict, including
a potential international force, to protect humanitarian
space and ensure that agencies have unhindered access
to affected populations. In that context, the autonomy
of humanitarian space, with a clear separation between
the civilian and military spheres of any international
presence, is of fundamental importance. Thirdly,
planning for the political transition and post-conflict
recovery must carefully take into account those who
have been forced to flee. For example, the electoral
process must foresee such issues as voter registration
of displaced populations, many of whom have lost their
identity documents.

Similarly, future recovery and resilience strategies
will be incomplete ifthey fail to include the dynamics of
displacement. The potential for the safe and sustainable
return of those who have fled is one key concern to be
firmly anchored in any road map for the future of the
region. Adequate support to countries hosting refugees
is another, including, for example, the rehabilitation
of refugee-impacted areas once displaced persons are
able to return home. I am confident that my old friend
Romano Prodi's efforts to bring about an integrated
United Nations strategy for the Sahel region will result
in a successful framework to enhance that support.

Once again, I appeal to the international community
to show to all countries of the Sahel the same solidarity
they have extended to so many Malian refugees while
totally disregarding the impact on their own economies
and societies. I again thank the Council for this
opportunity to brief it today.

