Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, Madam, I join in your expressions of condolence
over the attack that took place in Egypt. We offer our
sorrow, solidarity and commitment to continuing to fight
all manifestations of terrorism and barbaric extremism.

I thank you for convening this debate on the
question of Haiti. I also particularly thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra
Honore, not only for her comprehensive briefing but
also for dedicated work and leadership of the United
Nations activities in Haiti.

Uruguay associated itself with the statement to be
pronounced by the Permanent Representative of Peru
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Haiti.

We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
of 17 March (S/2017/223), presenting the findings of
the multidisciplinary strategic assessment mission
carried out in early February under the leadership
of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
The assessment was produced at a moment of great
importance for Haiti, since the newly elected President
was inaugurated on 7 February, marking the return
of the country to constitutional order. We therefore
congratulate the people of Haiti, President Jovenel
Moise, Prime Minister Jack Guy Lafontant and the new
Government team, wishing them success in this new
stage of such importance to Haiti.

Haiti has been facing huge difficulties, including
serious natural disasters, and has yet to overcome
numerous and complex challenges in strengthening its
democracy, political stability, the rule of law and the
Haitian National Police, protecting human rights and
promoting economic and social development. Haiti
no doubt still needs the international community's
assistance to make the structural reforms necessary to
achieve sustainable development. It is also evident that
the situation in Haiti is not as we found it 13 years ago,
when the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) was established. Security is among the
sectors that has seen progress, including the increased
capacities and growing professionalization of the
Haitian National Police.

We believe that part of our responsibility
consists in determing the best way to support Haiti
in the current situation. In that regard, the strategic
assessment mission has provided important factors for
evaluation. These indicate that there is no reason today
for MINUSTAH to remain in Haiti beyond 15 October.
They also show that the current needs of the country
require another type of United Nations presence
and another type of support. We are aware of the
recommendation for the establishment of a new mission
with the main function of assisting the Government of
Haiti in the institutional strengthening of the rule of
law, supporting and strengthening the Haitian National
Police and monitoring, reporting and analysing the
human rights situation .

The issue of cholera in Haiti deserves special
mention. We welcomed with great satisfaction the new
United Nations approach to cholera, and in our capacity
as Chair ofthe Group ofFriends ofHaiti, we coordinated
the efforts towards the adoption of General Assembly
resolution 71/161, which welcomed that new approach.
Today, we also welcome the references to cholera
contained in the report of the Secretary-General, in
particular the reference to the certain political role for
the new mission, in complement to the efforts of the
United Nations country team.

In conclusion, we wish to reaffirm Uruguay's
commitment to and solidarity with Haiti. Uruguay
has been on the ground at its side since MINUSTAH
was launched in 2004, contributing, at the time of its
greatest deployment, two battalions, a maritime unit,
an air force unit, police officers and staff officials. In
the conviction that a military presence is not needed
in Haiti today, Uruguayan troops will withdraw from
the country on 15 april. and will do so with a sense
of fulfillment.

I also wish to reiterate our public recognition of
the work of all MINUSTAH personnel, especially the
women and men of my country who are deployed or
will be deployed to it, and our heartfelt recollection of
all those who have lost their lives in the line of duty.
All have demonstrated throughour the past 13 years
their dedication and commitment to the recovery and
stability of Haiti.

