Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): First of all, I would like
to thank the United Kingdom and France for requesting
today's meeting, and the presidency for promptly
convening it.

At the outset, let me recall the statement by the
Foreign Minister of Ukraine issued today on the alleged
use of chemical weapons in Syria, which reiterates,
inter alia, that the use of chemical weapons by anyone,
anywhere and under any circumstances is a blatant
violation of international law and must be strongly
condemned, and those responsible for such acts must
be held accountable.

There appears to be no end to the incessant flow of
reports from Syria regarding the use of toxic chemicals
as weapons. A real Pandora's box was opened in
2012 and, to date, we continue to witness the grave
consequences of the Syrian Government's actions and
decisions, or rather the lack of them, from five years
ago. The genie is out of the bottle but the international
community is still undecided about what to do about it,
despite the consensus that the use of chemical weapons
is unjustifiable and cannot be tolerated.

The international community, including the Security
Council, has been very prolific and eloquent in
expressing concern and condemning the use of toxic
chemicals as weapons, but that is as far as it goes. There
is an astounding lack of concrete actions, and therefore
the gap between talking the talk and walking the walk
is only growing. Vivid images of the victims who were
exposed to the poisonous gas in Idlib yesterday serve as
a loud and clear wake-up call for the whole international
community. They are a stark reminder to all of us in the
Chamber that there is a price to be paid for any failure to
act. Those innocent civilians in Idlib paid the ultimate
price because the Council could not get its act together
on the Syrian chemical weapons issue. Those children
whose pictures we saw yesterday fight for breath and
battle suffocation because of fateful decisions made
in distant capitals by people preoccupied by their own
grand agendas.

Under the circumstances, repeating the usual
mantras of "Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons investigation", "Joint Investigative
Mechanism involvement", "need for the host
Government's full cooperation" and so on sounds
hollow and, frankly, is an affront to the people of Syria.
Moreover, the Council's failure to act on the issue will
create the false perception that perpetrators of that crime
can hide behind the wall of lies and falsification - the
hybrid wall constructed by the Al-Assad regime and
secured by the Russian veto. That wall must be knocked
down. My only question today is this, Where is the
limit to our collective tolerance, which appears to have
no boundaries? And as a follow up: How many more
Idlibs will it take to finally move on this issue?

Proceeding from the Council's common position
that the use of chemical weapons is a flagrant violation
of international law, we believe it should act resolutely
and without any delay. In that regard, Ukraine supports
the draft resolution presented by the United States, the
United Kingdom and France, as a balanced and focused
document that introduces specific actions. We hope
that this important document will be adopted by the
Council today. That is the least we can do to ensure that
the Idlib attack is not ignored.

