Mr. Zhukov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian):
We are grateful to Mr. Moussa and Mr. Madeira for
their briefings.

We share the assessments and conclusions contained
in the reports ofthe Secretary-General (S/2012/365 and S/2012/421). We note some progress in consolidating
democratic processes in a number of States in the
subregion, including the peaceful holding of elections
and the orderly transition of power. We also welcome
the efforts of Central African countries to encourage
regional integration and cross-border cooperation.

A serious threat to peace and stability continues
to be posed by the work of armed groups and the
uninterrupted flow of weapons and combatants as a
result of the negative impact of the Libyan crisis. In
this regard, we attach great significance to the efforts
to strengthen security in countries in the subregion,
including the signing of the Kinshasa Convention for
the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons. Of
no lesser importance are measures taken by States in
the Gulf of Guinea to combat armed piracy in coastal
waters, including the preparation of a regional summit
on this issue, with the participation of all interested
parties.

We are concerned by the growth in the activity of
the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). We have seen more
than 50 attacks on civilians in the first three months of
this year alone. Due to looting, approximately 450,000
people are still refugees and internally displaced persons
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central
African Republic and South Sudan. The work of this
group is seriously destabilizing the military, political
and humanitarian situation in the affected areas, and it
undermines the efforts at their post-conflict recovery.

We call for a comprehensive approach to handling
this issue, which calls for the implementation of
military, political, socio-economic, humanitarian and
outreach measures. That would allow us to eliminate
the breeding ground for the work of the Lord's
Resistance Army, including by means of strengthening
State institutions and alleviating poverty and mass
unemployment. We believe it is important to take
steps to extend State authority to remote areas and to
ensure sustainable socio-economic development there.
We believe it is equally urgent to steadily implement
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration programmes for ex-combatants and to
strengthen and effectively reform the security sector.

We welcome the growing cooperation of States
in the subregion in regional and international
organizations and with other parties interested in
combating this group. We note the official launching in
the spring of 2012 of the corresponding initiative by the
African Union (AU), which calls in particular for the
establishment of an operational force of 5,000 soldiers
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Uganda.

We believe that the regional United Nations strategy
to counteract the LRA, which the Council has developed
through the United Nations Regional Office for Central
Africa (UNOCA) and with the AU and other partners,
will help broaden the coordination of collective efforts
in this area. That document, which is in our view solid,
charts the full range of interrelated goals, objectives
and activities to combat that militia and to eliminate the
consequences of its criminal activity for the countries
in the subregion.
We note the contribution of UNOCA to the
collective efforts to combat the LRA and the key role it
has in preventing conflicts, ensuring peace and security,
peacebuilding and strengthening the coordination of
the United Nations work and the work of regional and
subregional organizations in Central Africa.

