Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Time is short, and
I will abbreviate my statement. But there are a few
points I would like to make this morning. The first is to
say how touched we are that on her final day in office,
Ms. Bertini has chosen to come and talk to the Council.
During the time that she has been in office, the scale
and complexity of humanitarian operations mounted by
the United Nations and by others has increased
dramatically. Under her leadership, the World Food
Programme (WFP) has responded magnificently to that
challenge.

On Afghanistan, which is the subject of this
briefing today, I want to pay a particular tribute and
convey our thanks to WFP and to the other United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, which have
all played such a crucial role, together with very many
brave local Afghan employees, in ensuring that
humanitarian food aid and relief can be and were
delivered to those in need. The Secretary-General's
report and the figures which Catherine Bertini has
quoted to us today are ample testimony to the
effectiveness of their efforts.

Ms. Bertini's statement to us today eloquently
argued how food aid saves lives, how food aid can
contribute to recovery and how it can serve in the
longer term as a stabilizing factor. I respect a great deal
of her general thinking, but at the same time, I want to
caution that we must be very careful in using food aid
outside acute emergency situations.

We need to make sure that food and needs are
examined on a case-by-case basis. We need to be sure
that food is, in fact, the most appropriate and most
efficient resource transfer in cases of conflict and
beyond the immediate conflict stage. Naturally, in
many crisis situations food aid will fit that requirement
since needs are so immediate. But we need to recognize
also that food aid in conflict situations is highly
sensitive and, if misused, can have a direct and
immediate effect on the dynamics of violence. Systems
must be put in place to minimize food aid diversions.
Such diversions, as we have seen already in some
conflict situations, as the Council will know, can make
conflict even worse, and can exacerbate inequalities in
conflict and post-conflict societies where food is used
as a resource transfer.

Outside conflict and natural disaster situations,
where the imperatives for immediate relief and
consumption are much clearer, food aid must be used
with the effective local market production incentives
kept clearly in mind. And as with any intervention, we
must be sure that we monitor its use carefully and
thoroughly to be sure that it is being provided to those
who need it most and that it is the best solution to the
needs of beneficiaries.

Again, as in many other interventions - any
other intervention for that matter - the use of food
must have a clear exit strategy so that we know when
its job is done and how other interventions can be used
instead.

I am absolutely sure that WFP will reflect on
these points, not least in Afghanistan, where food is
going to form part of salary payments for civil
servants, and in other countries where the Programme
operates. We will continue to support its work in that
context. And if time allows, we would be interested to
hear from Ms. Bertini how WFP operations will
proactively factor these concerns into the Programme's
activities both in Afghanistan and in other crisis areas.

I have listened to and sympathized with
Ms. Bertini's extremely clear message on security: 188
unsolved cases involving the murder of United Nations
humanitarian workers is a scandal. We have made this
point in the Council before, and I do not need to labour
it now. But I just would like to say that as far as the
internal United Nations administration of security
issues is concerned, it is important that all the players,
and in particular the Office of the United Nations
Security Coordinator (UNSECOORD) and the
agencies, recognize that their various interests do not
constitute a zero-sum game. UNSECOORD has an
important coordinating role, which must be respected.
The United Kingdom has put its money where its
mouth is in supporting that coordinating role. But, of
course, we accept that the agencies have their own
security needs over and above what UNSECOORD
may be able to provide and these needs must clearly be
considered too.
Finally, I have been careful in these brief, I hope,
remarks to keep to issues that are unarguably part of
the Security Council's turf. But as Ms. Bertini made
clear, the complex of considerations surrounding food
aid is much wider than just that. The Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council must both work

towards a closer and more comprehensive
understanding of conflict issues and how we as a
system can deal with them more effectively. I very
much hope that Mrs. Bertini's successor will engage
with the Economic and Social Council to take them
forward.

