Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and in-depth report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for his
comprehensive briefing.

Bulgaria associates itself with the statement to be
made by the Spanish Presidency of the European
Union. As mine is the only country of South-East
Europe that is a member of the Security Council, I wish
to make a few additional comments on behalf of my
delegation.

I thank you, Sir, for having organized this open
meeting on Kosovo. It is important for the Council
closely to follow the situation there at a sensitive and
decisive moment in the establishment of viable
institutions to include all ethnic communities, pursuant
to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). We must
bear in mind that the evolution of the political process
in Kosovo will have a significant impact on the entire
subregion of the western Balkans, in particular on the
democratic transition in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia itself and on stability in the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

Bulgaria's assessment of the work done by the
Secretary-General's Special Representative, Mr. Hans
Haekkerup, is positive. He was central to the beginning
of a genuine political dialogue and democratic process.
While thanking him for his work, my delegation is
pleased to note that, as we have just learned, the
Secretary-General is about to choose a new Special
Representative. I would like to take this opportunity to
say how pleased my country is at the choice of
Mr. Michael Steiner for that post. We believe he has all
the necessary qualifications, as well as great experience
in the region, which is his own region as well. All this
will make it possible for him to carry out his work at
this sensitive moment in the implementation of the
mandate of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo.

My delegation welcomes the efforts of the United
Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe, the European Union and the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, as well as those of all
governmental and non-governmental institutions.
Those efforts made it possible for the parliamentary
elections to succeed, with the participation of all ethnic
groups in Kosovo, including the Serbs. The
foundations have been laid for the emergence of
genuine democratic life and a civil society grounded in
respect for human rights and the primacy of the rule of
law.

On the other hand, the fact that the Kosovo
Assembly has placed itself at an impasse that makes it
impossible for it to elect a president is a deplorable
setback. Bulgaria appeals to the sense of responsibility
of all actors in the political process to abandon partisan
attitudes so as to provide the international community
with, among other things, legitimate interlocutors. That
legitimacy will not be complete unless the future
Government represents the interests of all ethnic
communities of the province without exception. To that
end, it is important that all political forces be ready to
take on the challenges and responsibilities of
administration and government within the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government and resolution 1244 (1999).

Bulgaria believes that the presence of UNMIK
and KFOR is a decisive element for Kosovo's security.
That presence is vitally important, and it must
continue. UNMIK has carried out remarkable work in
reforming the Mission and transforming the old mixed-
administration structures into Transitional Departments
that will become ministries as soon as a Government is
installed. The progressive transfer of authority to local
authorities, who will be solely responsible in the
future, is a very important step in transferring
responsibility to the elected officials of Kosovo.

Bulgaria fully supports UNMIK in combating
organized crime and terrorism. In that connection, we
agree with the analysis presented by the representative
of the United Kingdom as regards one of the most
serious problems facing Kosovo. We are pleased that
the struggle against organized crime has been given
priority by UNMIK. We agree with the Secretary-
General's assessment as regards the links between
organized crime and terrorism, and between regional
networks in the Balkans and operations in Kosovo.

The socio-economic context of "grey" - not to
say "black" - economy when it comes to trafficking in
arms, drugs and young women can endanger the
stability of still-fragile institutions and weaken
relations between ethnic groups, which are still
vulnerable to manipulation by mafia-type groups. My
country believes that the only way of breaking the
vicious circle of economic and social stagnation,
unemployment, criminalization of the economy and the
symbiosis between organized crime and ethnic
extremism is to fully integrate Kosovo into the
economic life of South-Eastern Europe and the
continent as a whole. The Bulgarian Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Solomon Passy, has on several
occasions emphasized the need for a genuine
revolution in the infrastructures of South-Eastern
Europe enabling it to become integrated into the
economy of the larger continent and of the world.

The report of the Secretary-General speaks of the
precarious security situation in Kosovo. The murder of
the Albanian-speaking member of the Assembly Ismail
Hajdaraj on 17 January 2002, which is unambiguously
condemned by Bulgaria, merely confirms that concern.
My country joins the Secretary-General in appealing to
the elected officials of Kosovo to "clearly and openly
reject terrorism". (S/2002/62, para. 43)

It is deplorable that the return of refugees and
displaced persons has lost some of its momentum. We
believe this is a warning sign of a lack of trust among
the ethnic communities that could have very serious
consequences.

UNMIK is now at a critical phase in the
implementation of its mandate. In the months to come,
the Council will have to follow developments very
closely and support the Mission's activities. The
overall direction of things in Kosovo is no doubt
positive, but the process is far from being irreversible.
The Council's vigilance remains indispensable.

