Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, we welcome Pakistan's timely convening of this
meeting on United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We are honoured by the presence of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, with whom we had the
opportunity to meet with in Islamabad a few months
ago when representing the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999). We join
in the words of farewell to our dear colleague Chencho
Arias of Spain.

The issue of peacekeeping constitutes one of the
most crucial responsibilities in the multilateral arena. It
is no accident that this issue appears in the Preamble of
the United Nations Charter and in its Article 1.

Since 1948, there have been a total of 57
peacekeeping operations, and we know that now there
are 14 active missions, with possibly four more
missions to join them. The successive changes
undergone in the world situation in the last decade
have led to the formulation of new doctrines and
principles such as preventive diplomacy and
humanitarian intervention, which improve and
strengthen collective international action in this area.

A change in the nature of conflict can be seen,
shifting from inter-State conflicts to intra-State
conflicts with repercussions beyond the State's borders.
For that reason, the demands on and functions of
current peacekeeping operations are greater, in
accordance with their increasing complexity, which
obliges them to be multidimensional in nature. Those
operations should be viewed as integrating elements
and as part of a process that includes prevention
efforts, promotion of political dialogue, humanitarian
assistance, the promotion of human rights, institutional
capacity-building and support for social development,
among other elements.

In that context, the United Nations continues to
be the principal international institution responsible for
contributing to the settlement of conflicts. Lasting
peace requires contingents of United Nations troops
endowed with the necessary capacity. We therefore
consider the search for initiatives to improve efficiency
and speed of deployment to be a priority concern.

The concept of State security has changed,
coming to include non-military aspects of security.
Human security, focusing on the individual as the
subject of security, has gained great importance in the
work of peacekeeping operations.

Chile has participated in many missions,
deploying military observers in various parts of the
world. In the last decade, thanks to the modification of
our national legislation, we have broadened our
participation and are now able to participate in
missions under Chapters VI and VII of the Charter,
providing military and police personnel and medical
evacuation, as was recently done in the area of Bunia
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Either through direct participation or through
integration of our troops with forces of other
nationalities, we now have personnel in such countries
as Cyprus and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Moreover,
under resolution 1529 (2004), my country has deployed
a battalion to Haiti to participate in the Multinational
Interim Force in order to help stabilize that country and
avert a bloodbath. And certainly, Chile will contribute
to the follow-on United Nations peace-stabilization
operation in Haiti, dispatching an even larger military
contingent. Chile is also contributing as Chair of the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, where it is working to improve policies
relating to these matters.

It is more important than ever to enhance an
element I mentioned earlier in my statement: the
multidisciplinary nature of peacekeeping operations.
The real challenge for such operations today is not
merely to separate the conflicting groups but to help
create the conditions necessary for eliminating the
causes of conflict. To that end, it is crucial to abide by
international humanitarian law and the principles of
human rights. But we must also remember that it is
impossible to build a stable and lasting peace without
first establishing the rule of law. Here, we consider it
indispensable to support the restoration of the judicial,
police and penal systems and to ensure respect for
human rights. Help with institution-building is also
indispensable in nations devastated by long years of
conflict and war. It is indispensable to insert re-
emerging societies back into the "virtuous cycle" of
economic and social growth. In our view, that can best
be achieved with the close cooperation of international
and local civil society.

It is also very important to implement policies of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration. Close
coordination is needed in the sequential
implementation of those three processes: disarmament,
demobilization and the effective reintegration of
combatants, in many cases by making sure that they
can participate in the labour market.

As said earlier this morning, post-conflict
reconstruction in the framework of a peacekeeping
operation joins the Security Council's own
responsibilities with those of the Economic and Social
Council, the United Nations Development Programme
and the international financial institutions, which can
make a decisive contribution to the attainment of
stability. None the less, we still need an appropriate
operational formula that will enable those bodies and
institutions to work together and coordinate their
activities both in conflict prevention and in post-
conflict reconstruction.

In our view, the role of women in the
maintenance of peace is also important. There has been
progress since the Council's adoption of its resolution
1325 (2000), on women, peace and security. But
numerous reports indicate that much remains to be
done to integrate women into peacekeeping operations
and, even more important, to fight criminal violence
against women in conflict zones. Here, my delegation
attaches the greatest importance to exemplary
behaviour on the part of participants in peace missions.
We therefore encourage the formulation of a
standardized code of conduct applicable to all peace
missions and to all personnel working in peacekeeping
operations.

My country believes that conflict prevention must
be paramount. We consider that priority must be given
to implementing measures that would strengthen that
element rather than controlling the damage caused
once a conflict has begun. We must consider the
creation of an early warning mechanism that will
enable the international community to take preventive
measures to contain a conflict at its earliest stages and
then, along with the parties concerned, to find lasting
solutions.

Finally, we see post-conflict reconciliation as
essential once war has ceased. This is something to
which due attention and work should be devoted, with
a View to preventing bloodshed and suffering from
recurring after a time. That, indeed, has occurred
several times, obliging us once again to dispatch a
peacekeeping operation and to expend effort and
resources because we had not paid the proper attention
to the dimensions of dialogue and reconciliation among
the parties to the conflict.

We owe it to the thousands of innocent victims to
improve our system of peacekeeping operations.
Ultimately, that is how we will save more lives.

