Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (Spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Feltman and
Ambassador Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union, for their briefings.

According to the note by the President of the
Security Council, the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) shall brief the members of the
Security Council on his work and on the implementation
ofthe resolution every six months. In my briefing, which
will be short, I will highlight three parts of my report:
first, the setting up of the 2231 (2015) format and the
procurement channel; secondly, the monitoring of the
resolution; and, finally, issues related to transparency,
outreach and guidance.

First, with regard to the setting up ofthe 2231 (2015)
format, I should recognize that, when the Council
appointed me as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the first thing that came to my
mind was: What is a Facilitator ofa resolution? The 2231
(2015) format did not exist and none of us, nor members
of our team, really knew what the new provisions
set forth in resolution 2231 (2015) entailed for the
Facilitator. Hence my first task was to set up the 2231
(2015) format and to develop a new working method.
That work would never have been possible without
the valuable assistance of the Secretariat, specifically
through the Security Council Affairs Division.

One of the most challenging issues was establishing
a channel for communication between the Security
Council and the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). For such
transactions, which need to go both through the Joint
Commission and the Security Council, we had to figure
out two main things: first, the format we should use
to communicate with them and, most important, the
issues we would inform each other about on a regular
basis. The Secretariat played a crucial role in that
regard, as it provided us with templates for each type
of communication.

To date, to my surprise, we have only received one
proposal by a Member State, which was subsequently
withdrawn, to participate in permitted activities as
set forth in paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231
(2015). During the reporting period I did not receive
any notification regarding certain activities described
in paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
nor did I receive travel-ban or assets-freeze exemptions
requests. However, the good news is that system is
operational. I am sure that it will provide legal certainty,
and I hope that my successors will find it to be solid
and useful.

Another task pertaining to the setting up of the
2231 (2015) system was the establishment of a website.
I believe we have developed a very instructive website
for those interested in the implementation of the
resolution, in particular with regard to information on
nuclear transfers and other activities.

The second part of my report pertains to the
monitoring of the resolution. During the reporting
period, the Council received information on alleged
actions inconsistent with the resolution. The Council
received information on 7 and 9 March with regard to
ballistic-missile launches by the Islamic Republic of
Iran. The Security Council met under the resolution
2231 (2015) format to further consider those launches. I
am not going to repeat the discussion that took place, as
it is well described in the report. However, I would like
to highlight some of the conclusions that were drawn
from that meeting.

First, the Security Council agrees that all Member
States, including Iran, must act in accordance with all
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). Secondly, it is
essential that the Security Council act with unity when
it comes to resolution 2231 (2015), so as to assist in its
effective implementation and to create legal certainty.

The Council has also received information with
regard to two alleged cases of arms seizures. On 7 June,
a Member State submitted a report informing that its
naval forces had encountered and boarded a ship that
was transiting international waters in the vicinity of
the Gulf of Oman. According to the report, the arms
originated in Iran and were likely bound for Yemen.
With regard to this case, I sent a letter to the Permanent
Representative of Iran in whichI invited his Government
to comment on the report. As I was finishing my report,
Iran had still not responded formally to my letter.
However, in the course of my frequent contacts with the
Permanent Mission of Iran to the United Nations, the
Mission informed me that it rejected such an allegation
and that Iran had never engaged in such delivery.

On 5 July, another Member State submitted to
the Security Council a report informing that its naval
forces had encountered and boarded a ship in the
northern Indian Ocean that contained an major arms
cache. The Member State concluded that the arms
originated in Iran and were likely bound for Yemen and
Somalia. In that connection, I would like to stress that,
under paragraph 6 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
engaging in the activities I have just described without
the authorization of the Security Council would be a
violation of the resolution.

Thirdly, during this period, I attached high priority
to transparency, outreach and practical guidance. In
order to improve the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), it is important that all stakeholders understand
perfectly the provisions of the resolution. On 1 March,
I convened an open briefing on resolution 2231 (2015),
during which I gave an overview of its main provisions
and its implementation by the Security Council. I
believe that transparency is especially important in this
case, given the technical complexity of the resolution.

Finally, I would like to say that it has been a great
pleasure for me to work with the members of the
Security Council, the European Union delegation and
the Permanent Mission of Iran. They all demonstrated
flexibility and a constructive spirit during the period
under review, which allowed for the report and the
Facilitator's activities to come about easily. I have
nothing but words of gratitude for them.

