Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I appreciate this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), pertaining to Afghanistan and the Taliban,
which I am pleased to do in accordance with paragraph
56 of resolution 2255 (2015). I am also grateful to

the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for their
support of the work of the 1988 Sanctions Committee
and continued assistance to its Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team.
The main goal of the 1988 Committee is to deter
the Taliban from continuing to support Al-Qaida and
its affiliates and to deter Taliban attacks against the
Government of Afghanistan, through the use of tools
such as global asset freezes, global travel bans and
global arms embargoes. At the same time, the 1988
sanctions regime is intended to support the peace
and reconciliation process, including through the use
of the delisting process and the process of granting
exemptions to enable listed persons to engage in peace
and reconciliation negotiations and other approved
activities. For the credibility and effectiveness of
the sanctions regime, it is essential that the relevant
procedures be followed at all times, in particular the
requirement that all listed individuals require travel
ban exemptions, which should be submitted in a
timely manner.

In its most recent statement at the Moscow
conference on Afghanistan, organized and hosted by
the Russian Federation on 9 November, the ending of
the sanctions regime was the first demand made by
the Taliban. International engagement with the Taliban
throughout the year has concentrated on encouraging
it to enter a political dialogue, primarily through the
Kabul Process initiative. In addition to the initiatives
launched by Uzbekistan and Indonesia, overtures
were also made through the meetings of prominent
religious clerics in Afghanistan, Indonesia, Pakistan
and Saudi Arabia.

The leadership of the Taliban has stabilized under
Haibatullah Akhundzada and his deputy Sirajuddin
Haqqani. In its latest report (see S/2018/466), the
Monitoring Team noted that the fighting season in 2018
would be at least as bloody as that of2017. Unfortunately,
that prediction has proven to be correct, in spite of the
sanctions measures. The Taliban has pressed forward
throughout the year with a ferocious military campaign
that included the use of terrorist tactics, such as
infiltration and targeted assassinations, kidnappings
for ransom and suicide bombings. The Taliban was also
successful in overrunning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) presence in northern Afghanistan
after it was critically weakened by an intense campaign
led by Afghan and United States forces. The presence
of ISIL in eastern Afghanistan remains contained
through the same factor of combined Afghan and
United States military pressure. Afghan security forces
have struggled to repel repeated Taliban assaults on
provincial capitals, but resolutionemain optimistic due
to the consistent support and assistance received from
the international presence in Afghanistan.

The report of the Monitoring Team also noted
that Al-Qaida remains closely allied to and embedded
within the Taliban. There has been no change to that
close relationship in recent Taliban declarations.
The Taliban's finances originate from taxation on
the narcotics economy and the illegal extraction of
natural resources. The impact of the assets freeze on
the Taliban's illegal activities will only be intensified
once additional information is gathered on where the
Taliban and its financial backers have invested their
illicit proceeds from the narcotics economy and illegal
exportation of illegally mined mineral resources, such
as onyx marble, chromite, talc, gemstones and gold.

While there are many structures and frameworks
in place for the implementation of the 1988 sanctions
regime, the effectiveness of its implementation depends
not only on internal, but also regional and international
actors. The Committee would therefore like to
encourage Member States to play a more active role
in providing information that would help to maintain
the sanctions list as up-to-date as possible and to assist
the Committee in the implementation of the sanctions
measures in order to enhance its effectiveness.

The overall effectiveness of the 1988 sanctions
measures also relies on close coordination with the
Government of Afghanistan and other actors in the
region. I travelled to Afghanistan last year, and again
this year as part of the Council's visit in January. I
remain convinced that there is potential for greater use
of the 1988 sanctions regime to deter the Taliban and
support the peace process. Renewed efforts are also
needed to list individuals and entities associated with
the Taliban who are not yet on the sanctions list, but
who carry out activities that are harmful to the peace
and security of Afghanistan.

The Committee is keen to assist the Government
of Afghanistan in making wider use of the tools
offered by the 1988 sanctions regime. Throughout
2018, the Government of Afghanistan made overtures
for peace with the Taliban, including the offer in
February of negotiations without preconditions and
the establishment of ceasefires in June and August. I
thank the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his briefing to the Committee in October and for his
regular support of the Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team in its three visits to Afghanistan.

The Committee looks forward to continued close
engagement with UNAMA, Afghanistan and other
States in the region under the chairmanship of Indonesia
in 2019.

