The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Spain, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. deez-
Barnaevo (Spain) took the seat reserved for him
at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/200 and corrigendum I, which
contains the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation concerning Western Sahara.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/2009/224, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by France, the Russian
Federation, Spain, the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States of
America.

I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the following oral amendments to the draft
resolution.

The current eighth preambular paragraph will
become the seventh preambular paragraph, and should
read as follows:
"Stressing the importance of making
progress on the human dimension of the conflict
as a means to promote transparency and mutual
confidence through constructive dialogue and
humanitarian confidence-building measures,"

The former seventh preambular paragraph will
become the new eighth preambular paragraph and
should read as follows:

"Welcoming in this context the agreement
of the parties expressed in the Communique of
the Personal Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Western Sahara of 18 March 2008 to explore the
establishment of family visits by land, which
would be in addition to the existing programme
by air, and encouraging them to do so in
cooperation with the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees".

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it,
as orally amended. Unless I hear any objection, I shall
put the draft resolution, as orally amended, to the vote
now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Viet Nam


The President (spoke in Spanish): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution, as orally
amended, has been adopted unanimously as resolution
1871 (2009).

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.


