Mr. Hosni (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank the Foreign Minister of Somalia, Mr. Omaar, and
Mr. Ould Abdallah and Mr. Lamamra for the detailed
statements that they have given. I would like to take
this opportunity to thank you, Mr. President, and
members of the Security Council, for giving me this
opportunity to address the Council on the situation in
Somalia.

This statement comes at a critical and promising
juncture in the peace process that has been ably led by
Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Somalia,
with the active participation of the African Union and
the League of Arab States and the clear support of the
international community. In this context, allow me to
briefly make the following observations.

First, while the Arab States welcomes the
important measures that have been taken to implement
the Djibouti agreement that was signed last August -
the most important of which is the formation of an
expanded parliament and the extension of the
transitional period for the work of Somali institutions,
as well as the election of Mr. Sheikh Sharif Sheikh
Ahmed as President and the formation of a national
unity Government under Mr. Omar Abdirashid Ali
Sharmarke's leadership - at the same time it affirms
the urgent need to offer tangible support for this
process at the political, financial and material levels.

We are facing a truly positive development that
must be sustained with the necessary capacity to
implement all of these changes. Therefore, we reaffirm
the need urgently to offer all forms of financial and
logistic support to the Somali Government so that it
can establish effective State institutions and implement
its programmes for reconciliation, security and stability
and provide basic services for the Somali people.

Despite the fact that the Arab League is neither a
donor nor a financial organization, it responded to the
call by the African Union Peace and Security Council
and transferred last week $1 million to the Somali
Government's account so that it could start establishing
the Joint Security Forces as stipulated in the Djibouti
agreement - to be comprised of 10,000 troops - for
the purposes of maintaining law and order and to
guarantee the sustainability of the current Somali
institutions. The Arab summit to be held at the end of
this month in Doha, the capital of Qatar, will have on
its agenda support for the newly formed Somali
institutions.

Secondly, we welcome, support and reaffirm the
positive direction that the Somali national unity
Government has taken in terms of actively seeking
national reconciliation with all factions of Somali
society, domestically and abroad. We urge all Somali
factions to renounce violence and reconsider their
positions and join the march towards Somali national
reconciliation.

Thirdly, we also welcome the efforts of and the
role played by the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) and we call for offering it the urgent
logistic and financial support it needs so that the
African Union (AU) can increase the size of the
Mission to the authorized size, namely, 8,000 troops.

We strongly condemn the recent attacks against
AMISOM's personnel, which have led to the deaths of
12 peacekeepers from Burundi and have wounded
17 other peacekeepers, not to mention the numerous
Somali civilian casualties. We highly commend the
AMISOM. forces, who work under very difficult
conditions in Somalia, and we call on all parties to
offer support to those who work on behalf of us all, the
international community, to establish peace and
stability in the country.

Fourthly, we join the request of the African Union
to deploy a United Nations peacebuilding force in
Somalia. The Security Council must respond to the
strong, shared desire of the Government of Somalia,
the AU and the Arab League for continued support to
AMISOM. and build upon it and authorize the United
Nations to take over responsibility for peacekeeping in
Somalia at an early stage.

Fifthly, I reaffirm the organic link between
piracy, on the one hand, and the Somali question in
general, on the other. This issue forces us to seriously
consider the best and most effective way to support
efforts to establish peace and stability in Somalia,
especially after Somali parties succeeded in the
implementation of the Djibouti agreement. We, the
international community, must show adequate support
for them and protect the achievements that have been
made towards peace in Somalia. We must also prevent
any regression in efforts towards a settlement; that
could have negative effects in the political and security
spheres which would be very grave indeed if, God
forbid, they should take place.

Finally, the reconstruction of Somalia must be at
the top of the international community's agenda. For
our part, at the Arab regional level, the League of Arab
States, in coordination with the African Union, the
Organization of the Islamic Conference and the United
Nations, will this year convene a conference on the
reconstruction of Somalia. At that conference, the
Somali Government will present its development plans
and the necessary feasibility studies. The Arab States
and Arab investment funds will participate in the
conference; we hope indeed that everybody will
participate.

