Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I join others in
thanking the Secretary-General, the president of the
International Committee for the Red Cross and the
international president of Medecins Sans Frontieres
for their important briefings today. The Chamber
is far removed from the harrowing realities that
their presidents have just described and that their
organizations have sadly experienced at first hand. I pay
tribute to their bravery and to that of their colleagues.
It is vital that we hear from all of them on issues as
important as this.

The United Kingdom welcomes today's unanimous
adoption of resolution 2286 (2016) and the work of
Egypt, Japan, New Zealand, Spain and Uruguay in
preparing it. Coming three weeks ahead of the World
Humanitarian Summit, it is a clear signal on the part of
the Council ofthe vital need for respect for international
humanitarian law, for the protection of civilians and for
accountability for those who fail to show that respect
or protection.

Medical facilities and personnel have clear
protection under humanitarian law. However, as
we have heard, it is sadly repeatedly necessary to
demand compliance with those obligations, as we are
doing through today's resolution. Respect for medical
neutrality is a tradition that has existed for hundreds of
years, but it is slowly unravelling before our very eyes.
The red cross or crescent symbol that adorns a hospital
or ambulance has become a target, whether in Syria,
Yemen, South Sudan or Afghanistan. A hospital must
be a safe place, not a target. An ambulance must be a
sign of hope, not a target. A doctor or nurse must be a
ray of light, not a target. The doctors of Aleppo know
that all too well, as the Secretary-General himself
reminded us and as is shown by the reports today of yet
another attack on a hospital there.

In a joint letter issued last week, seven Syrian
doctors described the bombing of the Al-Quds hospital,
which killed at least 50 people and injured 60 more.
It was the third such attack on the hospital since the
conflict began. "The city is bleeding", they wrote. They
went on to say that their friends, the White Helmets,
continue to pull bodies out from the rubble, that those
attacking Aleppo have no regard for the sanctity of life
or humanity and that soon there will be no medical
professionals at all.

In a war seemingly without end and without rules
or limits, it is sometimes hard to be shocked. But when
a city - no, an entire country - is bleeding, it is
sickening to see doctors and nurses, the people who can
staunch that bleeding, being killed and maimed. In that
attack, a leading Syrian paediatrician, Dr. Muhammed
Wassim Maas, was killed. To those who knew him, he
was the bravest and kindest of souls. His devotion to
treating the war's youngest victims was unparalleled.
By day he worked in the children's hospital; at night
he responded to emergencies at the Al-Quds hospital.
As his friend Dr. Hatem put it so poignantly on
Facebook this week, he was killed for saving lives. Dr.
Maas should have been supported and protected, even
celebrated. Instead, he was killed while trying to save
others. And his story is just one ofhundreds to be found
in Syria.

Over the past five years, the civil-society group
Physicians for Human Rights has recorded 730 killings
and 359 attacks on medical facilities. That are three
medical workers killed every week and a medical
facility attacked every five days. At the same time,
we have seen medical equipment and surgical supplies
diverted away from opposition areas. In February, the
Syrian regime denied entry to besieged areas to 80,000
medical items, and to 19,000 in March. The regime is
also stopping urgent medical evacuations from those
areas. The consequences are horrifying: two children
injured in a landmine explosion in Bukkin died after
being denied the evacuation they desperately needed.

Taken together, that amounts to nothing less than a
systematic campaign against medical workers and the
entire health-care system in Syria. We all know who
is responsible. The Al-Assad regime has killed Syrian
civilians time and again. Time and again, it has killed
medical workers trying to save those civilians. Time and
again, it has flouted its obligations under international
humanitarian law. If Russia genuinely believes in the
commitment that we have all just made to protecting
medical workers, it must bring its full influence to bear
to restrain the Al-Assad regime and bring its merciless
attacks to an end.

Today's resolution sends the important message
that the Council will not tolerate attacks on any
medical workers or their facilities. We now have to
live up to the standards that we have just committed
to. Let us start today. The Council has a responsibility
to respond to horrific attacks such as the one on the
Al-Quds hospital that took the life of Dr. Maas and so
many others. Aleppo is burning, and its civilians are
being killed. We therefore request that the Secretary-
General give an urgent, open briefing in this Chamber
on the situation there. We look to you, Mr. President,
and to the Secretariat, to convene such a briefing as a
top priority.

