The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my national capacity.

I should like at the outset to welcome the Under-
Secretary-General and commend his continued
commitment, as well as that of his teams on the
ground, to the protection of civilians in armed
conflicts. I should also like to thank him for his
introductory statement today.

France, of course, aligns itself with the statement
to be made shortly by the representative of the Czech
Republic on behalf of the European Union.

Our debate is taking place in a particular context,
which everyone has stressed. We are, of course, deeply
concerned by the situation in Gaza. Once again, the
civilian population is paying a terrible price. We urge
the parties to the conflict to spare civilians.
International law, in particular international
humanitarian law, must be respected. We condemn
violence against civilians, whether they be Palestinians
or Israelis. We also condemn terrorism in all its forms.

In our view, the absolute priority should be the
implementation of a ceasefire, as requested in
resolution 1860 (2009). In that regard, we hope that the

diplomatic efforts under way, in particular the Franco-
Egyptian plan, will very soon succeed. The news
reaching us from Cairo appears promising in that
regard.

Generally speaking, the international community
must ensure effective compliance with the rules of
international law concerning the protection of civilians.
The United Nations is sparing no effort in that respect,
particularly in the context of peacekeeping operations.
It is preparing to take over from the military missions
carried out by the European Union in eastern Chad and
north-eastern Central African Republic, in addition to
that carried out with the African Union in Darfur,
through the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur.

The renewed mandate of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo at the end of last year is centred on the
protection of civilians, and we welcome that. However,
the civilian protection mandates entrusted to
peacekeeping operations in cooperation with the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
must be concretely reflected on the ground. That
dimension must be systematically incorporated into
operation planning documents. This point will be
among those to be discussed at the peacekeeping
seminar and debate to be held in the Council by France
and the United Kingdom on 22 and 23 January.

France welcomes the establishment of the
Security Council's informal expert group on the
protection of civilians. The group is necessary. It must
enable the Council to respond more systematically to
the need to protect civilians in cases in which a
peacekeeping operation is being considered or
renewed. France thanks OCHA and supports the
updated aide-memoire that we will adopt shortly. It
should serve as a reference. We must also develop
language to address the challenges facing us.
However, France regrets the fact that the aide-
memoire did not devote a separate section to sexual
violence, as initially planned. Indeed, sexual violence
is used in many conflicts as a weapon of war against
civilians, particularly in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and in the Sudan. Women are particularly
affected. France calls for strict compliance with
resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2008) and
encourages the Council to give this issue all the
importance it deserves.
Finally, we must give particular attention and
particular protection to children. The activities of the
Working Group of the Security Council on Children
and Armed Conflict, which France has had the honour
to chair since its establishment, has made it possible to
document the demobilization of thousands of child
soldiers. We must strengthen their reintegration into
civil society and muster the necessary resources to that
end.

France supports the idea that reports of the
Secretary-General on the situations in various countries
should specifically address civilian protection. States
have the primary responsibility for protecting their
populations from the most serious humanitarian
crimes, but the international community must be ready
to mobilize in the event of inability or lack of will on
the part of States.

As members are aware, France is particularly
committed to the concrete implementation of the
concept of the responsibility to protect. It is an
ambitious concept. It does not mean merely intervening
in the midst of a crisis to stop the most horrendous
crimes; it means acting in advance to prevent them. It
is time to strengthen the warning and surveillance
mechanisms in areas and situations at risk. Let us work
together in the months ahead to achieve a consensus on
that point.

What would the protection of civilians be without
the fight against impunity? Those responsible for the
most serious crimes must be pursued and punished. In
particular, France reaffirms its support for the activities
of the International Criminal Court and calls upon all
States to accede to the Rome Statute.

France welcomes the adoption, at the Dublin
Conference, of a binding text banning all cluster
munitions causing unacceptable damage to civilian
populations, as well as the fact that 94 States have
signed the Convention on Cluster Munitions.
Forced displacements concern us. France
commends the activities of the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and of all
those involved in providing assistance to refugees and
internally displaced persons. The civilian nature of
camps for refugees and displaced persons must be
guaranteed. The voluntary return of such persons, as
long as the conditions for security are fulfilled, and the
rights of returnees must be guaranteed. Resettlement
can be considered an alternative solution to voluntary
return.

Finally, the number of humanitarian workers
killed this year is the highest ever recorded. We must
protest and combat that situation, which is not
acceptable. All attacks against humanitarian personnel
must cease. Host States must ensure their security, thus
helping to protect civilians.

France appeals - everywhere, strongly and
systematically - for compliance with international
humanitarian and human rights law. This battle is
essential. It must be fought in unity and with resolve.
France is committed to it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I call on the representative of the Czech
Republic.

