Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): France
would like once again to thank and confirm its support
for the staff of the Tribunals for the work they are
undertaking in order to carry out the legal proceedings.
While the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is requesting a
final extension until 2017 to complete that work, it is
extremely important that he be able to count on the
engagement of all his staff until the end.

We pay tribute in particular to the commitment of
President Agius to take the lead. By adopting resolution
2306 (2016), on 6 September, which authorized the
urgent nomination of an ad hoc judge on a temporary
basis within the Appeals Chamber, the Council sought
to give its full support to these efforts. It is in this
same spirit that France supported the extension of the
mandate requested by the ICTY President in his letter
of 4 November.

The Tribunal will bring its work to a close in 2017,
and we recall the significant achievements of the ICTY
in the service ofjustice and peace. In the View of the
French delegation, it should be an opportunity to take
stock of the achievements and good practices of this
Tribunal, as well as avenues for improvement for more
effective justice. The ICTY has played a pioneering
role in bestowing its experience to other international
judicial institutions. That outstanding work must
evolve and continue to be dynamic. But more than
ever, the States of the region must show that they have
the will to put the achievements of the judiciary at the
service of stability over the long-term. They therefore
must continue to cooperate fully with the ICTY as
well as with the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

In 2016, in accordance with resolution 2256 (2015),
an assessment of the working methods of the ICTY was
conducted by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS), which resulted in recommendations. The French
delegation welcomes the fact that a code of conduct
was annexed for judges of the Tribunal to the report of
6 July 2016 following the recommendation contained
in the OIOS report (S/2016/669). We are encouraged
by the Tribunal's willingness to reformulate certain
recommendations, which attests to a more in-depth
exploration of finding ways for improvement and
meaningful dialogue with regard to management. More
than ever, as victims call for justice to be done, such an
effective approach must become a continual concern.

The branches of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and ICTY of the Residual
Mechanism, the role of which is temporary, are
committed to the same dynamic. France is pleased
that the institution is inspired by the good practices of
the ICTR and the ICTY and is actively seeking new
solutions to improve its functioning. In that regard,
every State must do everything possible to ensure that
this temporary entity can work in full compliance with
its statute and procedural safeguards.

Following the ICTR, the ICTY will also soon
conclude its work. If the Security Council decided to
establish those international criminal tribunals in the
1990s, it was because of its conviction that the States
concerned and their citizens would be the first to
benefit from the progressive strengthening of the rule
of law, by which the independence of the judiciary is
fully assured and the duty to remember fulfilled. Each
of those States will henceforth be the best agents to
ensure that what are known as intermediate criminals
are tried in a context of increased regional and mutual
cooperation, and lastly, in the effort towards regional
reconciliation and the preservation of memory.

