Mr. Heusgen (Germany): The result we just
witnessed - 15 votes in favour - was the objective
that the co-penholders, Indonesia and Germany,
had from the very beginning. It was key for us that
we demonstrate today that the Security Council is
unanimous in its decision on Afghanistan and on the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) and that we send a united message to the
people of Afghanistan that the Council remains by their
side at this time. But I also have to say that resolution
2460 (2019), just adopted, is not the kind of UNAMA
resolution that we worked towards as co-penholders
over the past six weeks, and it is not the kind ofUNAMA
resolution that we have had for the past 17 years.

When Indonesia and Germany - and I would
like to pay tribute to the good cooperation between
us newcomers as penholders - negotiated the text,
we reached a very strong consensus on all substantial
issues, including on perhaps the most important one,
namely, on the urgency of progress with regard to
an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process.
Unfortunately, however, issues that have nothing to do
with it and are not related to the excellent work and
mandate of UNAMA made it impossible to achieve
the resolution for which we had originally aimed. I
must admit that I really regret that we were not able to
overcome those differences.

We very much lament that such topics as the
upcoming elections, the participation of women in
the Afghan peace process, the situation of children in
armed conflict and the nexus between climate change
and security are no longer reflected in the resolution.
We have before us a text that really satisfies none of us,
but it has UNAMA's mandate at its very heart. Again,
we remain united in our commitment to Afghanistan,
and that is the most important message.

The mandate duration now is only six months.
That should be a reminder that our engagement in
Afghanistan is much broader than what we have
achieved, which is six months of engagement. Also,
when we resume discussions in the fall, we will have
a chance to reflect the dynamics in the country with
regard to the peace process and the elections. We hope
that at that time we will be able to refocus the resolution.

There is, however, one message that is very
important - and here I turn to the Afghan Ambassador,
who was strongly asking for an extension of one
year - that this extension of six months does not mean
that the United Nations, this organ and the international
community are not united in their support for the
Afghan people. The commitment remains, and the 15
votes today demonstrate that. I think that this is a very
important message that we want to send today.
I urge colleagues that, when we return to that
discussion, which will come faster than we realize, that
we take it very seriously and focus on the most important
issues on which we shared agreement and agree to leave
the marginal issues on the sidelines, so that when we
adopt the resolution next time, we give UNAMA the
guidance and tools necessary to accomplish its crucial
and challenging mission.

