Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/772*) on
the situation in Afghanistan, and would like to thank
Special Representative Staffan de Mistura for his
service. We would also particularly like to congratulate
Mr. Jan Kubis on taking on this challenging position
and pledge our full support to him.

We also welcome the outcome of the Conference
recently held in Bonn, which sends a clear message:
Afghanistan can count on the long-term support of the
international community, both during and long after
transition is scheduled to finish by the end of 2014.
Afghanistan is progressing in the transition, which will
result in the full ownership and sovereignty of the
Afghan people and a political system founded on the
Afghan Constitution, based on the rule of law and in
accordance with international human rights
obligations.

One aspect of particular importance and
sensitivity in that complex process is the situation of
women, in the areas both of fighting all forms of
gender discrimination and of ensuring women's
effective participation in the political process, in line
with the Council's agenda on women and peace and
security. During the Bonn Conference, numerous
Government representatives, including our Foreign
Minister, made clear statements on the importance of
supporting women's rights and participation as part of
the transition and peace processes in Afghanistan, and
of safeguarding the advances that have been made in
that area in the past decade.

We believe that the United Nations, and therefore
the Council, has a crucial role to play in this respect.
With the Council's renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) due in March 2012, we believe that a
discussion of the aspects of the situation in Afghanistan
relating to women, peace and security - with a view
to informed negotiations within the framework of the
mandate renewal - would be timely. The Government
of Liechtenstein, in partnership with the Liechtenstein
Institute on Self-Determination at Princeton University,
is therefore offering to host a workshop in
Liechtenstein on implementation of the agenda on
women, peace and security in Afghanistan from 28 to
30 January.

The outcome of those discussions should be fed
into the Council's negotiating process on UNAMA's
mandate renewal. Participants will include Afghan
women leaders, both from the Government and civil
society, senior United Nations officials, representatives
of non-governmental organizations, academics and
State representatives, particularly of those countries
that are Security Council members.

We hope that that meeting, which was supported
by the delegations of Afghanistan and Germany, can
make a concrete contribution to the preparations for the
renewal of the mandate and also offer a unique
opportunity to the Council to integrate its thematic
work in its country-specific activities. We hope that
Council members will be able to accept that invitation.

