Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I align myself
with the statement to be made later by the observer of
the European Union.

I join others in thanking the Secretary-General
for his detailed and thorough report (S/2017/783). Let
me also thank Special Representative Yamamoto for
his dedicated work and Foreign Minister Rabbani, via
Ambassador Saikal, for his statement.

Let me also underline the points made by my
Italian colleague, especially that on governance, in the
context of our split term in the Security Council in 2017
and 2018.

I will focus on three issues during this debate:
security, our commitment and the review of the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

My first point concerns the security situation in
Afghanistan and regional cooperation. We express
appreciation for the Afghan National Defence and
Security Forces; they bear the brunt of keeping
Afghanistan safe and secure. The fact that the security
situation in Afghanistan is nevertheless getting worse
is worrying. We have seen an increase in human
rights violations, civilian casualties and the number of
internally displaced persons, which are all a result of
insufficient stability.

Therefore, if Afghanistan is to prosper, continued
work on stabilization is crucial in our View. Stabilization,
peace and reconciliation can only be achieved through
a political process with committed actors. Being
committed entails refraining from supporting elements
that hamper the peace process and form impediments to
stability in Afghanistan and the region. We encourage
advances in the peace process through the greater
engagement of insurgent groups in serious and direct
peace talks with the Afghan Government. Notably,
we commend President Ghani for engaging in talks,
notably with the Pakistani Government.

My second point concerns our continuing
commitment to Afghanistan. The Kingdom of the
Netherlands remains committed to supporting the
development of Afghanistan. We make an annual
financial contribution of around €60 million, which
is focused on the re-establishment of legal order and
security, in accordance with Afghanistan's national
priorities. We urge the Afghan Government to intensify
its efforts in needed reforms and to continue to work
extensively with international and national civil
society organizations. Such organizations can help to
implement those commitments.

Furthermore, the Kingdom reiterates the
importance of the inclusion of women and youth in the
peace process, which was a point also highlighted by
the representative of Sweden. We applaud the inclusion
of an additional eight women in the High Peace Council
and the establishment of a youth consultation board.
Moreover, we welcome President Ghani's personal
commitment to gender equality as a top priority for his
Government.

That brings me to my third point - the strategic
review of UNAMA. We thank the Secretary-General
for his substantial report on the strategic review of
UNAMA (S/2017/696) and for his recommendations
regarding the future of the Mission. We express our
deep appreciation of the work of UNAMA and we
value the broad United Nations presence throughout
the country. A strong presence in its provinces should
be maintained. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
agrees with the Secretary-General that Afghanistan is
indeed not a post-conflict country. Therefore, the first
priority for the international community in supporting
Afghanistan remains supporting peace and stability. As
you just said in your national capacity, Sir, it should be
an Afghan-led peace process. Within that context, let
me stress the importance of further improving donor
coordination by UNAMA. A decisive plan is needed to
guide the interaction between donors, United Nations
institutions and civil society.

Let me also highlight one area in which the
Kingdom of the Netherlands has particular interest,
given our own efforts - strengthening the rule of law
in Afghanistan. The strategic review recommends the
abolishment ofthe rule-of-law unit within UNAMA. In
our view, that should be conducted only if rule-of-law
expertise is well integrated into the UNAMA Political
Affairs Division. As an integral part of the political
pillar of the Mission, in our view, a focus on the impact
of rule-of-law projects must be guaranteed.

In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
has been a long-term partner of Afghanistan - a
partner for peace, justice and development. We remain
committed to supporting Afghanistan in a decade of
ever-increasing Afghan ownership and leadership. In
that spirit of partnership, the Afghan people can count
on us to stand by their side. During our membership of
the Council in 2018, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to support Afghanistan with that same
vision, commitment and partnership.

