Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I join previous speakers in thanking the briefers
for their important presentations during this meeting. I
would like to address three fundamental topics today.

I turn first to the political developments and
the reconciliation agreement. The most important
development since the Security Council's consultations
on the situation in the Central African Republic,
on 7 February, was the signing of a reconciliation
agreement between the Government and 14 armed
groups, as well as representatives of civil society. Like
other speakers, I welcome the official signing of that
agreement on 6 February under the auspices of the
African Union and within the framework of the African
Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation, with the support
and facilitation of the United Nations.

In that regard, we would like to express our thanks
and gratitude for the tireless efforts by the Government
of the Republic of the Sudan, which hosted the
Khartoum negotiations from 24 January to 5 February.
We hope that the agreement will end the armed conflict
in the Central African Republic, which began in 2012.
We also welcome the decision agreed by all parties
to create a monitoring mechanism to supervise the
effective implementation of the political agreement.

Some African conflicts have seen positive
developments, such as in the Horn of Africa, where
we have seen reconciliation efforts between Eritrea
and Ethiopia and remarkable stability achieved in
Somalia. In Central Africa, an agreement was reached
in South Sudan and there have been improvements in
the situation in Darfur. There is also the first peaceful
transition in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
well as the signing ofthe reconciliation agreement in the
Central African Republic between the Government and
the armed groups. In addition, there are opportunities
to restore peace in northern Libya.

Those favourable conditions are a glimmer of hope
for Africa. They are the result of the efforts undertaken
by the African Union and regional organizations, as
well as the result of the will of the Governments of
African States to achieve tangible progress in terms
of development and security, with the support of the
United Nations and through cooperation between the
countries in the region. We hope that those efforts will
last until we attain a sustained and comprehensive
peace in all of Africa, which is rich in natural and
human resources. The peoples of Africa can then enjoy
security, stability and development - all the more as
we move towards presidential elections in the Central
African Republic in 2020.

Secondly, on the security situation, acts of violence
in the Central African Republic continue to pose a
significant challenge to the Government. Although
the agreement was signed and political progress has
been achieved, the security situation remains fragile
in Bangui and other regions. Since acts of violence
erupted in the Central African Republic in 2013 and
2014, we have had cause for concern about the security
situation as a result ofthe escalation ofviolence between
armed groups and the conflicting parties, incitement to
religious and sectarian hatred and hate speech.

In that regard, we express our deep concern about
the recurrent violations and acts aggression carried out
by those extremist armed groups against personnel ofthe
United Nations, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA) and other humanitarian workers.
Attacks have also targeted Muslims, their religious
symbols and places of worship. We condemn those
attacks in the strongest possible terms, as we condemn
any attack that targets people because of their religious
beliefs or their places of worship, regardless of who
carries them out.

We also support the efforts undertaken by the Central
African Republic authorities to end such acts of armed
violence and to raise awareness among communities
to stop hate speech and establish peaceful coexistence
among all communities. The Government must ensure
that the perpetrators of violence are brought to justice,
end the culture of impunity, hold perpetrators of crimes
against civilians accountable and bring them to justice
without delay in order to preserve peace.

Thirdly, the humanitarian situation in the Central
African Republic remains precarious. Half ofthe people
need urgent humanitarian assistance. The number of
those in need of humanitarian aid and protection has
increased from 2.5 million to 2.9 million recently. That
is an increase of 16 per cent compared to the same
period in 2017. It is also worrisome to note that half of
those who need humanitarian assistance are children.

We agree with what the Secretary-General
indicated in his most recent report (S/2019/147), that
the only way to end this crisis is through a peaceful
solution reached by dialogue, in accordance with the
Khartoum negotiations. Certainly, if the efforts to hold
a dialogue are successful and a sustained consensus is
reached among all the political parties, that would have
a positive impact on the humanitarian, economic and
development situations, as well as with regard to the
return of internally displaced persons to their homelands
and of refugees from neighbouring countries.

In conclusion, we would like to express our deep
gratitude to Mr. Onanga-Anyanga for his tireless efforts
since he assumed his post as Head of MINUSCA.
We wish him every success in his future endeavours
and assure his successor, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, of
our support.

