Mr. Pereyra Plasencia (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): Peru strongly deplores the escalation of
violence and the loss of innocent human life in the

Middle East. It is essential that the parties involved
immediately cease all belligerent actions so that a
climate of peace can be restored in the region and
dialogue and negotiation can be pursued. That will
require a ceasefire and the release of the abducted
Israeli soldiers, as well as of the elected Palestinian
Authority officials who were recently illegally
detained.

This escalation of the crisis and its expansion into
Lebanon was provoked by Hizbollah, considered a
terrorist organization, which crossed the Blue Line to
attack a military post, killing eight Israeli soldiers and
taking two hostage, and launching rockets that claimed
civilian lives. Such aggressive action by any State is
unacceptable, and in this case it provoked a military
response by Israel in the State of Lebanon. That action
further worsened the cycle of violence in the Middle
East, which had already intensified following a similar
action by the Hamas-led Government of the Palestinian
Authority in which it attacked, through a tunnel, an
Israeli military post, killing two members of the Israel
Defense Forces and abducting another. In both cases
those kidnappings and attacks - whose similarity is
not coincidental - prompted a military response on
the part of the Israel Defense Forces.

Peru recognizes Israel's right to self-defence and
security. However it must exercise that right in
accordance with the principles and norms of the
Charter. Furthermore, we call for the application of
international humanitarian law, particularly in this
context of generalized violence, so as to prevent
further civilian loss of life and damage to the
infrastructure of Lebanon and Gaza. Israel must refrain
from the excessive use of force. All parties to the
conflict have a duty to respect the lives and human
rights of Lebanese and Palestinian, as well as Israeli,
civilians.

Peru profoundly regrets the harm caused to
Palestinian, Lebanese and Israeli civilians. Given the
escalating violence in Lebanon, it is essential that the
Lebanese Government implement the decision taken a
few months ago to disarm those groups operating in the
refugee camps and elsewhere. There is an imperative
need to restore the monopoly on the use of force in
Lebanon. As Hizbollah has shown, not only does the
capacity of such groups constitute an ongoing
challenge to the authority of the Lebanese State, but,
worse still, their actions could embroil Lebanon in an
international conflict, which no one wants to see.
Furthermore, we should recall that any solution to
the crisis in the region must take into account the
requirements set out by the Quartet for the Hamas-led
Palestinian Authority. In this context, it must recognize
Israel, renounce violence and respect the agreements
previously entered into by the Palestinian Authority.

A few weeks ago, in this very Chamber, we
urgently called for decisive action on the part of the
Quartet, at the highest level, leading to a permanent
ceasefire, the Palestinian Authority's handover of the
kidnapped member of the Israel Defense Forces and
the release of imprisoned elected Palestinian Authority
officials. That call should today be extended to
Lebanon, with a View to bringing about a ceasefire and
the release of the two soldiers taken hostage by
Hizbollah.

Peru expresses its full support for the special
mission sent to the region by the Secretary-General
under the leadership of his Special Adviser,
Ambassador Vijay Nambiar, and including Mr. Terje
Roed-Larsen and Ambassador Alvaro de Soto. We
therefore call upon all States concerned, other members
of the Quartet and the protagonists involved to extend
to them their full cooperation and assistance, so that
the mission can fully meet its objectives.

