Mr. Dilja (Albania): At the outset, it is a distinct
pleasure for me, Mr. President, to warmly congratulate
you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month and to thank you for
having convened this meeting.

On behalf of the Albanian delegation, I welcome
President Tadic here today. I would also like to warmly
welcome Prime Minister Kosumi. His presence is a
significant message of recognition of his Government's
commitment and responsibility with regard to building
a democratic, multi-ethnic, stable and prosperous
Kosovo for all of its citizens.

I extend my delegation's sincere thanks to
Mr. Jessen-Petersen, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his excellent briefing. We are
delighted to welcome him here today, and we
compliment him on his excellent work and outstanding
leadership of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). I assure
him of my Government's full support for all of his
endeavours.

The passing of President Rugova was a great loss
for Kosovo. Kosovo lost a man of peace and wisdom
who was committed to achieving a free, tolerant and
democratic future of his country by peaceful means.
We pay tribute to him today and express our
appreciation that Kosovar society swiftly and maturely
overcame that difficult moment. We hail the new
President, Mr. Sejdiu, and congratulate him on his
election. We express our conviction that President
Sejdiu and the entire political spectrum will follow
Rugova's path, vision and goal.

We have before us the Secretary-General's report
on the activities of UNMIK and on the situation in
Kosovo during the last months of the previous year.
Albania shares its assessment of the progress made, as
well as its message with regard to accelerating the
implementation of the standards.

As the report states, the comprehensive review
has encouraged the Kosovo Provisional Institutions to
make progress both on the implementation of the
standards and on a number of other important
processes. We note with satisfaction the stable political
and security situation in Kosovo, something that has
been clear since the death of President Rugova; the
improvement in freedom of movement and the
protection of property rights; the rapid progress on
privatization; the progress in the dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade; the good work on repairing and
protecting the Serbian Orthodox cultural and religious
heritage; and, last but not least, the significant progress
in preparations for final status. Those and other
achievements identified in the report and in the
briefing of Special Representative of the Secretary-
General are all indicators of the commitment of
Kosovo's Institutions with regard to standards
implementation and positive and promising signs of a
process which has already started.

The period covered by the report was a
significant and challenging one for Kosovo. A number
of important serious events took place during that time,
all of which undoubtedly attracted a great deal of
attention, sometimes, perhaps, even by diverting
attention from other responsibilities. Thus, conclusions
on the pace of progress on standards implementation
should be seen in the context of the challenge
represented by those specific times and events.

Nevertheless, we join in the Secretary-General's
appeal to the Kosovo leaders to reinvigorate their
efforts to ensure accelerated and sustainable progress
in the implementation of the standards. We share the
view that a long-term European perspective for Kosovo
requires effective standards implementation. At the
same time, we reaffirm our understanding that this is
an ongoing process. It should and will continue to
remain a central focus for the Government and the
people of Kosovo, to be vigorously pursued throughout
and beyond the status proceedings. In fact, we strongly
believe that the definition of Kosovo's status will focus
a significant amount of energy on the implementation
of all the standards and will swiftly accelerate progress
in all areas.

We are all aware that various issues need to be
addressed with the necessary attention, will and energy
in Kosovo today. Decentralization is an important issue
that will benefit everyone; it will advance the rights of
minorities, strengthen local initiatives and assist the
economic and social development of all areas and
communities. But decentralization is also a delicate
issue that should be addressed carefully within the
framework of a well-defined status for Kosovo. As
long as Kosovo's central institutions do not enjoy
genuine and complete self-governing status, the
decentralization process will remain vague and
difficult to fully implement. We welcome and look
forward with hope to the upcoming negotiations in
Vienna on that matter and encourage both sides to
work constructively.

Albania supports the dialogue between Kosovo's
communities and also between Pristina and Belgrade.
The parties must be engaged in good faith. Issues of
human concern, such as missing persons and returns,
and other technical issues are important; they need to
be discussed if further progress is to be made. Let us
note that, besides the encouraging work of Kosovo's
Institutions to create an atmosphere of security and
confidence for returns, for example, the process also
requires political will and real efforts on the part of
Kosovo Serbs and Belgrade. We encourage the Kosovo
Serbs to directly participate and engage in Kosovo's
Institutions.

Kosovo is experiencing very important times; its
status process has become a major political issue that is
being followed closely in the region and beyond.
Kosovo's political leaders have made significant
efforts to prepare for the process by establishing a
unified negotiating team - which, we are sure, will be
wisely and professionally led by President Sejdiu - by
adopting the political platform and by preparing for
this crucial process.

My Government has welcomed the Contact
Group's guiding principles for the settlement of
Kosovo's status. We fully agree and reiterate that
Kosovo should not return to the pre-March 1999
situation - that there should be no changes in
Kosovo's current territory, no partition of Kosovo and
no union with any other country or with part of any
other country.

We reaffirm our full support for Mr. Ahtisaari and
his negotiating team. We think that an accelerated
status process would be the best approach. Albania
commends the most recent statement of the Contact
Group and its appeal for a realistic, stable and multi-
ethnic solution to Kosovo's status.

We hold the view that the most realistic,
pragmatic, just and fair option with regard to status is
independence, with support from the international
community. That solution would respect the will of the
people of Kosovo. But it would not only do that. We
believe, and are confident, that independence will
ensure the promotion and protection of minority rights
and of Kosovo's cultural and religious heritage; that it
will generate political and social stability and security
for Kosovo and security for the whole region; and that
it will help to establish a sustainable, multi-ethnic and
democratic society there. It will conform with
democratic values and European standards and will
help pave the way for a European perspective. Indeed,
those are the conditions on which the Kosovars should
agree and that they should articulate strongly in the
status negotiations.

Lastly, let me reassure the Security Council that
the Albanian Government will remain fully committed
to playing an active, moderate and constructive role in
the region. It is committed to playing such a role in this
particular case, in Kosovo, throughout this process. As
I mentioned earlier, the international community, the
Security Council and Mr. Ahtisaari's team will always
have a reliable partner in Tirana.

