Mr. Sidikou (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to speak on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I shall focus my
remarks on the political, humanitarian and security
situations, the challenges facing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and the support that the
Security Council could offer to the collective efforts of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and international and regional partners.

The political situation remains extremely fragile
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which
contributes to increased tensions, the ongoing
contraction of the political space, and a very real risk
that the situation could deteriorate further. Despite
the efforts of the Facilitator appointed by the African
Union, Mr. Edem Kodjo, and the continued support of
the United Nations and the international community
for those efforts, progress in the national dialogue has
been limited, although we have recently heard that
developments are moving apace in the right direction.

In September, Mr. Kodjo presented a proposal for
consideration by the parties to reach agreement, first, on
the duration of a political transition and the role of the
outgoing President beyond the interim period; secondly,
the establishment of a transitional Government and
key portfolios; and thirdly, a date for the holding of
the presidential election. However, due to the boycott
of the national dialogue by the opposition coalition
known as the Rassemblement des forces politiques et
sociales acquises au changement, and more recently the
withdrawal of the Conference episcopale nationale du
Congo from the dialogue, agreement on these issues
has not been reached. Moreover, the dialogue process is
not as inclusive as one might have hoped.

In the course of one session of the national
dialogue, the National Independent Electoral
Commission announced that the holding of presidential,
parliamentary and provincial elections in one day would
not be technically possible until 18 November 2018,
following the registration of voters to be completed
31 July 2017. This announcement has provoked strong
protests from several political opposition parties that
believe that Commission has been instrumentalized
to keep President Joseph Kabila in power beyond the
presidential term limits set out in the Constitution.
On 4 October in Kinshasa, the Rassemblement held
a conclave whose recommendations reiterate, inter
alia, a call for the resignation of President Kabila on
19 December. The conclave also announced its intention
to organize political demonstrations across the country
on 19 October.

(spoke in English)

Against this background of political polarization,
serious violence erupted on 19 and 20 September
following large-scale demonstrations in Kinshasa and
elsewhere. The United Nations has confirmed the
killing of at least 49 civilians in the clashes that took
place - 38 by gunshot - while others were burned
alive or killed by machete. More than 140 civilians were
injured, and there are unconfirmed reports of dozens of
other casualties. Four police officers were also killed,
allegedly by demonstrators, during the clashes.

MONUSCO investigations have documented the
involvement of State and non-State actors alike. We
have also documented the involvement of the Garde
republicaine in several instances of violence against
civilians. There were hundreds of arrests reported,
and more than 100 people were initially detained in a
military camp before being transferred to State courts.
Unfortunately, in the immediate aftermath of the Clashes,
MONUSCO was denied access to detention centres,
several hospitals and morgues, making confirmation
of the casualties and arrests difficult. Moreover, those
demonstrations impacted civil and political rights in
other parts of the country where demonstrators were
also reportedly arbitrarily arrested and ill-treated by
State agents.

While not directly related to the electoral context,
the situation prevailing in Kananga, the capital of Kasai
Central province, is also a matter for serious concern,
with reports of several clashes between militiamen
affiliated to a traditional leader, including child
soldiers, and State actors, which impinge on the human
rights of the civilian population, including children's
rights, causing widespread displacements. Here again,
MONUSCO's presence in Kananga is very limited,
and the force is not present, which is an additional
risk to protecting civilians. Nonetheless, the Mission
is actively monitoring the situation and has deployed
a team of human rights and political affairs officers
to better monitor, report on and analyse developments
in the area. We have also engaged with political
authorities, local leaders and members of civil society
to find a peaceful solution to this crisis.

For our part, we have consistently called for
restraint on the part of all actors, including opposition
members, and I have personally raised our concerns
with my Government interlocutors about the role
of State actors in the violence. Throughout the past
months I have worked with other stakeholders,
including the diplomatic community, civil society and,
importantly, the Church, to build bridges between the
Facilitator - Mr. Kodjo - the presidential majority
and opposition groups. I have also liaised closely with
the Government to take confidence-building measures
to create political space for dialogue, notably through
the release of political prisoners and allowing media to
operate without constraint.

The Mission has also reinforced its presence in
Kinshasa with additional assets, which will allow for
a greater presence and improved monitoring of the
situation. The Mission will continue monitoring closely
and reporting on the political, security and human rights
situation. Also, MONUSCO will continue to impress
upon the national authorities and security services the
need to manage public order in accordance with the
Constitution and international standards. An important
effort will also continue to be dedicated to engaging all
political actors on the need to find a peaceful resolution
to differences linked to the electoral process and the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

While much attention is currently focused on
the political situation, I would like to highlight the
fact that the security situation in the eastern part of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo remains very
worrying and is characterized by severe protection-of-
civilians risks in many communities. Those tensions
are only increasing throughout the electoral period.

In the Beni area, where a serious massacre took
place in August, small-scale attacks on civilians by
suspected elements of the Allied Democratic Forces
(ADF) have continued in recent weeks. Violence in
the broader northern Lubero area has contributed to a
surge of displacement, with more than 100,000 people
displaced in the past three months alone.

In that context, the protection of civilians remains
the highest priority of MONUSCO, one that requires
every component ofthe Mission to play a role. Ofcritical
importance is the ability ofthe Mission to act quickly and
effectively to early-warning threats of violence, based
on a solid understanding of the dynamics of a given
situation. In Beni, where protection threats are severe,
MONUSCO has established a joint analysis-collection
and early-warning cell, which brings together civilian,
police and force elements to provide cross-cutting
analysis and direction to the Mission's operations. This
is a positive development that has already enhanced the
Mission's response and effectiveness. We are looking
to further develop those capacities to support the
Mission's tailored strategies against all priority armed
groups, including the newly mandated area of criminal
networks in resolution 2277 (2016).

In support of those strategies, MONUSCO has
continued to carry out military operations against armed
groups, based on solid cooperation between the force
and the Forces arme'es de la Republique de'mocratique
du Congo (FARDC). In Eringeti, ongoing joint
operations against ADF positions over the past several
months have dislodged ADF elements from several
key locations and allowed the FARDC to establish a
more consistent presence in the affected areas. Those
operations against the ADF have seen the FARDC in
the front lines, supported closely by MONUSCO. The
operations have cleared key ADF camps in the so-
called triangle area and have disrupted their operations
and supply lines. The challenge ahead will now be to
consolidate the gains and assist the FARDC in building
up its control in the area.

Robust peacekeeping requires a proactive approach
and looking to deter violence before it happens. I
believe the Security Council could usefully reinforce
that message with the troop-contributing countries as
we continue to work together to make the Mission more
effective in its protection mandate.

In the context of the continued violence in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
I would like to highlight an immediate concern with
regard to the national disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programme. Following violence in
the DDR camps in Kamina and Kitona over the summer,
the Government initiated the return of more than 1,000
ex-combatants to communities in the eastern part
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. While the
reintegration of ex-combatants into communities is an
essential part of the DDR process, that move was taken
before the Government and the World Bank-funded
partners had adequately prepared. Without sufficient
sensitization and preparation, there is a risk that those
ex-combatants may cycle back into armed groups, or
exacerbate already high tensions in communities where
they return. MONUSCO has worked to implement its
community violence-reduction programme to support
the transition of ex-combatants back into civilian life.
However, it is critical that the Government, the World
Bank and implementing partners move quickly to put in
place the necessary community reintegration measures,
if further returns from the camps are to take place in a
constructive manner.
As I mentioned, population movements in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
particular have increased the risks to already vulnerable
communities. That has stretched already strained
humanitarian delivery systems beyond their means. I am
pleased to report that the humanitarian community has
brought life-saving assistance to more than 3.5 million
people this year, but that still falls far short of those in
urgent need. Currently, the 2016 humanitarian appeal
of $690 million is only half funded. With continued
displacements, an additional 350,000 refugees arriving
from South Sudan and epidemics, such as the recent
outbreak of cholera, we expect the needs to continue to
grow in 2017. I hope the Council willjoin me in urging
for greater support to those most in need in the the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Democratic Republic of Congo has entered
a period of extreme risk to its stability. The electoral
crisis has become a constitutional crisis, with deepening
political polarization and no immediate resolution in
sight. Actors on all sides appear more and more willing
to resort to violence to achieve their ends, while the
space for constructive political activity has shrunk still
further. If that trajectory continues, I believe large-scale
violence is all but inevitable. And while MONUSCO
will do everything it can Within its mandate to protect
civilians, the scope of the threats dramatically outstrip
the Mission's capabilities.

The only solution is for the parties to re-engage in
an inclusive process that charts a peaceful path forward
for the country. I have remained actively engaged
with all of the national, regional and international
stakeholders, and I believe there is a chance for the key
parties to come together in a credible, inclusive manner.
However, they will not do so without engagement by
all of us, including the Security Council. I hope the
Council will speak collectively and individually to
reinforce the following key messages.

First, the Rassemblement des forces politiques
et sociales acquises au changement and other key
stakeholders currently boycotting should be encouraged
to return to the dialogue process. Secondly, the
Government should be encouraged to undertake direct
confidence-building measures with the opposition,
including steps to ensure the rights of peaceful political
activity are preserved and ensure direct engagement
between President Kabila and the leadership of the
Rassemblement, namely, Mr. Tshisekedi.

Thirdly, there should be no impunity for any actor
perpetrating political violence. Finally, the regional
organizations, that is, the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the Economic
Community of Central African States, working in close
consultation with the United Nations, need to engage
more directly, including through efforts to designate a
high-level emissary to help bridge the political divide.

(spoke in French)

In conclusion, I should like to stress that the coming
period will almost certainly be extremely difficult. The
tipping point in the serious violence could be reached
very quickly. I believe that the Council should remain
actively seized of the situation and endeavour to hold
regular exchanges with the Secretariat leadership and
MONUSCO in coming months.

I am very grateful for the opportunity given me
to convey to the Council certain observations on the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and
I hope that together, along with the Congolese people,
we can chart a more positive course for the country.

