Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by bidding farewell to my good
friend Ambassador Gillerman, who has appeared
before the Council today for the last time. I wish to tell
him that we will miss him and his impassioned defence
of his country's interests, and we shall always
remember him gratefully.

I also wish to thank the representative of
Palestine for her statement.

We thank you, Sir, and the Vietnamese delegation
for convening this open debate and commend your
leadership in ensuring that it took place. The situation
in the Middle East truly requires the frequent
involvement of the membership of the Organization.
We understand and share the frustration of those who
have criticized the way in which opportunities such as
this are exploited by those seeking to advance domestic
policy agendas. However, we feel that to be the price
we must pay for the legitimacy that accrues to the
Council when it heeds the voices of the States on
whose behalf it exercises its mandate.

I thank the Secretary-General for his report and
Mr. Pascoe for his briefing this morning.
As I have said on a previous occasion, the
Security Council has become a part of the problems
besetting the Middle East. For some years now, the
voice of the Security Council has gone unheard and its
contribution to resolving the region's problems has
been close to nil. Worse yet, the Council's silence,
arising from a stalemate caused by cross-purposes and
selfish interests, is a sorry contribution to those
problems, and not to the solutions that millions of
human beings living in fear and anguish deserve. Our

dear friend Ambassador Spatafora of Italy recently
warned us that the Council's inaction could make it
irrelevant as an actor on the international stage. Costa
Rica is convinced that that is a luxury that the
international community can ill afford. The United
Nations and the Security Council in particular are part
of a common estate that humankind must not squander.
As has already been seen, the Council's irrelevance can
lead only to a world that exists beyond the bounds of
the law. That is a responsibility that Costa Rica will not
join in shouldering.

The consideration of the situation in the Middle
East requires courage, as we know. We have sometimes
borne witness in other forums to demonstrations of the
courage that is so lacking here in the Council. Outside
these walls, the President of France, the United States
Secretary of State and the Quartet freely reproach
Israel for its persistent policy of establishing illegal
settlements, but in this Council we are unable to reach
a similar agreement, nor have we mustered sufficient
resolve to condemn acts directed against Israeli
territory that cannot be qualified as anything but
terrorist. Frequently, too, we hear the Secretary-
General voice ideas and launch appeals that should
originate from or, at the very least, be embraced by the
Council.

For Costa Rica, the Council's silence can lead
only to the persistent violation of all the norms that
should govern civilized coexistence among peoples.
The Council's irrelevance to international life could
allow multilateral mechanisms to go to waste instead
of being used as innovative instruments for attaining
peace, protecting human rights and promoting
development for all.

In the light of all that, Costa Rica wishes to
contribute to this debate a brief assessment of the
situation in the Middle East. If the Council will not or
cannot express its concern at the long-standing grave
humanitarian situation in Gaza, and if the Council is
will not or cannot condemn, as it should, policies and
actions that undermine efforts to attain peace, it should
at the very least consider positive elements that could
help establish a climate conducive to understanding.

In that regard, we are grateful to Egypt for its
mediation that resulted in a ceasefire between Hamas
and Israel. We are also grateful to Turkey for its
mediation, which has encouraged rapprochement
between Israel and Syria, and to Qatar for its good

08-4326]
offices, which have facilitated institutional
normalization in Lebanon. We also recognize the
efforts that made possible the exchange of prisoners
between Israel and Hizbullah. We welcome the
measures adopted by Palestinian security forces aimed
at restoring order in the West Bank.

We welcome the convening of the summit of the
Union for the Mediterranean under the auspices of
French President Sarkozy, which underscored the
resolve of all parties to continue to work to ensure
peace throughout the Mediterranean Basin and during
which Syria and Lebanon announced the resumption of
diplomatic relations.

Costa Rica echoes the report of the Secretary-
General and reaffirms the need for compliance with
obligations with which the parties are very well
acquainted. In the Middle East, there will be no final
victory for some over the others: peace can only be the
outcome of moderate voices calling for the creative and
respectful coexistence of two independent States within
secure and recognized boundaries.

