Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In accordance with
paragraph 3 (a) (iv) of resolution 1591 (2005), I have
the honour to brief the Security Council on the work of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1591
(2005), concerning the Sudan, covering the period from
18 January to 25 March 2019.

During the reporting period, the Committee met
in informal consultations on 12 February to discuss
the final report of the Panel of Experts on the Sudan's
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005) (see S/2019/34) with the member States of the region.
This was the sixth such meeting, which I convened
in accordance with paragraph 28 of resolution 2340
(2017), by which the Security Council emphasized
the importance of holding regular consultations with
Member States concerned, as needed, in order to
ensure full implementation of the measures set forth in
the resolution.

After a brief presentation by the Panel's
Coordinator, the representatives of the Sudan, Egypt,
Ethiopia, South Sudan, Eritrea, Uganda and Libya
made their statements. All representatives expressed
their appreciation for the opportunity to share with the
1591 Committee and the Panel their views on the final
report. We discussed with our interlocutors the issues
ofborder security and armed groups in the region. They
expressed their commitment to the implementation of
the sanctions measures and highlighted the importance
of building on the spirit of cooperation through
constructive dialogue between the Committee and the
invited States.

Anticipating the expiration of the Panel's mandate
on 12 March, the Under-Secretary-General for Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs proposed to the Committee
five individuals, all incumbent, to serve as experts on
the Panel of Experts on the Sudan. On 28 February, the
Committee concurred with that selection and we are
awaiting the official appointment of the five experts by
the Secretary-General.

On 13 March, the Committee received the
Panel's fourth progress report. The Panel was closely
monitoring the situation, which preceded and followed
the declaration of the state of emergency in the Sudan.
It reported that, at the time of writing, the protests
were still ongoing in some parts of the country and
that several opposition parties had joined them. The
protests also had an impact on the peace talks, as the
non-signatory movements suspended their involvement
in further talks.

The Panel reported that the overall situation in
Darfur had remained more stable than in Khartoum and
some other areas of the Sudan. Although the overall
regional dynamics were stable, the Panel also underlined
some regional risks and threats to the peace process in
Darfur. It informed the Committee about the localized
frequent clashes between the Sudan Liberation Army/
Abdul Wahid faction and the Government in Jebel
Marra, as well as the activities of Darfuri rebel groups
based in Libya.

With regard to the humanitarian situation, the Panel
stated that despite the decrease in conflict, thousands
remained in need of humanitarian assistance. The Panel
drew the Committee's attention to the inadequate food
rations and medical supplies in internally displaced
persons (IDP) camps and to the Government's continued
policy of dismantling IDP camps.

Finally, I would like to inform the Council of my
intention to visit the Sudan. I am currently discussing
the dates and the programme for the possible visit with
the representatives of the Sudan in New York. Given
the current political and security situation in the Sudan,
the dates for the visit have yet to be determined.

