Ms. Ndhlovu (South Africa): During the fifty-
seventh session of the General Assembly, speaker after
speaker has stressed the need for full and unconditional
compliance with Security Council resolutions. The
Foreign Ministers of the 115 member States of the
Non-Aligned Movement also called on all States to
abide by Security Council resolutions. They pointed
out that if the Security Council's resolutions are not
enforced, the very legitimacy and credibility of the
United Nations is threatened. Furthermore, they called
for conflict situations to be addressed multilaterally,
through the United Nations.

We are meeting here today in response to the
Israeli military onslaught on the headquarters of the
Palestinian Authority in Ramallah. This is the same
Israeli military force that the Security Council ordered
to withdraw six months ago. Israel has yet to comply
with Security Council resolutions that call for the
withdrawal of its forces from Palestinian towns and
cities.
The life of President Arafat, the elected leader of
the Palestinian people, is under threat. Once again,
President Arafat's condemnation of the attacks against
Israel, which he regards as both morally unacceptable
and counter-productive to the Palestinian cause, has
fallen on deaf Israeli government ears. It seems that
there is a blind impulse towards Violence and
vengeance that prevails over the logic of dialogue and
peace. More innocent civilians continue to die. We
unreservedly condemn the killing of civilians, Whether
they are Israelis or Palestinians.

The sense of despair, frustration and hopelessness
in the Middle East is brought about by the occupation
and by the fact that no land has been returned in
exchange for peace as required by Security Council
resolutions. For too long, Israel has ignored the
decisions of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. Israel continues to illegally occupy
Palestinian lands, settlements continue to expand at an
alarming rate and extrajudicial executions, arbitrary
arrests and the destruction of private Palestinian
homes, farms and institutions continue unabated. Israel
routinely violates even the most basic provisions of
international humanitarian law and the Fourth Geneva
Convention and has yet to withdraw its forces as
required by Security Council resolutions 1402 (2002)
and 1403 (2002) and General Assembly resolution
ES-lO/ll. Israel also continues to illegally occupy
Syrian and Lebanese territory and to violate the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Lebanon.

The draft resolution being circulated seeks to
address the fundamental requirements for the
resumption of a meaningful political process that
would lead to a comprehensive solution of the Middle
East crisis. It is in line with the Arab peace plan and
the recommendations of the Quartet. For any lasting
peace in the Middle East to take hold, the Israeli
military must withdraw immediately to the positions
held prior to September 2000 and all acts of violence,
including military acts; destruction and terror must
cease immediately.

We call on the Security Council to immediately
adopt this resolution. As the Non-Aligned Movement
Ministers made clear, the Security Council must ensure
the implementation of all its resolutions. Otherwise, its
credibility will be undermined.

