Mr. Kyslytsya (Ukraine) (spoke in French): At
the outset I wish to thank the French presidency of the
Council for this timely initiative and the opportunity to
have a fruitful discussion on such an important aspect
of peacekeeping as the protection of civilians.

Ukraine, as an active troop-contributing country
and a country where an armed conflict directed from
outside is raging, views the issue of protection of civilians
as the most important task of peacekeeping operations.

Civilians continue to constitute the vast majority
of casualties in situations of armed conflict worldwide.
Each day civilians are killed or wounded, often with
absolute impunity. Sexual violence destroys the lives
of women and girls and young men. Artillery shelling
and air strikes destroy Vital infrastructure and unleash
massive displacement. Families are separated, entire
communities are torn apart and generations of children
grow up without enjoying the right to education. It is
disturbing that nearly 60 million people worldwide
have been forced to leave their homes because of
conflict, Violence and persecution. Among them are
nearly 20 million refugees, over half of whom are
under 18 years of age. Humanitarian needs are at
record levels and more than 80 per cent of the United
Nations humanitarian funding is directed at conflict
response. The fate of civilians in conflict remains
extremely worrying, and much more needs to be done
for their protection.

According to the outcomes of the three most
recent comprehensive reviews of peace operations, the
peacebuilding architecture and the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000), the United Nations nowadays
has to play a proactive role to prevent the outbreak,
resurgence or continuing of armed conflict. Therefore,
preventive diplomacy represents an important but
underused tool that the Council should deploy more
actively to ensure that peace is maintained. This tool
should be brought in as soon as possible when a conflict
is emerging. For instance, we see the need to expand the
Council's highly positive experience in the framework
of Visiting missions this year in Africa to all parts
of the world where situations warrant the Council's
involvement on the ground.

(spoke in English)
While Ukraine aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered by the European Union delegation, I would
like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
As a non-permanent member of the Council, Ukraine
knows at first hand that sometimes the Security Council
cannot react promptly to threats to a civilian population
because the absence of a host country's consent stands
in the way of the rapid deployment of a peacekeeping
mission. However, it is hard to explain the Council's
inaction in response to a direct request to host a United
Nations mission, whose presence on the ground would
provide additional protection to civilians and contribute
to stopping the violence.

Our calls for Council action on such a request from
Ukraine - where the civilian population continues to
suffer from foreign military aggression - were not
heeded. Russian-led illegal armed groups, with direct
support of the Russian regular military forces, continue
to wage war in certain areas of the Donetsk and
Luhansk regions of Ukraine, with dire consequences
for civilians residing there. According to reports on the
situation in Ukraine by the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),
civilians have paid the greatest price for this conflict.
Since 2014, OHCHR recorded more than 9,000 people
killed and more than 21,000 injured in the conflict area
in eastern Ukraine. Up to 2,000 civilians have been
killed in armed hostilities, mostly as a result of the
indiscriminate shelling ofpopulated areas from various
artillery systems.

In a situation where the Council finds itself blocked
from discharging its direct responsibilities, Ukraine
is compelled to use other possibilities at the regional
level to establish an international armed presence in
the occupied territories in order to protect civilians and
ensure full implementation of the Minsk Agreements.
I would like to use this forum to call on the occupying
Power to implement the respective provisions of the
Minsk Agreements.

Just a few weeks ago, we marked the International
Day of United Nations Peacekeepers. I would like to
take this opportunity to pay tribute to all of the Blue
Helmets who are risking their lives to bring peace
and stability to people in different parts of the world.
Since its inception, United Nations peace operations
have proved to be an adaptive instrument and flagship
activity of our Organization.
The protection of civilians has become an obvious
objective for United Nations peacekeeping operations,
and the success of a peacekeeping mission is often
judged by its ability to protect civilians. Ukraine is
a State contributor to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, has recognized the Kigali Principles
and again committed itself to the policy that the
protection of civilians is an overarching goal of United
Nations peacekeeping.

We strongly believe that the peacekeeping
operations authorized by the Security Council have
to be provided with robust mandates for civilian
protection. Any uniformed personnel who witnesses
Violence against civilians should not hesitate to do
everything possible to stop it is. We should the View
that the United Nations should build and enhance its
strategic partnership with regional organizations and
work alongside them, sharing its unique experience
in peacekeeping activities. We welcome the close
cooperation and partnership of the United Nations with
the European Union and the African Union.

As we can clearly see from the Council's interaction
last month with the African Union (see S/PV.7694),
these regional organizations have their own Vision and
approach to the issues ofregional peace and security. The
African Union has also become one of the key partners
of the United Nations in conducting peace operations
on the African continent. We share the View that the
common purpose between the United Nations and the
African Union should be established throughout the
whole process of peacekeeping activity, with protection
of civilians as an integral part of these efforts. We see
potential in establishing closer interaction between
the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In that regard,
we would welcome United Nations initiatives aimed
at contributing to the peace activities of the OSCE on
the ground, especially when regional organizations'
missions are displayed in an insecure environment.

It is a generally recognized approach that those
responsible for war crimes, violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human
rights are to be held accountable. Therefore, a peace
achieved by parties to a conflict should not in any way
mean impunity for perpetrators of atrocities against
the civilian population. All Victims of crime deserve
justice and nothing less.

