Mr. Sana (Rwanda): I thank Ambassador Quinlan
of Australia for his presentation of the 90-day report
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). I wish to reiterate our appreciation for the
tremendous work achieved by the Committee under his
able leadership. I hope that the work of the Committee
will continue to grow under the leadership of the
incoming Chair, Spain.

Rwanda commends the continuing efforts of
the Committee in ensuring full compliance with
resolution 1737 (2006) and other relevant resolutions.
Rwanda joins the voice of the Committee's Chair
in welcoming the renewed commitment of the P5+1
and Iran to continuing negotiations towards finding
a comprehensive agreement in the framework of the
Joint Plan of Action. Although we believe that the 1737
Committee and its Panel of Experts must endeavour
to respond to the efforts of the P5+1 and Iran, we
also agree that while we wait for a comprehensive
agreement, measures imposed by the Council in its
numerous resolutions must remain in full effect and
States must continue their full implementation.

We commend the continuing assistance of the 1737
Committee to national and international organizations
in implementing relevant Security Council measures,
notably the consideration of requests for guidance
covering a range ofissues, including whether a proposal
for providing technical assistance to Iran in the field
of energy efficiency and mine action, as well as other
cooperation proposals, are permitted by the sanctions
measures. We value and encourage the strengthening
of such information exchange between the Committee
and national or international organizations in relation
to the implementation of resolution 1737 (2006) and
other similar resolutions.

On the issue of communications between Iran and
the Committee or its Panel of Experts, it is unfortunate
that Iran has not yet responded to two letters written

by the Committee, respectively, on 27 March in
relation to a carbon fibre interdiction, and on 9 July
in relation to an interdiction in the Red Sea of a cargo
of conventional arms. In that context, we once again
urge the Government of Iran to cooperate with the
Committee and its Panel of Experts by responding to
the communications seeking clarification on suspected
Iranian violations of resolution 1737 (2006) and other
pertinent resolutions.

