Mr. Cabactulan (Philippines): Thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this open debate on the
promotion and strengthening of the rule of law in the
maintenance of international peace and security.

More than six decades after the founding of our
United Nations, the task before us still looms large:
the pursuit of a just and lasting peace remains. Indeed,
despite the advancements we have achieved, we
continue to be beset by war, conflict and violence.

An Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs report paints a sobering picture: in most regions
of the world, between 1990 and 2012 and especially
over the last decade, the number of people displaced by
conflict - excluding fatalities - has been increasing,
reaching an 18-year global high of 45.2 million people
in 2012. We should redouble our collective efforts.
The Security Council should be focused on the critical
issues of international peace and security.

To be sure, the situations relating to the lands and
waters that give rise to tensions, instability or conflict
have become increasingly complex and complicated.
But in all these scenarios and circumstances, the
fundamental importance of the rule of law as the
solid bedrock of nation- and world-building cannot be
questioned. The rule of law is a vital object and policy
instrument that can lead to lasting peace and stability.
Necessarily, for this building-block to remain
strong, we should do everything within our capabilities
to ensure that all stakeholders adhere to the rule of
law. The rule of law by itself does not ipso facto bring
peace and stability. It is adherence to the rule of law
that brings those ideals and principles to life and makes
positive changes real.

That has been the position of the Philippines, as
amply articulated in the principles and purposes of the
United Nations. In the pursuit of enduring international
peace and security, all stakeholders, especially
Governments, should match their pronouncements on
the rule of law with action. When we adhere to the
rule of law, we ensure that we prevent disputes, resolve
conflicts and maintain peace and security, not through
sheer, raw power, but through the moral weight of
pacific processes.

When we adhere to the rule of law, we make full
use of the entire international legal infrastructure
available to us to resolve disputes: the International
Court of Justice, the Permanent Court of Arbitration,
the International Tribunal on the Law of the Sea and
other specialized tribunals. When we adhere to the rule
of law, we combat impunity in all its forms, reaffirm
the importance of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and support efforts to hold accountable
the perpetrators of the most serious international
crimes.

The international legal system provides ample
and extensive adjudicative mechanisms through
international courts and specialized tribunals. The
motivation to resort to those mechanisms to resolve
disputes is there. It is intriguing to note that those
professing the existence of the strongest basis for its
claims - legal, historical or otherwise - do not have
the proclivity to submit to adjudication.

The Philippines acknowledges the importance of
the rule of law as a key element of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping, conflict resolution and peacebuilding.
As such, the Philippines recognizes the inclusion of the
strengthening of the rule oflaw in the mandates of 18 of
the 28 Security Council missions' mandates.

The Philippines, as a police- and troop-contributing
country, continues to do its part in strengthening the rule
oflaw. The Philippines is present in seven peacekeeping
missions. Together with other stakeholders, we work
on strengthening the rule of law, including through,
among other things, the rebuilding of police and law-
enforcement services, ensuring humane and secure
prison facilities, strengthening legal frameworks and
developing the national civilian capacity.

But more needs to be done. The Philippines calls
for the establishment of clear, credible and achieveable
mandates for peacekeeping missions. We likewise
call on stakeholders to provide the necessary policy,
logistical and political support for peacekeeping
missions.

The Special Committee on Peacekeeping should
provide timely and substantive policy directions
that ensure a robust peacekeeping architecture
and strengthen cooperation between troop- and
police-contributing countries, the Security Council and
the Secretariat. Key to such support is the provision
of adequate resources and training, for the safety and
security of all our peacekeepers. The Security Council
must likewise make the utmost efforts to ensure
that the freedom of movement of all peacekeepers is
respected. Any act curtailing the freedom of movement
of peacekeepers or impacting their safety and security
must be condemned in the strongest terms.

Last December, peacekeepers deployed to the
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali were wounded
and killed in an explosion. We know all too well that
pain and suffering. Throughout our five decades"
engagement, Filipino peacekeepers have made the
ultimate sacrifice in the name of peacekeeping. Our
peacekeepers in the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force were kidnapped on two occasions. We
must do everything we can to prevent such incidents.

On the other hand, we must also recognize that
the success of rule-of-law efforts relies not only on
peacekeeping missions. There should be national
ownership, political engagement, and coordination
and alignment of efforts and resources. In that regard,
we should also look into how other relevant actors can
contribute to strengthening rule-of-law efforts. The
role and inputs of host countries will therefore be vital.

The Philippines has had to grapple with its own
challenges. Throughout the years, my Government
has resolutely pursued the path of peace through
negotiations and meaningful dialogue within the
framework of the rule of law and the 1987 Constitution
of the Republic of the Philippines.

In the southern Philippines, we have made
significant headway in bringing about ajust and lasting
peace under President Benigno S. Aquino. Panels
from the Philippine Government and the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front formally signed the fourth and final
annex to the Framework Agreement on the Bangsamoro
on 25 January, in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
These tangible fruits of years of committed work
deserve the support of all those who have pledged to
uphold peace and security through the rule of law.
There may be lessons to be learned and best practices
based on our experience that the Philippines can share.

Our world knows all too well and has seen too much
of the terrible suffering ofpeoples caught up in conflict
and strife. We believe that the biggest takeaway that our
collective history - blighted as it is with pernicious
violence - has taught us is that the biggest investment
we can make is in preventing conflicts from arising.

In the context of internal conflicts, there is much to
develop and support so that all stakeholders can come
to a peaceful resolution. In the context of preventing
international conflicts, we can, and should, rely on the
rule of law to ensure not only that the rights of States
are observed, but, more importantly, that States comply
with their obligations. This is a situation where "right
is might".

In this regard, the continuing discussions held
over 40 years on the responsibility of States for
internationally wrongful acts deserve our careful
consideration. Virtually all delegations agreed, during
the sixty-eighth session of the General Assembly,
that the draft articles were a key contribution to the
development of international law, being broadly used
as reference by international and national tribunals and
Governments. Yet consensus has not been achieved on
the next steps forward. There should be a way forward
through meaningful dialogue.

Clearly, the road ahead of us remains very long.
The advancement and maintenance of international
peace and security must continue to be pursued. Let
us take this opportunity to renew our pledge to uphold
the principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations. We must match that pledge with action and
vigilance.

We must never fear to call out those who flout the
rule of law. We must continue to remind ourselves of
the importance of the rule of law and strive for world
peace. As responsible members of the international
community, we adhere to the rule of law and comply
with our international obligations and commitments.

