Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): We thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this meeting on the
situation in East Timor. I welcome once again in our
midst Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello, Special
Representative of the Secretary General. We very much
appreciate his focused, informative and useful briefing
on the latest developments in East Timor and his
projections for the future of the territory.

A week back we had the report from the Council
mission to East Timor and Indonesia (S/2000/1105).
Let me once again express the appreciation of
Bangladesh to Ambassador Andjaba and other
members of the Security Council mission for a very
useful undertaking. Ambassador Andjaba for the
second time has shown wise and effective leadership of
the Council's missions to the troubled territory. We
owe him a special debt of gratitude.

With regard to the mission's visit to Indonesia,
we feel there was a clear need for Council members to
see for themselves the result of the efforts of the
Government of Indonesia and also to discuss how the
Council could work together with the Government to
find a solution to the issues raised in its resolution
1319 (2000).

We were pleased to receive the 10 November
report of the Indonesian Government on follow-up of
the Council mission, to be issued as document
S/2000/1125. We welcome the commitments made by
that Government in various areas of concern, and we
look forward to their effective realization.

On East Timor, we get a clear message from the
report of the mission, confirmed by Mr. Vieira de
Mello in his presentation this morning. That message
relates to the need for an international presence in East
Timor for some time after the territory's independence.
In other areas too there will be a need for a strong
international commitment of financial and technical
assistance. The recommendation of the report about
reallocating a part of the peacekeeping assessed budget
to training the local police force points in a similar
direction: if we do not do it now, the need for
maintaining an international police force will be even
greater. The judiciary is under-resourced and cannot
cope with the demands placed on it. Delivering justice,
in respect not only of petty crimes but also of the
serious ones committed in the wake of the referendum
last year is very important. In short, the whole issue of
capacity-building requires more attention and
resources. We can all agree that this is a tall order for
the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET).

The issue of slow disbursement of funds has been
raised by Council members in the past. Given the
urgency with which reconstruction must be pursued,
we agree with the recommendation that, for UNTAET,
increased budgetary flexibility should be granted to
facilitate execution of its mandate. We therefore
support all the recommendations that were made in the
Council mission's report in that regard. We are happy
that the robust and decisive action of UNTAET
peacekeepers has succeeded in reducing militia
violence in East Timor. We also share the satisfaction
of the mission with regard to the progress made so far
by UNTAET in the implementation of its mandate.

The refugee issue remains a great cause of
concern. We are happy to note that Indonesian
ministers assured the mission of their Government's
commitment to resolving that issue. Moreover, in the
Indonesian Government report to which I referred
earlier, that Government reaffirmed its intention to
work closely with the relevant agencies, including the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) to prepare for registration of
refugees as a matter of urgency.

Problems that still stand in the way are continued
militia intimidation and extortion of refugees in camps,
lack of information about conditions in East Timor and
ensuring a safe and secure working environment for
humanitarian and aid agencies, enabling them to return.
We believe that the discussions held during the Council
mission will help the Government to redouble its
efforts to achieve the declared objectives. In that
regard, we agree with the report's recommendation that
the Government and UNTAET should work together.
Recent repatriation of refugees from among ex-
Indonesian armed forces reservists from East Timor
(MILSAS) is an example that points in the right
direction. It shows that with the right steps taken by all
sides, the refugees need not languish in the camps for
an indefinite period.

We support the idea of reinvigorating the bilateral
talks between the Government of Indonesia and
UNTAET. We welcome the efforts of the Indonesian
Government in preventing cross-border incursions into
East Timor. Cooperation between the Indonesian armed
forces and police and their counterparts in UNTAET is
essential to minimize cross-border incidents. We
welcome the setting up of the Joint Border Commission
in that regard. We further welcome the adoption of
recent Indonesian legislation for the establishment of a
human rights tribunal which would help in the process
of delivering justice in cases of gross human rights
abuses and of murders of United Nations personnel.

The issue of justice and reconciliation has been
emphasized many times over in the report and in
statements made today. We agree with that focus; this
issue has important implications for the future of the
territory. It is also linked with other problem areas. The
difficulty is to have justice delivered speedily in cases
of known violence; this, we expect, would have a
positive impact on national reconciliation. National
reconciliation, or at least its local manifestation, is an
important factor in speeding up refugee repatriation. It
is important that this is understood in the right
perspective by both the East Timorese people and those
they will reconcile with. We hope that both sides will
adequately support the good work of UNTAET in this
area. We strongly feel that the foundation of durable
and peaceful relations between the territory and
Indonesia lies in harmonious relations between the
peoples of East Timor and of West Timor. That should
be the objective of all endeavours.

In Mr. Vieira de Mello's presentation, we
identified five areas which we believe should be
supported by the Council. The first relates to
reconstruction. I think Mr. Vieira de Mello's
consultations with the World Bank are very appropriate
in that regard; we also look forward to the Brussels
meeting next week.

The second relates to the UNTAET assets to be
retained in East Timor, particularly essential hardware.
We believe that the proposal made by Mr. Vieira
de Mello is of great importance; the Council should act
upon it. We would ask the Secretariat also to work with
all relevant agencies and bodies to ensure that it is
implemented and that the assets remain in East Timor.

The third has to do with the pace of withdrawal of
UNTAET troops. We agree with Mr. Vieira de Mello
that this will depend basically on the security situation
and on capacity-building in East Timor. We would like
to see appropriate follow-up on that.

The fourth is the process of Timorization through
capacity-building. Mr. Vieira de Mello said that this
should not end with the independence of the territory,
and I think that it is very important that the Council
bear this in mind - and not only the Council: I believe
that subsequently the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council will be involved in
development activities in East Timor.

The final point relates to a smooth transition by
the end of 2001 through an effective process of
Timorization, with executive and legislative power
handed over to the East Timorese people. We believe
that to be an important matter that should be borne in
mind.

We look forward to the expected general elections
to a constituent assembly, which should take place by
mid-2001. We hope that the United Nations will be
present in East Timor well into the future, as Mr. Vieira
de Mello says it must be. We look forward to the
Council's involvement in that process.

