The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the consideration of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I
propose, with the consent of the Council, to invite that
representative to participate in the consideration
without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ileka
(Democratic Republic of the Congo) took a seat at
the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

(spoke in French)

"The Security Council condemns with the
utmost firmness the massacre of some 50 people,
most of them women and children, which
occurred on 9 July 2005 in Ntulu-Mamba, in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

"The Security Council requests the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to establish
the facts and report to the Council as quickly as
possible.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Congolese authorities to prosecute and bring to

justice expeditiously the perpetrators and those
responsible for these crimes, and requests the
United Nations Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to provide all
necessary support. The Council encourages the
Congolese authorities to continue their efforts to
ensure the protection of civilians and respect for
human rights within their territory.

"The Security Council stresses the need to
bring to an end, particularly in the districts of
Kivu and Ituri, attacks by armed groups on local
populations, which not only cause further
suffering to civilians but also threaten the
stability of the entire region as well as the
holding of elections in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Council calls upon the
Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda
to abide by the commitment given in Rome, on
31 March 2005, to put an end to the armed
conflict and to settle without further delay the
issue of the repatriation of their combatants.

"The Security Council reaffirms its full
support for MONUC. It welcomes the robust
actions MONUC is undertaking in pursuit of its
mandate and the assistance it provides to the
Armed Forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to improve security conditions for the
population."

(spoke in English)

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2005/31.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.30 p.m.

