Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Let me begin by joining
previous speakers in thanking Mr. Kai Eide, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan, and Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for their respective briefings.

My delegation warmly welcomes the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Rangin Dadfar Spanta, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, and of His Excellency
Mr. Makhdoom Shah Mehmood Qureshi, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Pakistan, at this debate. We thank
them for their very important statements.

Since the 2001 Bonn Agreement, Afghanistan has
been regarded as an exemplary State arising from
conflict. In a few years, it has achieved notable
progress in various sectors. But now, what Afghanistan
has accomplished is being greatly corroded by serious
challenges to the country's security and stability. Fear
of sliding back to a conflict situation is increasing as
the activities of militants grow stronger. The most
recent bomb attacks in Kabul reflect the urgent need to
address the security challenges.

Military measures remain critical in responding
to the increasing attacks by militants. The role of the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) has
been central in assisting the Afghan Government to
tackle the challenge. But military measures are not the
only instrument to achieve peace and stability. As the
militants continue to rely on asymmetric attacks, it
becomes more difficult to adopt a full-scale military
response.

The situation in Afghanistan must be dealt with
through a comprehensive strategy that incorporates the
pillars of security, governance and rule of law and
socio-economic development. Indonesia therefore
attaches great importance to the Afghanistan National
Development Strategy, which serves as a road map for
comprehensive action over the next five years.

An Afghan-led reconciliation process will
continue to be needed in order to achieve sustainable
peace. All-inclusive reconciliation requires all parties
involved to renounce violence, respect justice, equality,
freedom and tolerance and promote consultation.
Addressing the drug economy also remains an urgent
matter, as it is particularly linked to sustaining the
insurgency.
The intensifying conflict in Afghanistan,
exacerbated by natural disasters, has caused multiple
humanitarian challenges, as described by Under-
Secretary-General Holmes. With regard to financing
for humanitarian assistance, there is an urgent need to
allocate more resources to meet the emergency
requirements of millions of vulnerable people.
Mobilization of resources by the United Nations and by
non-United Nations humanitarian agencies is a
commendable effort.

As attacks against humanitarian deliveries
continue, the protection of humanitarian actors and
their work becomes critical. These attacks constitute a
clear violation of international humanitarian law. My
delegation strongly deplores such attacks, which not
only jeopardize the lives of humanitarian workers but
also could put the Afghan people in a more difficult
situation.

Regional cooperation continues to be pertinent to
the strengthening of Afghanistan's engagement in
regional dynamics and its capacity to address
transnational problems. Bilateral partnerships between
Afghanistan and neighbouring States in addressing the
security challenges and in finding mutually acceptable
solutions to humanitarian problems are also of
paramount importance.

My delegation also attaches primary importance
to the Paris Conference on Afghanistan, held on
12 June 2008, which not only resulted in $20 billion in
pledges but also reaffirmed the Afghanistan Compact
and supported the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy. We are hopeful that disbursement of the
pledges will be expeditious and that implementation
will be effective and efficient.

In the current situation in Afghanistan, the role
and contribution of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) becomes more
crucial than ever. Its good-offices support, as mandated
by Council resolution 1806 (2008), in the
implementation of Afghan-led reconciliation
programmes remains pertinent. UNAMA's assistance to
the Afghan Independent Electoral Commission in
ensuring free and fair elections in 2009 and 2010 will
be instrumental in the consolidation of democracy in
Afghanistan.

Finally, Indonesia wishes to reaffirm its full
support for UNAMA and its work, and for its
contribution towards a peaceful, democratic and
prosperous Afghanistan.

