Mr. Hunter (United States ofAmerica): The United
States is pleased to renew the mandate of the Panel of
Experts under Security Council resolution 1718 (2006)
so that it can continue its important work to strengthen
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea sanctions
regime. The full and comprehensive implementation
of resolution 1718 (2006) is critical to achieving the
final, fully verified denuclearization of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. As such, we call on all
States to proactively engage the Panel to support its
investigations of sanctions violations.

We also urge all States to fully implement all their
obligations and work with other States to counter the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea's increasingly
sophisticated trends in evading sanctions, as stated
by the Panel in its latest report (see S/2019/17l). We
are very concerned about the fact that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea continues to unlawfully
obtain refined petroleum products unhindered in the
Yellow Sea and the East China Sea, despite having
exceeded the Council's cap last year by more than
seven times.

We are also concerned about the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's increasing smuggling of
coal to sell in nearby countries in East Asia unhindered.
All States, especially those in the Asia-Pacific region,
must enhance their vigilance and proactively counter
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's illicit
activities in and around their territorial waters, using
all authorities provided by the relevant resolutions.

Finally, we are concerned about the fact that in
the light of the sanctions reducing the regime's access
to hard currency, the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea is expanding its global efforts to conduct
cyberthefts to make up for its export-revenue losses.
We estimate that the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea could be earning hundreds of millions of
dollars through those activities each year. All States
are vulnerable to that increasing trend, and must do
more to protect themselves and prevent the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea from undermining the
Council's sanctions.

