Mr. Akram (Pakistan): As this is the first formal
meeting of the Council for the year, let me take this
opportunity to express the happiness of the delegation
of Pakistan at seeing you, Sir, presiding over the
Council as we inaugurate our work for the year. I
would also like to express my delegation's appreciation
for the skilful manner in which your predecessor,
Ambassador Tafrov of Bulgaria, conducted the work of
the Council during the previous month.

The delegation of Pakistan wishes to thank all
five departing Council members and to welcome the
new members of the Council who have taken their
seats this year.

We thank you, Mr. President, for your
presentation, as Chairman of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), of the
comprehensive report and assessment of the
Committee's work.

Pakistan is a front-line State in the fight against
terrorism. We have deployed 70,000 troops on our
border with Afghanistan for the interdiction and search
of infiltrating or exfiltrating Al Qaeda and Taliban.
members. Pakistan has developed an effective
intelligence network and a quick reaction force for this
purpose. We have captured over 500 Al Qaeda and
Taliban operatives in this campaign, which is
continuing actively at present.

Al Qaeda is today a shadow of what it was in the
past. But, even if more diffuse, the nature of the threat
is more complex. Through the splintering of cells and
the subcontracting of terrorism, terrorists have
conducted operations in many countries, including my
own, and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1267 (1999) and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee must be responsive to the mutating threat
that is evolving.

We appreciate the work done by the Al Qaeda and
Taliban sanctions Committee. We have fully supported
its efforts in all respects. We welcomed your visit, Sir,
to Pakistan. We believe that your visits to various
countries have energized the work of the Committee,
and we trust that you found your interactions in
Pakistan positive and constructive.

Pakistan, for its part - as you know, Mr.
President - requires financial and technical assistance
to enhance its capacity for counter-terrorism, in
particular with regard to surveillance equipment at its
ports of entry and exit, as well as in the development of
human resources.

I would like to offer a few comments and
suggestions with regard to the report we have received
today. We have noted that the visits by the Chairman
and members of the Committee were useful in
observing firsthand the efforts of States to fight
terrorism, particularly Al Qaeda, the Taliban and their
associates. Such visits and dialogue should be
continued in future in order to sensitize both the
Committee and Member States to the need for
coordinated action and mutual cooperation.

The Chairman of the Committee's policy of
transparency in holding periodic meetings should also
be continued in order to enlist maximum support on the
part of the international community. The Committee
should further streamline and improve the process of
submitting new names for addition to the consolidated
list. A designating State should not only consult the
concerned States but also provide as much background
information or evidence as possible, both to ensure the
credibility of the list and to meet due process and legal
requirements.

It is clear that there is a need for legal clarity and
precision with regard to the preparation of the list. In
particular, we believe that there is a need for careful
identification of the coverage of the Taliban, taking
into account the emerging realities in Afghanistan.

Financing of terrorism continues to be a major
area of concern. The Committee should continue its
focus on alternative remittance systems. In this context,
it is important to provide greater assistance to States
needing such assistance to improve their financial
structures, including banking systems.

We are mindful of the Committee's needs in
terms of experts and analytical support to fulfil its
mandate in accordance with Council resolutions. We
hope that the appointment of experts and analysts will
be made in line with the principles of equitable
geographical distribution and other relevant United
Nations rules and procedures.

The Committee should also pay more attention to
factors such as reporting fatigue which may hamper
States' cooperation with the Committee. In order to
maintain its credibility and legitimacy, the Committee
should continue to operate within its mandate to ensure
that States comply with their obligations under the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Finally, the performance of States should be
evaluated not only on the basis of their country reports
but also of their actions on the ground against
terrorism.

The fight against terrorism can be successful only
if we address the problem in all its facets. Military and
administrative measures are but a part of the
comprehensive response which the problem requires.
We need to search for long-term solutions and to pay
greater attention to factors which lie at the root of
terrorism. There is in particular a correlation between
poverty, religious and political persecution, and
injustice on the one hand, and terrorism on the other.

The war against terrorism must therefore be
fought comprehensively, on a global front, with vision
and understanding. It should not erode the moral values
of our societies. It must not be hijacked by those who
seek to use it as an excuse to suppress other peoples. It
must not be allowed to engender a clash of
civilizations.

