Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): My delegation
would like to thank you, Madam President, for
convening this open debate on the issue of children and
armed conflict. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his well constructed, well
documented and comprehensive report. My delegation
also commends Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict, and Ms. Carol Bellamy, Executive
Director of the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF), for their perseverance and for their
excellent work. We in Sierra Leone know that those
two officials are a credit to our global institution.

The Security Council has clearly acknowledged
that the impact of conflict on children has a variety of
implications for international peace and security. The
adoption of resolution 1261 (1999) gave rise to special
measures aimed at the protection of children exposed
to conflict, thus enhancing the political, civil,
economic, social and cultural rights of the child within
the framework of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child.

We have also noted that the protection of
children, especially those who have found themselves
conscripted or enlisted as child soldiers, has received
ample consideration and a degree of specific
recognition in certain international instruments, such as
the 1998 Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, International Labour Organization Convention
182 of 1999 concerning the prohibition and immediate
action for the elimination of the worst forms of child
labour, and the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child. In furtherance of this cause, the
General Assembly has also adopted the Optional
Protocol on the Convention of the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In
paying heed to the call of the Secretary-General, the
Sierra Leone Parliament, on 23 May this year, ratified
the Rome Statute establishing the International
Criminal Court. The instrument of ratification will
soon be deposited with the Secretary-General.

In that regard, we appeal to all members of the
international community to sign and ratify all
instruments relating to the protection of children in
armed conflict.
The question of children and armed conflict is of
particular interest to my country. That phenomenon has
been a tragic feature of the rebel war since it started in
March 1991. Our conflict has been dubbed the
"children's war" because, tragically, children were not
only the victims of the armed conflict in which they
were caught up, but were also perpetrators of some of
the atrocities that were committed. Children are those
most affected by the growing number of armed
conflicts, of which they are the targets, the victims and
the instruments. These children should have no part to
play in armed conflicts. They need to be protected.

My delegation commends the Security Council
for having adopted resolution 1306 (2000) on Sierra
Leone - the resolution on diamonds - and also
welcomes the resolution adopted last week, on
Wednesday, 20 July, by the world's two main diamond
trading associations to curb the illicit trade in conflict
diamonds. Both resolutions focused on the nexus
between the illicit trade in diamonds and in arms and
on their joint role in fuelling some of the most brutal
and devastating wars in our African continent.

My delegation agrees also with references to
inadequate awareness of the extreme suffering of
women and, especially, girl children, during conflicts.
My Government has responded appropriately to the
special needs of the girl child as well as to those of all
other war-affected children in its disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes.
Educational and vocational training opportunities are to
be organized and made accessible to the girl child
accordingly. In April this year my Government
established the National Commission for War-affected
Children as a means of ensuring that the concerns and
well-being of children and young people are taken fully
into account in resource allocation, programme
planning and national policy-making.

One of the greatest challenges facing post-
conflict Sierra Leone is the crisis of young people. If
former child soldiers are to become productive
members of post-conflict societies, alternatives to
fighting and effective programmes for their
reintegration must be put in place. The Lome Peace
Agreement stipulates that particular attention be paid to
the special needs of these child soldiers in the existing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
express its thanks to the troop-contributing countries,
to congratulate the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone on its recent successes and to express its
heartfelt condolences to the countries and families of
the wounded soldiers and those that have lost their
lives.

