Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Like other Security
Council members, I thank Special Representative
Shearer for his briefing and the dedication with which
he is implementing the mandate of the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS), in accordance with
the three-tiered approach to the protection of civilians.
I also thank President Mogae for updating us today
and welcome his call to the international community
to speak with one voice on the South Sudanese crisis.

Italy considers three fundamental aspects in assessing
the situation in South Sudan - the humanitarian
situation, human rights and national reconciliation
and the peace process. The continued violations of the
ceasefire are forcing thousands of South Sudanese to
leave their houses, villages and lands every day. The
humanitarian situation in South Sudan is an emergency
involving half the country's population. Neighbouring
countries are called on daily to stanch this human
haemorrhage with their limited means and the risk that
the instability will soon spread to more areas of the
region. Working for a shared solution for peace in South
Sudan also means healing this wound on the African
continent. While we all have a moral imperative to help
South Sudan, for regional actors it also represents a
geopolitical burden.

The tragic situation in South Sudan has been
further exacerbated by serious human rights violations.
The conflict encourages impunity, sexual and gender-
based violence and the recruitment and use of child
soldiers, as well as constraining freedom of opinion
and speech. All of this is slowly destroying the young
South Sudanese nation. We firmly believe that without
justice, there can never be true national reconciliation.
We welcome the conclusion of the preparatory work
by the African Union, with the support of the United
Nations Office of Legal Affairs, for establishing
a Hybrid Court, and hope that the South Sudanese
authorities will quickly follow up in accordance with
chapter 7 of the peace agreement.

Finally, with regard to the peace process, in
the past two weeks some small but important steps
forward were made at a meeting held in New York.
The communique issued after the thirteenth meeting
of the United Nations-African Union Joint Task Force,
the African Union Peace and Security Council, the
high-level summit convened by the Secretary-General
and other events all came out in support of the IGAD
high-level revitalization forum. With Ethiopia, Italy
co-chairs the IGAD Partner Forum, which has been
strongly supportive, politically and financially, of
IGAD efforts to improve regional stability.

As we have consistently stated since we joined the
Security Council, the crisis in South Sudan is also a
regional one. It is up to IGAD to lead international action
for reconciliation there, with the support of the African
Union and the United Nations. We therefore reiterate
our support to the revitalization forum, agreeing that
this is "a last chance for the parties to really achieve
sustainable peace and stability in South Sudan", as the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union stated
in its communique of 20 September.

