Mr. Kobayashi (Japan): At the outset, on behalf
of the delegation of Japan, I would like to express my
appreciation for the opportunity to participate in this
meeting on the situation in Ethiopia and Eritrea. Japan
has been closely following this conflict and welcomes
the decision which the two countries made on 18 June
to lay down their arms and sign the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities. The Agreement was greatly
facilitated by the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), particularly by Algeria in its mediating role as
Chair, as well as by the United States and the European
Union. Japan pays high tribute to all of them for their
tireless efforts. Since we have dispatched our State
Secretary and other senior officials of the Foreign
Ministry to both countries in an effort to find a
peaceful solution to the conflict, Japan is all the more
gratified by the cessation of hostilities.

The second phase of the proximity talks on the
implementation of the ceasefire Agreement, sponsored
by the United States Government, started in July in
Washington, DC. In this connection, my Government
would like to emphasize the following two points: first,
Ethiopia and Eritrea are requested by Security Council
resolution 1312 (2000) to quickly agree on the
deployment of mine action experts. Because demining
is a precondition for the deployment of a peacekeeping
mission for the re-establishment of civilian
administration and the return of displaced persons, a
decision on this issue should be made as soon as
possible. In this regard, Japan is considering the
possibility of making a financial contribution for mine
action conducted by the United Nations in this area.

Secondly, the parties should resolve, once and for
all, their dispute over the delimitation and demarcation
of their common border, in accordance with the OAU
Framework Agreement and the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities. The resolution of the border
issue should not remain inconclusive, since it has been
a cause of this conflict, and it could provoke hostilities
again.

Japan hopes that the peace talks will soon be
successfully concluded. Japan is also of the view that
the preparations for establishing a United Nations
peacekeeping operation need to be completed quickly,
and peacekeepers should be deployed as soon as
possible in order to ensure the implementation of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities.

Looking ahead, the two countries will have to
confront a wide range of problems in the aftermath of
the conflict, such as those relating to landmines,
refugees and internally displaced persons, not to
mention the daunting task of reconstruction and
development. Before the conflict broke out, Japan had
been one of the largest donors to both countries, having
extended assistance to Ethiopia and Eritrea in the areas
of agricultural production, social and industrial
infrastructure and human resource development. Its
assistance to Ethiopia ranged from $37 million to $63
million a year during the period 1995-1997. It provided
assistance to Eritrea for the first time in 1993, and in
1997 it had quickly become the second-largest donor to
that country. I might add that last year Japan
contributed $4.9 million through the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as
well as about $1 million through the World Food
Programme to mitigate the suffering of those in
desperate need in the region.

Upon the faithful implementation of the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities and the
realization of peace between Ethiopia and Eritrea,
Japan, in cooperation with the international
community, is determined to extend as much assistance
as possible to both countries.

