Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): We
congratulate you, Madam President, on participating
in and presiding over this important meeting. We
also welcome the participation of the President of
Nauru and the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Kazakhstan. We thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Ms. Amina Mohamed; the civil society representative,
Ms. Ibrahim; and the Minister of Water Resources of
Iraq, Mr. Hassan Janabi, for their valuable briefings.

As a state neighbouring Iraq, we have similar
environmental concerns. We agree with Mr. Janabi
that climate change has effects on the ecological
system in many parts of his country, particularly in
the marshlands, as he outlined in his statement. This
requires closer coordination at all levels in order to
mitigate the adverse impacts on the environment and
the people, and to revitalize and develop this area again.

We agree with everybody in the Council that the
phenomenon of climate change is clearly inevitable and
that it has become a concern to all nations and peoples of
the world, given its grave consequences and challenges
in our times. It imperils the security and even the
very existence of certain States and is a harbinger of
a humanitarian disaster. Contrary to what some people
believe, human activities are the main reason for this
change, as wars and conflicts are no longer the sole
reason for instability and insecurity.

In that regard, we underscore the role of the Security
Council, the organ entrusted with the maintenance of
international peace and security by the Charter of the
United Nations, although we believe that the Council is
not the ideal organ in which to tackle the phenomenon
of climate change owing to the multidimensional
consequences that need to be addressed within the
context of sustainable development. Nonetheless, the
efforts of the Council are an integral part of the efforts
undertaken by other United Nations bodies and agencies,
within their respective mandates, in order to mitigate
the impact of climate change and the potential risks it
may pose to security. Those efforts are underpinned by
the requirements and provisions of the Kyoto Protocol
to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change and the Paris Agreement on Climate
Change, which are the legal instruments binding us to
cooperate in that area.

We cannot discuss international measures to
address the phenomenon of climate change without
reaffirming the importance of the implementation of
common but differentiated responsibilities by States,
which was enshrined in the 2015 Paris Agreement.
We welcome the Agreement's entry into force at a
record pace.
With a view to achieving multidimensional
sustainable development, we must establish conditions
conducive to combating the serious consequences of
climate change, for example, drought, desertification,
famine, political upheavals, conflicts over resources,
mass displacement, cyclones, floods, heat waves,
rising water levels and food insecurity. Despite the
efforts undertaken to counter climate change, the path
ahead in order to mitigate its effects is still a long one.
Concerted international action is a sine qua non to
mitigating the impact of climate change and its serious
repercussions for our planet. It will take political will
and cooperation, as well as international solidarity, to
attain those objectives.

Without a doubt, developing countries are making
exceptional efforts to address climate change and
strengthen their capacities to adapt themselves to
its consequences. They are the first countries to be
affected by climate change. The same holds true for
small island developing States and numerous African
States. We hope that developed countries will deliver
on their commitments vis-a-vis the leading role that
they need to play in adopting the bold and urgent
measures needed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions,
and maintain the agreed temperature level.

The international concern about climate change is
accompanied by a similar concern on the part of the
State of Kuwait. We, like other nations, are affected
by it and has therefore joined international efforts to
combat it. We will spare no effort at the local, regional
and international levels to address it. My country sought
to promote collective action from the beginning to the
conclusion of the negotiations on the Paris Agreement.
We have incorporated the commitments arising from
the Agreement into our national priorities, projects and
programmes. That is a reflection of our responsibility to
future generations, given our environment-friendly role
within the framework of mitigating the consequences
of climate change and adapting to it.

In conclusion, the State of Kuwait will continue
to support the United Nations endeavours to address
the challenges caused by the phenomenon of climate
change. We believe that addressing this phenomenon is
a joint responsibility, albeit to varying degrees, in line
with national priorities and capacities, which will lead
to realizing the aspirations of all our nations.

