Mr. Vieira de Mello (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to start by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency. I am honoured to have
been invited to brief the Council under your presidency
on the United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET) for the first time and to introduce the
Secretary-General's first report.

(spoke in English)

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the first three months of the
Transitional Administration in East Timor, and I will ask
members to bear with me if my presentation is slightly
longer than expected, since, as members can imagine, we
have attempted to cover a wide variety of problems and
challenges in these first three months of the Transitional
Administration.

I trust the report conveys the situation that the vast
majority of East Timorese face every day as they recover
from the devastating violence of September last year. In
that month, roughly 750,000 persons out of a pre-
consultation population of about 880,000 were either
internally displaced, if only for brief periods, or fled into
West Timor, or were forced across the border into West
Timor. In addition to losing their houses, an
overwhelming number of East Timorese lost their
possessions and their life's savings. In the aftermath of
this devastation, they lacked food security, basic health
care, potable water and sanitation. Virtually all public
buildings were burned, damaged or ransacked; the
services they had provided collapsed overnight. The
telecommunications system was destroyed, along with
many local radio networks. Electrical supply was
disrupted and generators were damaged. Furthermore, the
main airport in Dili became inoperative, and cross-border
trade effectively ceased, adding to the Territory's
isolation.

The social and economic consequences of this
upheaval are massive. East Timor was a poor territory
before September 1999; it has been in a calamitous state
since then. Roughly 80 per cent of the population is
without means of support; yet prices of basic commodities
are about double those of the pre-consultation period. The

 

allocation system is slowly resurrecting, albeit on an
informal voluntary basis. There exist no local mechanisms
for maintaining law and order.
After so many years of turmoil and successive legal
regimes, disputed claims on property are widespread. Not
surprisingly, there have been growing signs of rising
criminality and disaffection over the past months. While
this phenomenon stems in good measure from widespread
unemployment and youth left idle, there are also indications
that local rivalries and long-standing conflicts may be re-
emerging in the form of community and gang violence. In
the face of these problems, the people of East Timor are
justifiably impatient to see improvements in their lives.
Towards that end, UNTAET has set itself a number of key
objectives for its first six months. The extent to which it
achieves these goals will be the measure of its success in
meeting the high expectations of the people, repairing and
redressing the damage of East Timor's recent past and
fulfilling the ambitious and, in fact, unprecedented mandate
which this Council has given it.

First of all, UNTAET must ensure the physical
security of all East Timorese and their access to a fair
judicial system within an environment of law and order.
UNTAET must also support the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UN HCR) in the
repatriation of all those refugees who wish to return from
West Timor and elsewhere, and sufficient resources must be
made available to meet their shelter, health and sanitation
needs during their integration. Meanwhile, basic
administrative structures must be established at both the
central and district levels, a civil service must be created
and East Timorese at all levels must be empowered to
participate fully in the decisions made and implemented
through these structures. Furthermore, the country must be
moved out of the phase of humanitarian relief, and basic
public services must be brought fully on line.
Reconstruction must start; I will come back to that in a
moment.

Health services and the education system must be put
back on an even keel, and vital infrastructure, such as
electricity and water-supply systems, must be fully restored.
To sustain these efforts in the medium and long term, the
economy as a whole must be put on a solid footing with
basic regulatory fiscal and monetary structures in place. A
series of regulations to allow for the resumption of normal
economic and agricultural activity have been or will be
passed in the near future, and a revenue base to sustain the
Government must begin to be collected. Finally, during its
first six months UNTAET will have to collect, catalogue
and guard evidence on the human rights abuses
perpetrated in East Timor.

UNTAET has taken a number of steps towards
meeting these objectives, but the challenges remain huge.
As the members of the Council are aware, in the border
areas, and particularly in the enclave of Oecussi, militias
continue to pose a threat. Eight cross-border incursions by
militias into Oecussi have taken place in the past few
weeks. I wish to reaffirm to the Council that the
UNTAET peacekeeping force will deter or repel any such
threats with the same firmness and determination as has
the multinational force known as the International Force
in East Timor (INTERFET) up to now.

At the district level in East Timor, law and order is
of increasing concern, as public security is being
undermined by a rising crime rate which reflects - I
repeat - the widespread unemployment and the
disruptions to the education and social systems that have
left too many youth idle. In Baucau, for instance, which
I visited earlier this month, gang battles involving
hundreds of youths took place on an almost daily basis
over the Christmas and New Year period.

At present, only 480 United Nations civilian police
are in East Timor, far below their full authorized strength
of 1,610. The ability of the international civilian police to
penetrate the society, understand the society and access
local information is obviously very limited. So UNTAET
is implementing measures to integrate local participation
in police activities. As an immediate measure, over the
next few weeks UN TAET will institute a police assistance
programme, in which former East Timorese police
officers of known quality are to serve as auxiliaries of our
civilian police. This programme will be phased out once
enough fully fledged East Timorese police are trained at
the new police academy scheduled to begin operations in
March. We have also entered discussions with the former
Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East Timor
(Falintil), which has indicated that it would be willing,
unarmed, to lend its standing in the local communities to
efforts to develop crime-prevention strategies through
community education and provide intercession to reduce
community tensions.

It is also critical that the judiciary become fully
functional. While 10 East Timorese judges and
prosecutors have been appointed and are working, these
judges have little practical experience on the bench and
need further mentoring and support. Thirty more
candidates for positions as judges, prosecutors and

 

defence lawyers are currently being trained, but the pool of
candidates remains, as the Council can see, very limited.
Courts lack even basic support staff, equipment and
furniture. The prisons are in worse shape still, and with the
INT ERFET detention centre at full capacity, prisons in both
Dili and Baucau, which UNTAET is to reopen soon after
some repair work is completed, must be gradually
refurbished and staffed with qualified wardens, which we
do not have, if UNTAET is to be able to arrest and hold
criminals.

With regard to refugee repatriation, the Council has
already been informed that the rate of return of refugees
from West Timor has slowed down over the last two
months as the rainy season has set in. The reasons for this
are complex, stemming in part from militia intimidation in
some of the camps and widespread misinformation,
disinformation or lack of adequate information regarding
the true situation in East Timor. But this slow rate of
return, I believe, is also attributable to other factors, ranging
from the lack of basic services and the destruction of
infrastructure inside East Timor to genuine concern about
the safety of returnees. Many people whom I spoke to last
week in Atambua and Kupang, especially among those who
were previously employed by the Indonesian administration
- civil servants, soldiers and policemen - are hesitating
until they are provided with a clear indication of their
future benefits, if any, including pensions, as well as of
their chances of joining the new East Timorese civil
service.

Once the reconstruction and development projects
supported by the World Bank trust fund begin to come on
line and to have a tangible impact in East Timor, these
programmes will clearly also serve to support the return of
refugees. Until then, however, there is an immediate need
for funding through the United Nations and humanitarian
trust funds for rapid start-up projects to provide
employment and allow returnees and residents alike to set
about rebuilding their communities immediately. This, I
must say, is the greatest frustration of the East Timorese
population at present and our greatest challenge.

Since UNTAET's establishment, very good progress
has been made in developing consultative mechanisms to
ensure the full participation of East Timorese in decision-
making processes, particularly at the central level. The
National Consultative Council, which I established in late
November of last year and which is composed, as the
Council is aware, of seven members representing the
National Council of Timorese Resistance (CNRT), the
broad coalition that campaigned for independence, three
representatives of pro-autonomy political groups, one
member representing the Catholic Church and four
UNTAET members, including myself, who chair it, has
met on five occasions since early December and reached
consensus on eight fundamental regulations. It reviewed
and gave its approval to development and reconstruction
priorities; it established an independent Public Service
Commission responsible for developing the new civil
service; and it discussed a full range of issues facing the
East Timorese population and UNTAET at present. With
its emphasis on consensus, the National Consultative
Council reflects the basic philosophy which guides
UNTAET's work in East Timor, namely, that our mission
is to work not so much as an interim Administration
appointed to govern, but as co-architect, along with the
East Timorese, of a national administration that will serve
the country long after UNTAET's departure.

The effective consultation established at the national
level is also being pursued at the district level. This
emphasis on consultation extends also to other
mechanisms. For example, the Transitional Judicial
Service Commission, composed of East Timorese and
UNTAET commissioners and chaired by Baucau Bishop
Basilio do Nascimento, has held town hall-type meetings
to discuss justice issues. I and other UNTAET staff have
held many similar open information meetings and
dialogues with East Timorese across the country.

From the date of my arrival in mid-November, I
have established a pattern of daily consultations with
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and other members of the CNRT on
all important matters outside the context of the
Consultative Council. We have also developed regular
dialogue with pro-autonomy groups, either in the margins
of the Consultative Council meetings or through visits to
West Timor and Jakarta, such as the one I paid last week.

Results have been mixed in the dialogue with this
latter group, with some pro-autonomy groups or militia
displaying continued hostility towards the United Nations,
as I experienced myself in Kupang, while others are not
only open to dialogue, but keenly interested in
strengthening communications and obtaining reassurances
that could lead to their decision to return and participate
fully, democratically and peacefully in the future political
life of the country. Xanana Gusmao has gone out of his
way in promoting reconciliation. Additional combined
efforts, which I began discussing with him over the
telephone yesterday, are, however, undoubtedly required.

 

Relations with Indonesia are key in this and in many
other respects. Following the Visit of Xanana Gusmao and
his delegation to Jakarta in early December 1999, I have
myself twice Visited Indonesia officially, with very
encouraging results in political, economic, humanitarian and
security terms. Last week, we agreed with Foreign Minister
Alwi Shihab and other senior Indonesian officials to launch
comprehensive bilateral negotiations on a host of issues
involving complex assets and liability claims. An agenda
and timetable should be discussed and approved before
President Abdurrahman Wahid visits Dili on 24 February,
in exactly three weeks. I must say that he and I found the
attitude in Kupang and in Jakarta, as well as in Denpasa,
where the regional military commander resides, very
constructive.

Through the Consultative Council and its sectoral
committees, UNTAET has set about building the regulatory
framework necessary to underpin the administration of East
Timor in all areas, including the economy, local
governance, justice, and public and civil services. In
addition to the first regulation, which defined the legal
framework applicable in East Timor during the transitional
period, and a number of other decisions that were of a more
administrative nature, regulations have now been enacted to
establish the Judicial Service Commission that I mentioned
earlier; a central fiscal authority, which is the embryo of the
future ministry of finance; the central payments office,
which is a proto-central bank; and the Public Service
Commission.

Regulations concerning the registration of commercial
enterprises, the use of currency, the new legal tender and
the licensing of foreign exchange bureaus have also been
passed. In the coming weeks, regulations on a range of
pressing issues will be tabled, including the organization of
ports, the licensing and supervision of banks, and
Government procurement procedures. The International
Monetary Fund has provided us with invaluable support and
advice from the very early stages of this operation.
Regulations to establish a border control service, a
prosecutorial service and sub-district-level councils are also
being drafted. Also, a regulation to amend the currently
applicable criminal procedure code will be necessary. Each
regulation enacted since the establishment of the
Consultative Council was drafted by technical committees
in which East Timorese were in the lead, with UNTAET
providing advice and support, and all have been adopted by
full consensus.

The effort to re-establish basic services and
infrastructure and thereby move from the humanitarian
phase to a more sustainable administration of East Timor
will be extremely difficult in the short term. Members of
the Council should be aware of my main concern at
present, as I indicated earlier, that infrastructural and
development projects provided for in the six-month
reconstruction plan and that will be funded under the
World Bank's labour-intensive trust fund will not, in all
likelihood, actually be implemented for some months. I
am extremely grateful to the World Bank for its energetic
involvement and for the exceptional partnership that we
have established in East Timor.

The Tokyo donor conference in December, as
members know, was most successful, with $522 million
being pledged for a variety of activities in the next three
years. I would repeat that the first six-month plan for
reconstruction was formulated and submitted to a donor
meeting in Washington last week. Notwithstanding the
Bank's real sense of urgency, UNTAET faces a gap in
time which may well result in the perception among East
Timorese during the next few months that little is being
done to repair infrastructure, save for the United Nations
own facilities, for which assessed contributions will be
available. Therefore, quick advance disbursements against
the World Bank fund, flexibility in the use of assessed
resources, and generous bilateral contributions will be
essential to prevent social unrest until the World Bank
comes in full strength.

As the members of the Council are aware, the
International Commission of Inquiry on East Timor, as
well as the Indonesian Commission of Inquiry, submitted
their reports last Monday. While it remains to be seen
what mechanisms might be established to deal with this
matter, UNTAET's human rights component has assumed
the lead in the coordination of the investigative process in
line with the recommendations of both Commissions.

Thus far, investigations into past human rights
violations have been carried out by INTERFET, United
Nations civilian police and other international actors. It is
essential that the information from these sources be
consolidated and catalogued. Over 300 bodies have been
found, 71 different crime scenes identified and 71 bodies
exhumed so far. In Liquica, a mass grave of up to 17
persons has recently been found; likewise, in Oecussi, a
grave site of up to 60 bodies has been discovered. Further
sites are waiting to be examined. The United Nations
civilian police has registered a total of 467 murders
alleged by eyewitnesses, which would point to the
likelihood that further victims may yet be found.

 

A human rights centre has been established in Dili,
which will serve as the centre for such investigations,
evidence collection and cataloguing, and training, as well as
to house a small, very basic but essential mortuary facility.

In the coming months, UNTAET will need to meet a
number of serious challenges. First among them are the
high expectations of the Timorese, who will have displayed
tremendous patience regarding the slow pace at which the
destruction of last September is being addressed. Also, East
Timor has been sheltered from the outside world for the
last two decades, and now the influx of foreigners, civilian
and military alike, is proving to be a source of some
tension and resentment. I am also concerned that our
presence should not have an adverse impact, as I saw in
other, similar operations in the past, on East Timorese
society and culture, and for that reason I have issued a code
of conduct drawn up in consultation with our East Timorese
colleagues for all UNTAET staff to follow.

Establishing a new East Timorese administration calls
for the urgent creation of a civil service. As recently agreed
in the National Consultative Council, we have this very
week begun paying stipends to those thousands of
individuals who have been engaged in voluntary civil- and
public-service functions. This will be a provisional measure
pending the recruitment of new civil servants against a new
salary scale to be decided by the Public Service
Commission over the next three months. In 2000 the civil
service will employ only some 7,000 or so persons, and,
clearly, the problem of unemployment will have to be
addressed by other means, such as the rapid implementation
of rehabilitation and reconstruction projects.

I am confident that we can continue to enjoy the very
strong support that the Council has thus far provided
UNTAET, and that the Council will continue to be our
greatest asset. In particular, East Timor will rely on the
Council's assistance to ensure that the recent harassment
along East Timor's borders will not be allowed to continue
and that the pro-autonomy groups and political militias in
West Timor accept the outcome of the popular consultation
and opt for a moderate, democratic course of action. The
remaining extremist groups and militias in West Timor
should be disarmed and disbanded once and for all; I have
discussed this once again with the Governor of West Timor,
with General Kiki Syahnakri, regional military commander,
and with the Government in Jakarta last week, and have
been given assurances that this will happen.

I also wish to urge members of the Council to use
their influence to ensure that the Transitional
Administration has access as early as possible to the
funds necessary to carry out its mandate. This is
especially essential for all the many costs related to the
actual governance functions with which the Council has
entrusted us in what is a devastated country.

Let me briefly report on the military situation. A
carefully planned, progressive takeover of the
International Force in East Timor (INTERFET) by the
UNTAET military component began on 1 February with
the transfer of the entire eastern section to United Nations
command. This gradual process will continue in the next
three weeks, until full transfer has taken place in the latter
part of February.

I wish to pay tribute here to Major General Peter
Cosgrove, with whom I have worked very closely indeed
since my arrival, and to his officers, men and women of
different contingents for INTERFET's remarkable
achievements in restoring and maintaining security in East
Timor and along its borders.
As the Secretary-General indicates in his report, I
shall remain very mindful of the Council's expectation of
regular assessments of the necessary United Nations
military strength with a view to achieving possible early
reductions.

In terms of the political future and the related
timetable, it is premature to predict when a process of
drafting a constitution should begin. This would lead, as
members can imagine, to two other fundamental
questions, relating to a regulation on new political parties
and to another on elections. Given the urgent problems
we now face, both humanitarian and relating to
reconstruction, it is too early to politicize the environment
and distract ourselves and the East Timorese from the
many pressing issues to be faced during this initial
emergency phase. I believe, however, that in the second
half of 2000 we will start reflecting and perhaps acting on

these issues - constitution, political parties and
elections - and on a related calendar leading to
independence.

In conclusion, I would like to summarize what I
believe is at stake for the United Nations in East Timor.
As a remote country of some 800,000 people, with
relatively few resources, East Timor is, in the final
analysis, of little strategic importance. Nevertheless, the
people of East Timor have fought and suffered for
decades to achieve their independence, and until very
recently they did so in the face of general indifference -

 

with the exception of this Organization and the Security
Council.

Thus, I believe, the United Nations owes East Timor
a debt. Equally, East T imor represents an unprecedented
challenge for the United Nations. We are called upon to
administer and govern a territory which is starting from
nearly nothing in terms of resources. At a time of flagging
confidence and growing cynicism with respect to the
multilateral system, East Timor provides us with the
opportunity to prove - to the East Timorese, who for so
long were without support, as well as to ourselves - that
UNTAET can be a paradigm of nation-building in future
latest- generation United Nations operations approved by the
Council.

