Mr. Ohin (Togo) (spoke in French): At the outset,
let me commend the French Government for the
initiative to organize this meeting, which is focused
on the humanitarian situation in Syria and its serious
repercussions for neighbouring countries. I would also
like to thank Deputy Secretary-General Jan Elliason
and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Antonio Guterres for their very detailed briefings on the
subject. I also commend the presence of the Ministers
from Syria's neighbouring countries of Turkey, Jordan,
Lebanon and Iraq, as well as the other heads of
delegations attending this meeting.

The Syrian crisis, which has already lasted for
more than 18 months, is now in a complete stalemate
with regard to a peaceful settlement. The inability of
the Security Council so far to speak with one voice to
address this crisis is deeply regrettable. Unfortunately,
the various initiatives undertaken outside the Security
Council have not succeeded in bringing about a positive
solution to the conflict, undoubtedly they have often
been conflicting. Moreover, the six-point plan of the
Joint Special Envoy of the United Nations and the
League of Arab States on Syria, Mr. Kofi Annan, was
seen as the best way to end the crisis, particularly in
that it had been agreed to by the parties involved.

Given the ongoing violations of that plan and the
surge in fighting with the use of heavy artillery and
sophisticated weapons, typical of a conventional war
and an internal armed conflict with serious international
implications, the Joint Special Envoy decided to
announce his resignation. My country, which regretted
that resignation, has nevertheless welcomed the quick
appointment of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as Joint Special
Envoy. I would like to reaffirm here our full support
for Mr. Brahimi and to wish him every success as he
carries out his mandate.

Syria has now entered what one would call a civil
war in which the people pay a heavy price. The clashes
taking place in the urban areas, the number of dead,
totalling in the dozens per day and already surpassing
25,000, and the pointless destruction of property have
increased the number of displaced persons within the
country as well as the number of refugees seeking
safe haven in neighbouring countries. Turkey, Jordan
and Lebanon in particular are accommodating a huge
number of refugees, currently estimated to exceed
250,000, including women and children who have
fled massacres, summary executions and all manner
of abductions and violations of human rights. That
situation is a genuine humanitarian disaster, both in
Syria and in the host countries. From all standpoints,
the situation is worsening as the fighting intensifies
and the martyrdom of the Syrian people is heightened.

In that regard, Togo would like to thank the
host countries for the untold sacrifice that they are
undertaking to protect and come to the assistance of the
thousands of refugees arriving in their countries in dire
need, some of them sick or wounded. Hosting refugees
is always a heavy burden, both for the host State and
for the humanitarian organizations that work to provide
assistance. The host countries cannot bear that heavy
burden alone, and the full cost cannot be assessed
without factoring in the insecurity that it leads to.

My country therefore calls upon the entire
international community to continue to remain engaged
with regard to the tragedy currently taking place in
Syria by providing increased material and financial
assistance to meet the needs of Syrian refugees and
displaced persons. I would like to take the opportunity
afforded by this meeting to commend the efforts
undertaken to date by States, United Nations system
entities and humanitarian agencies, as well as their
staff, who, within Syria and in the refugee camps,
are working to provide the relief and assistance to the
populations that their status requires.
Beyond the words of support and the efforts
undertaken on the ground to help refugees and displaced
persons, we need to define strategies to reorganize and
support humanitarian action. That is the goal of this
meeting, since all of the other initiatives to date with
regard to a peaceful settlement of the conflict have
failed.

From the viewpoint of my country, the strategies
to be established need to include the adoption of
national or regional measures to provide relief to
displaced Syrians, both within the country and
outside as refugees. At the same time, we need to
firmly hold parties on all sides accountable for their
responsibilities in terms of complying with the relevant
international legal instruments of humanitarian law
and international human rights law. Proven violations
of that responsibility to protect, which is incumbent
upon all parties, must be considered within the context
of the fight against impunity and should lead to holding
those responsible accountable for their actions before
national or international courts.

The Security Council must send a strong and
unequivocal message to all parties in that regard, for
there can be no doubt that the forces who are fighting
in Syria are continuing to commit serious violations of
international law, human rights law and international
humanitarian law. The report issued in February
(A/HRC/ 19/69) by the independent international
commission of inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic,
mandated by the Human Rights Council, indicates
that those violations are committed both by the
governmental forces and by the anti-Government armed
groups. Several months after the publication of the
report, and following months of violations and acts that
shock the conscious of humankind, we must conclude
that such acts have worsened owing to the increasing
intensity of the fighting and the use of military aircraft,
the use of terrorist attacks and the perpetration of
widespread massacres, with men, women and children
indiscriminately being the victims.

That litany of acts, which constitute violations
of human rights, includes impediments to providing
humanitarian assistance. My country calls on all parties
to avoid such acts and commit to opening humanitarian
passageways so that assistance can be brought to the
populations that direly need it. Humanitarian workers
must also be protected to be able to carry out that
dangerous mission. In that regard, we reaffirm that the
provision of humanitarian assistance must take place
within the context of respect for the sovereignty of
Syria itself and respect for the neighbouring countries
that are absorbing the continuous influx of refugees.

The Syrian conflict cannot avoid being subject to the
conventional rules of conflict resolution. Its settlement
will necessarily entail dialogue, regardless of whether
one party is a winner or a loser. Syria will need all ofits
daughters and sons to rebuild. Syrians will have to live
with the outcome of the tragedy that they are currently
experiencing; but dialogue and reconciliation cannot be
put off for much longer. That dialogue needs to begin
now, and to do that the fighting must stop.

The message that the Security Council has sent
since the very beginning of the crisis, although it has
not been successful in getting it implemented on the
ground, is still relevant. The fighting needs to stop to
provide an opportunity for diplomacy to convince all
of Syria's community, political, ethnic and religious
components to engage in dialogue in order to bring
about a restoration of peace in their country.

This notion of dialogue was supported by the
independent international commission of inquiry on
the Syrian Arab Republic, which continues to believe
that the only possible way to put an end to the violence
is an inclusive dialogue that brings about a negotiated
settlement to effectively ensure respect for human
rights for the entire population of the country.

The United Nations must remain engaged in
bringing about a political settlement to the crisis, and
Mr. Brahimi will have the challenging responsibility of
meeting the legitimate aspirations of the Syrian people.
The tireless support of the international community,
and specifically of the Council, is necessary to ensure
that his mission is successful. We all agree that we
need to provide relief to the refugees, but we are also
all aware that the solution to this crisis is a political
one. Therefore, we all know what remains to be done to
achieve a lasting solution.

