Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): I had a
text to read out, but I think that after Ambassador
Mahbubani's long statement, I will instead contribute
to a spontaneous discussion, at the risk of having
appear in the verbatim record statements that are not
carefully weighed word by word.

Kishore Mahbubani's final comment was
interesting. It was, in the end, a practical
recommendation. I think that if we wish to have lively
debates, we must make sure that texts such as that just
read out by Ambassador Mahbubani can be included in
the verbatim record without first having to be read out.
That way, we would then be able to have the
conversation that I am now trying to start. I think that
this is an additional reform that we should consider.
I would like to begin by welcoming the
extraordinary determination demonstrated by
Ambassador Mahbubani, Christine Lee and the entire
Singaporean team in transforming the annual report. I
think that is a small but absolutely necessary task. We
no longer have an unusable compilation but a report
enabling anyone to find an immediate record of our
work during a given year. Not only have we saved
money for the United Nations, which in itself is a good
thing - in fact, we will have to decide among
ourselves what to do with those savings - but also and
more importantly, we are making available to all
Member countries a genuine working tool.

As did our friend Kishore, I would like to include
Ambassador Greenstock in my congratulations because
the introduction is, I think, the beginning of an
analytical section. The Security Council is a slowly
evolving animal, but I think that the example given by
Ambassador Greenstock is a good start on an analytical
section, which could gradually find its way into the
beginning ofthe annual report.

Beyond my comments on the annual report, I
think that today's discussion is an opportunity to reflect
once more on our working methods. What strikes me in
listening to Ambassador Mahbubani, as compared to
his statement last year in the General Assembly, is that
in his view we have made a great deal of progress. I
think that is an accurate judgement. If we take a look at
the development of the Security Council's working
methods since its creation more than 50 years ago, we
can see that we have gone from a period of hibernation
to a period of increasingly rapid development. Some
would say that the progress is not yet rapid enough.
But I am struck by how the Security Council has been
able to develop its working methods pragmatically. If
we compare the Council to the General Assembly, we
could say that in this friendly competition, the Council
has taken the lead. When we take a look at the way in
which the monthly programme is decided on and
prepared, when we see the goals we set for ourselves,
and when we think about the wrap-up sessions, which
are dear to some and criticized by others, we can say
that in terms of organization, we are making progress
while still retaining the necessary flexibility in our
work, which is dictated by constantly changing events.

Ambassador Mahbubani spoke of transparency. It
is true that never in the history of the United Nations
has the Security Council held so many public meetings.
We have broken all records. He was right in
mentioning our openness to civil society through our
Arria-formula meetings, which enable us to meet with
the representatives of non-governmental organizations,
who come to enrich our work and who transform the
Council's image by showing its ability to listen,
beyond the circle of States, to all those who can make a
useful contribution.

Aside from those meetings with civil society, our
ability to work with other Member States has also
improved. Ambassador Greenstock once again deserves
to be commended, this time as Chairman of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee. His actions are an
example of what we all should be doing when we have
the responsibility of chairing a committee or working
group. The ad hoc working group on conflict
prevention and resolution in Africa is also a very good
working tool, which we should use even more.

I would add a last point. Security Council
missions beyond the Chamber, to countries, have
become for us - and also, I think, for our partners in
the various regions that we visit - an absolutely
indispensable element for working better with the
countries concerned and with regional and subregional
organizations.

Those examples show that we have indeed been
able to evolve.

Ambassador Mahbubani referred to the successes
and frustrations that we have had over the past year. I
would mention an issue to which he referred: sanctions.
It is true that for two years we have tried to agree on
and to adopt a document. We are deadlocked.
Nevertheless, we can observe that after the decade of
sanctions, we have been able to develop a tool that is at
our disposal alongside words, statements, resolutions
and the use of force. Today, sanctions are a more
refined and more targeted tool. We have introduced
time limits. I think that is a major advance, even if
some seated at the Council table do not agree. We have
also begun to pay attention to humanitarian
consequences. I think that those are two areas of
progress, among others, that demonstrate that on that
issue too the Council has been able to evolve in the
right direction.

I will conclude by asking about one suggestion
made by Ambassador Mahbubani. Is it necessary to
codify all of this? At the risk of surprising my
colleagues, I would say that 1 gladly side with British
pragmatism. In France, we are obsessed with codifying
everything, beginning with our Constitution.
Experience has shown that now, and at an ever faster
pace, we are changing our Constitution because the
world is changing very quickly. As for the English,
they do not have a written Constitution, and they are
doing very well. I think that perhaps we should follow
the wisdom and pragmatism of the British in our
working methods. It is good to develop our working
methods. I believe that we have been to do so fairly
quickly. Let us continue to do so without getting
bogged down too much in codification.

