Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this meeting today. I also thank Mr. Abou
Moussa, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Regional Office
for Central Africa (UNOCA) for his briefing. I take this
opportunity to commend UNOCA for its consistent
efforts and involvement in all regional initiatives aimed
at restoring peace and stability in the Central African
region.

As it is at the heart of the continent, the Central
African region may be a yardstick for the situation
in Africa. The subregion is faced with extreme cases
of ineffective State authority over some territories
and porous borders. That is particularly true for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. The region is plagued by uncontrolled
armed groups, including terrorist movements like the
Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), gangs of thugs like
the ex-Seleka and the "anti-balaka", but above all, the
genocidal movement called the Forces de'mocratiques
de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), which continues to
spread and propagate its genocidal ideology 19 years
after the genocide perpetrated against the Tutsi in
Rwanda.

We have heard the statement made by our colleague
the French representative. He warned all of us of what
is going on in the Central African Republic, where
Muslims and Christians are killing each other. The
Council can imagine what having the FDLR in that
melting pot would mean.

Days ago, we all heard on the news that armed
groups from the Central African Republic carried
out an attack in Cameroon. That just proves the
dangers posed by those armed groups not only to the
countries they operate in, but also to neighbouring
countries. Therefore, we can never overemphasize
the need to eradicate those negative forces. Moreover,
it is unfortunate that, during the reporting period, as
highlighted by the current report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/671), the subregion was dominated by
the further deterioration of the overall situation in the
Central African Republic.

That being said, we commend the newly awakened
spirit of ownership and cooperation among regional
leaders. That was exhibited by the pledge of $50 million
in support of the efforts of the Economic Community
of Central African States (ECCAS) in the Central
African Republic made by the Heads of State at the
extraordinary summit of the Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC), held on 14 June
in Libreville. It was also demonstrated by the outcome
of the 36th ministerial meeting of the United Nations
Standing Advisory Committee on Security Questions
in Central Africa, held in Rwanda in August, which also
discussed the situation in the Central African Republic.
We take this opportunity to commend the efforts of the
African Union (AU), ECCAS and the United Nations,
through the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in the Central African Republic and UNOCA, in
the search for a lasting solution to the current crisis in
the Central African Republic.
Rwanda further welcomes the decision of the
Heads of State of CEMAC to abolish visa requirements
for nationals of the six CEMAC countries, effective
1 January 2014. We believe that this is a major milestone
towards regional integration and economic cooperation.
If the people of the Central African region are to fully
benefit in a timely manner from that new development,
there is a need to stabilize the entire region, and
especially to curb the activities of all negative forces in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic.

The Secretary-General's report reveals that despite
combined efforts, the Lord's Resistance Army remains
a major security, humanitarian and human rights
threat. Although the figures released by the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs show
a decline in the total number of LRA incidents, the
related killings, abductions and massive displacement
of civilian populations remain concerning.

We strongly condemn the continued violations
committed against children by the LRA and its use
of rape, sexual slavery, sexual violence and forced
recruitment of child soldiers. We commend the
successful efforts of the African Union Regional
Task Force military operations to weaken the LRA.
In that regard, we congratulate the troop-contributing
countries, especially Uganda, on their efforts.

We remain gravely concerned by the humanitarian
situation of over 350,000 displaced persons in LRA-
affected countries, andurge the international community
to maintain its support in favour of the displaced
populations. We call for increased humanitarian
assistance to those who are most vulnerable, and urge
the Central African Republic authorities to assume
their primary role in providing security and safety to
displaced persons. In that regard, we call on the Central
African Republic to allow and facilitate, as appropriate,
access by humanitarian agencies to those who have
been most affected.

Poaching in the Central African region has
increased to worrying levels. At the 36th ministerial
meeting of the United Nations Standing Advisory
Committee on Security Questions in Central Africa,
held in Rwanda in August, it was revealed that the
region had lost 70 per cent of its elephants in the past
10 years. It is worth noting that poachers and armed
groups use sophisticated weapons acquired from the
income generated from the illegal ivory trade to kill
innocent civilians and destabilize nations. That is
why the practice remains a serious security threat to
affected countries in the region and hence requires
increased determination on the part of regional actors,
in coordination with the countries of destination, which
are located mainly outside the continent.

Let me conclude by thanking the European Union
and the United States for their invaluable support of
the implementation of the AU Regional Cooperation
Initiative against the Lord's Resistance Army. We also
welcome the pledges made by Luxembourg and the
United Kingdom towards the implementation of the
United Nations regional strategy. We call upon other
bilateral and multilateral partners to join regional
efforts in the fight against one of the most criminal
and brutal armed groups of recent decades. Rwanda
remains confident that with ongoing, sustained regional
and international efforts, the LRA and its notorious
commanders may be living their last days.

