Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic):
Mr. President, I appreciate your efforts during your
presidency of the Security Council this month and I
thank you for convening this meeting on the situation
in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

I align myself with the statements delivered by
the representative of Saudi Arabia on behalf of the
Group of Arab States, the representative of Egypt on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the
representative of Tajikistan on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference. I also thank
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing and stress the
importance of the role of the Secretariat in accurately
reporting the facts on the ground in the occupied Arab
territories and the impact of the prolonged Israeli
occupation on stability not only in the Middle East but
around the world. I also welcome the participation of
Mr. Pedro Serrano, Acting Head of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, and of
Mr. Abdou Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People in this meeting.

The world has recently borne witness to the
radical position of the Israeli Government, which has
shirked its internationally agreed obligations and
brought the peace negotiations to a deadlock while
remaining immune to accountability. Such behaviour
thwarts the efforts of the Council to send a clear signal
to Israel that the world can no longer accept the
continuation of illegal settlements and the occupation
of Arab territories since 1967. Especially in light of the
current turmoil in the Arab world, it is mistaken to
believe that the flexibility of Arab States and the
efforts of the Quartet and the Secretary-General will
continue forever. Unfortunately, the Israeli
Government persists in its illegal settlement activities
in the occupied Palestinian territories and the occupied
Syrian Golan, in defiance of the demands of the
Quartet, the Committee of Ministers for the Arab Peace
Initiative, and the two-thirds of the members of the
international community that stand ready to recognize
the Palestinian State.

There is an international consensus today in
favour of the two-State solution of Palestine and Israel,
living side by side in peace. We must take advantage of
this consensus and momentum to avoid a regional
confrontation that is not unlikely to erupt in the present
circumstances. The leaders of Israel ought to take this
danger seriously.
The position of Arab and peace-loving States is in
line with relevant United Nations resolutions,
including those of the Security Council. The
establishment of a lasting, just and comprehensive
peace in the Middle East can be based only on the
principle of land for peace and international legality.

We reiterate our firm rejection of the illegal
measures taken by Israel in occupied East Jerusalem
and its attempts to change the Arab identity,
demographic composition, legal status and religious
character of the city, and we stress that all such
attempts are null and void and without effect. The
international community must reject the attempts of the
Israeli Government to undermine the Islamic and
Christian holy sites, demolish houses in the city, expel
Arab residents and revoke their residency rights with
the aim of Judaizing the city. Such attempts violate the
obligations of Israel, the occupying Power, under
international law, are inconsistent with the relevant
decisions of the United Nations, and undermine the
foundations of a peaceful solution to the Palestinian
question and the Arab-Israeli conflict.

While the Israeli occupation of Lebanese territory
continues, we note ongoing Israeli violations of airspace
and espionage activities, which pose a threat to
Lebanese sovereignty and violate resolution 1701
(2006). Israel also continues to occupy the Syrian Golan
Heights and deplete its wealth. It has scaled up its
settlement policy there alongside its policy in Palestine,
expelling Arabs and demolishing their homes in an
attempt to change the identity and structure of the
occupied territory, in contempt of basic human rights
and in violation of international law. We reaffirm here
the decisions of the General Assembly, which has
declared invalid the Israeli decision to annex the Golan
and affirmed the need to return it to Syria, in
implementation of resolution 497 (1981). We also
reaffirm the need for the remaining occupied Lebanese
territories to be returned to Lebanon and for the right of
the Lebanese to defend their territory to be recognized.

I recall that this Council has the responsibility to
achieve peace in the Middle East; that is particularly
true of the five permanent members, which have a
historic and political responsibility vis-a-vis the current
situation. The solution exists, provided that there is
political will to create conditions conducive to the
establishment and viability of an independent
Palestinian State and the recognition of its borders
based on those of 4 June 1967, with East Jerusalem as
its capital. In conclusion, I recall that the right to
struggle for liberation from foreign occupation is a
legitimate right that cannot be equated with military
aggression by occupation forces.
