Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would also like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate. In
the deliberations on this topic, we should always bear
in mind that the Security Council acts on behalf of all
States Members of the United Nations. That is why the
working methods of the Security Council are an issue
that concerns the entire United Nations membership.

Many challenges to the better functioning of the
Organization are a result of the lack of transparency,
accountability, effectiveness and democracy in the
Security Council. The working methods of the Council
are at the heart of those shortcomings, which have a
direct impact on the critical undertakings of the United
Nations as a whole.

We remain convinced that the more transparency
the Council displays in undertaking its work, the more
accountable it will be. The more it shares information,
consults and accepts input, the more effective it will
become. Moreover, a Council that is more responsive
to the United Nations membership will be better placed
to meet the challenges of an increasingly complex
world. It would be difficult to say that we have reached
this point.

We acknowledge that some progress has been
achieved in the last few years in improving the Council's
working methods. Much of note 507 addresses the ways
in which the Council communicates with the outside
world and the degree to which information about the
Council is available and accessible. Yet there is still
room for improvement in terms of more informative
briefings and the timely availability of draft resolutions
and presidential statements, and certainly a decrease
in the frequency of closed meetings is needed for a
meaningful interaction. Greater transparency is also
necessary in the functioning of the Security Council
subsidiary organs, which should be encouraged to
further interact with the United Nations membership.
The Council should not miss opportunities to get views
beyond those of Council member States.

Another improvement would be to better incorporate
conflict prevention into the Security Council agenda.
There is broad consensus among Member States on the
need to enhance our efforts on prevention, including
through mediation efforts. Consolidating the Security
Council's role in prevention by making the best possible
use of the tools at its disposal to prevent conflict is
vital. To do so, the Council needs to be able to act in
an informed manner. Current experience indicates that
the Council often finds itself responding to crises in an
incremental manner, making greater use of the tools at
its disposal only as situations deteriorate.

The use of the veto has also proved to hamper the
most important role of the Council in a given situation,
not least in the early phases of a conflict. We believe
that better outcomes could be achieved and more
humanitarian tragedies prevented if the tools at the
Council's disposal were utilized much earlier, without
resort to the veto as an instrument for advancing
national interests. In this manner, we see the work of
the Council as being complementary to that of the other
organs of the United Nations, with which it needs to
remain in synergy.

Needless to say, better coordination of the Security
Council with the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Secretariat, as well as with
the Peacebuilding Commission, is crucial. Greater
interaction with regional organizations as well as
troop- and police-contributing countries would also
undoubtedly contribute to the Council's effectiveness.

Finally, I would like to emphasize that we consider
the issue of working methods as one of the components
of the broader Security Council reform agenda. At the
same time, our firm beliefis that updating the Council's
methods of work cannot be a substitute for engaging
in more substantive talks on Security Council reform.
We must continue to seek a constructive solution by
identifying a common denominator to channel the
debate on the Council reform agenda. I will not go
into the details of our position on this issue here, as I
made that position clear during the intergovernmental
negotiations last week, in addition to the remarks made
by the United for Consensus group.

Before I conclude, I would like to stress that we
look forward to continuing to contribute constructively
to the ongoing discussion on improving the working
methods of the Council. Increased transparency and
effectiveness will further enhance the legitimacy of
this body in the eyes of all Member States. That, in
turn, will only strengthen the Council's role in the
maintenance of international peace and security, to the
benefit of us all.

