Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I
welcome Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Kubis to the Council and thank him for his
comments. He has our support in carrying out his
challenging assignment.

I also thank the staff of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for the
important work they do each day under very difficult
conditions. I further welcome Ambassador Tanin and
thank him for once again addressing the Council.

Afghanistan has made great progress, and I want
to underscore our support for Afghan leadership and
Afghan sovereignty. The United States is committed to
backing Afghanistan and continuing our partnership
through 2014 and beyond.

I will focus today on two areas: the progress
Afghan authorities have made in taking over
responsibility for security, and efforts to reduce the
corrosive effect of narcotics.

In the past few months, we have seen several
significant steps. Last November, President Karzai
announced the second tranche of areas that will begin
the transition to an Afghan security lead. This tranche
includes five provinces in their entirety, and various
districts and cities in 13 other provinces. Parwan
province became the first area from tranche II formally
to begin the transition process last December. All but
one have followed since. Now, approximately 50 per
cent of the Afghan population lives in areas that are
transitioning to Afghan security lead.

The Afghan Government's increased domestic
success has been complemented by its diplomatic
leadership in the Istanbul process on regional security
and cooperation and at the Bonn conference.
Afghanistan's neighbours had the foresight to
recognize that economic development in the region
will take root only when there is security and stability.
At both Istanbul and Bonn, Afghanistan's neighbours
and the broader international community pledged their
support to the Afghan-led and Afghan-owned
reconciliation process. This support is critical.

Since then, regional and international partners
have helped solidify Afghanistan's progress. After
Istanbul, the United Nations played a key role in
supporting regional efforts to implement the
commitments and confidence-building measures agreed
there. In Bonn, 15 international organizations and 86
countries joined with Afghanistan to reiterate mutual
commitments and to deepen and broaden our historic
global partnership in support of Afghanistan.

The NATO summit to take place in Chicago in
May, and the Foreign Ministers' meeting to take place
in Tokyo in July, will be particularly important for
clarifying plans for supporting Afghanistan into the
future. At the NATO summit, we will determine the
next phase of our commitment to Afghanistan. This
includes shifting to a support role in 2013 in advance
of Afghanistan taking full responsibility for security in
2014. As President Obama reiterated last week, we are
going to complete this mission responsibly.

I also want to re-emphasize President Obama's
message that we are deeply saddened by the events that
took place last week in Kandahar. That incident was
tragic and shocking. United States Secretary of
Defense Panetta has expressed our commitment to
getting the facts as quickly as possible and to holding
accountable anyone responsible.

On the issue of narcotics, we welcome the
discussions that took place in Vienna in February at the
Third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact on
controlling the flow of opiates from Afghanistan. This
was the first such meeting in five years, and brought
the Paris Pact's 57 partner States together to discuss
how best to combat narcotics trafficking from
Afghanistan.

The problem before us is complex and
entrenched; it funds terrorism and violence, blocks the
emergence of legitimate livelihoods, and ruins lives.
Yet we know that a better future is possible, freeing
Afghanistan and its neighbours from the curse of drug
addiction and economic dependence on this illicit
trade. On the ground today in Helmand province, the
Afghan Government is driving forward an innovative
food-zone programme that, with international support,
has reduced poppy cultivation by over 36 per cent
since 2009. The eradication programme sponsored by
the Afghan Ministry of Counter-Narcotics expanded
into 18 provinces in 2011. More Afghan provinces than
ever are leading their own anti-narcotics efforts.

Across Afghanistan, the United States Agency for
International Development has invested $541 million
over the past three years in encouraging alternative
livelihoods, including through agricultural and
agribusiness training, agricultural credit, and the
promotion of high-value alternative crops. These
programmes serve over 300,000 rural households each
year. While the Afghan drug trade begins in
Afghanistan, its causes and consequences extend far
beyond its borders, and so must our responsibility for
resolving it. This is a global problem that demands a
common response.

Security and narcotics are just two of the
obstacles Afghanistan faces in building a strong
economy, ensuring the health of its citizens, and
asserting full sovereign control over its fate. The
United Nations plays an essential role in supporting the
Afghan Government and people in addressing the
challenges that Afghanistan faces in developing a
secure, stable and prosperous Afghanistan.

For that reason, the United States supports the
extension of the UNAMA mandate for a further 12
months. UNAMA's role will continue to evolve during
this period of transition, but there can be no doubting
the continuing importance of its contributions. From
the use of its good offices to promote regional
cooperation and its work as co-chair of the Joint
Coordination and Monitoring Board, to humanitarian
assistance and its work with refugees and internally
displaced persons, the United Nations has shown
beyond any doubt its commitment to the people of
Afghanistan. We commend the Organization for its
vision and tenacity, and we thank the delegation of
Germany for its leadership in negotiating the renewed
mandate.

Afghans are taking responsibility for their own
security, pursuing reconciliation and planning for a
stable economic future. And as they do, the United
States will continue to stand by their side.

