Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to welcome Your Excellency, Madam
Foreign Minister, to New York and to thank you for
presiding over this meeting. I also thank Mr. Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
and Mr. Krahenbiihl, Commissioner-General of the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), for their briefings.

China has been closely following the recent tensions
in the Gaza Strip and Jerusalem. We express our deep
concern and sorrow over the casualties resulting
from the clashes. We welcomed the recent ceasefire
agreement reached and commend the United Nations,
Egypt and others for their good offices. Safeguarding
the legitimate rights and interests of the Palestinian
people is a joint responsibility of the international
community, and in that context I want to emphasize
the following.

First, we must adhere to the principle of a two-
State solution in seeking a just and durable solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The international
community should base its efforts on the Arab Peace
Initiative, the principle of land for peace and the
relevant Council resolutions with a view to facilitating
a settlement of the question of Palestine and eventually
establishing a State of Palestine with full sovereignty,
based on the 1967 borders, and with East Jerusalem as
its capital. Any new initiative must comply with those
basic international norms. That is the only way to ensure
a fair and durable solution that is broadly acceptable to
the international community.

Secondly, it is necessary to implement resolution
2334 (2016) effectively. The party concerned must
immediately cease all settlement activities in the
occupied territories, the demolition of Palestinian
houses and the destruction of Palestinian property, and
take measures to prevent violence against civilians. It
is crucial to ensure that all legal actions or unilateral
measures aimed at legitimizing settlements cease
immediately and take practical measures to reverse
their impact.

Thirdly, there must be unity in promoting a
resumption of Palestinian-Israeli peace talks as soon
as possible. It is vital to refrain from actions that
could worsen the situation or jeopardize trust, and
to create the conditions necessary for the resumption
of dialogue. Parties that have strong influence in the
Middle East must play a constructive role and refrain
from unilateral actions that could escalate tensions in
the region. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation must be
actively facilitated.

In recent years the hotspot issues in the Middle
East have triggered numerous humanitarian crises. In
extremely harsh and difficult conditions, UNRWA has
continued its humanitarian relief efforts with positive
results. We have noted that it has been working hard
to improve the humanitarian situation of Palestinian
refugees, safeguard their rights, alleviate the burden
on their host countries, actively promote regional
peace and stability and prevent the spread of terrorist
and extremist ideologies in the refugee camps. China
applauds such efforts. We call on the international
community to lend greater support to UNRWA. We
hope that the pledging conference to be held in June
will be a success. Last year, China greatly increased its
annual contribution to UNRWA, and we will continue
to contribute to it financially.

