Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you for convening this important
meeting, Mr. President, and for speaking on the
important topic of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. The importance of this subject requires that it
never be addressed selectively or at anyone's particular
discretion, since we are still seeing such a selective
approach when it comes to choosing which civilians are
worthy of protection during armed conflict and which
are not.

Nor must the aims and objectives of this noble
concept be exploited in order to compromise a State's
sovereignty or interfere in its internal affairs by
manipulating and distorting the issue of the protection
of civilians in the service ofinterventionist policies and
an aggressive political agenda. Those who pay the price
of such policies are first and foremost civilians.

We feel, therefore, that the protection of the
Palestinian and Syrian civilians in the occupied Golan,
and of the Lebanese who are chafing under Israeli
occupation, must constitute a major part of this laudable
international effort in the context of the accurate and
objective implementation of the mandate envisaged
under the rubric of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Is the silence at Israel's settlement aggression,
which threatens the very principle of peace itself, not
contrary to the most fundamental right of civilians
to live in their homeland in freedom, sovereignty and
safety? Are the Palestinians and Syrians in the occupied
Golan, and the Lebanese living under Israeli occupation
in southern Lebanon, not civilians and hence unworthy
of protection? That basic concept must be the focus of
the debate.

Jurisprudence establishes that international efforts
to protect civilians in armed conflict be undertaken in
strict respect for the principles enshrined in the Charter
that provide for the respect of the sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity of States and
non-interference in their internal affairs. That is in
line with the provisions of the Geneva Conventions and
international humanitarian law, since all international
instruments underscore the primary responsibility of
national Governments to protect their citizens. That
responsibility is exclusive and cannot be substituted
or manipulated to serve certain political agendas that
undermine the sovereignty, independence and stability
of entire States and peoples, manipulating the lives of
their civilian populations under the pretext of protecting
them. We therefore feel that the protection of civilians,
on the one hand, and threats to international peace and
security, on the other, should not be confused.

Moreover, there should be no loose interpretation
of the issues of the protection of civilians, including
of such contentious terms as the "responsibility to
protect" or "humanitarian intervention", which would
lead, ipso facto, to compromising the credibility and
the impartiality of the United Nations, be it at the
level of the membership or the Secretariat. It would
be tantamount to undermining noble efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General, contained in
document S/2012/376 and submitted under this agenda
item, addresses various issues and topics. It briefly
mentions the daily suffering of the Arabs under Israeli
occupation for decades. The report timidly addresses
the tragic situation of the Libyan people after 130,000
Libyan civilians were killed under the pretext of
protecting them from the former regime. Today, Libya
is governed by 2,600 armed militia rather than a central
Government administering the country's affairs.

While we are reluctant to refer to the events in
Syria described in the Secretary-General's report,
we would like to put on record that the report quotes
selectively and partially from the content of resolutions
2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012), in which the Security
Council required the equal commitment of all parties
in Syria to putting an end to the violence, protecting
civilians and delivering humanitarian aid to them.
The report fails to mention the Syrian Government's
positive cooperation with United Nations humanitarian
agencies, including the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. It also disregards the adverse
effects of the unilateral sanctions imposed on Syria
and the terrorist acts of armed groups against civilians,
such as murder, forcible evacuation, the obstruction of
civilian movement and the disruption of daily civilian
life. Adding insult to injury, the Secretary-General's
report fails to mention the daily suffering of Syrian
civilians under the Israeli occupation of the Syrian
Golan.

A few hundred armed extremists in
Homs - Salafis, Wahhabis or Takfiris infiltrated by
Al-Qaida elements - expelled some 100,000 Christian
Syrians from their neighbourhoods and homes simply
because they were Christians. So we now have 100,000
Christians displaced from Horns and dispersed
throughout Damascus and elsewhere. Another 400,000
people have been displaced from Homs. Such issues
must be addressed by all present here.

The readiness to protect civilian lives requires
those who claim to do so to stop instigating acts of
violence and terrorism in Syria, fuelling tension and
playing the sectarian and religious extremist card.
If they were sincere, they would call on all parties to
engage in a genuine national dialogue, in accordance
with Kofi Annan's plan in order to reach an exclusively
Syrian-led political solution, without the interference
of any outside party, instead of opening the borders
of neighbouring States to armed groups to carry
out terrorist and destructive operations, perpetrate
massacres and assassinations, and destroy the country's
infrastructure.

Civilians can be protected not by fostering
destructive scenarios, such as civil war or sectarian
conflicts, but by promoting the implementation of
the principles of international law and the rule of
law, nationally and internationally. Civilians cannot
be protected by subjecting their lives to instability
and danger. The biased foreign media focus on the
violent movements in Syria and legitimize the armed
opposition, while ignoring the voices of the national
Syrian opposition, which rejects foreign intervention
and seeks to put an end to the internal crisis through a
comprehensive national dialogue and civilized peaceful
means.

We are not against the genuine Syrian national
opposition building a democratic, conciliatory and
constitutional Syria that guarantees the security,
protection and safety of all Syrians, civilian and
military, without exception. There is no need to destroy
the country in so doing. The one issue that incites the
majority of Syrians is efforts ofthe enemies ofthe Syrian
State and people, such as the Salafis, the Wahhabis, the
Takfiris and supporters of racist, ethnic and sectarian
sedition, to divide the country and take it backwards, as
they did in Iraq and Libya.

The representatives of some States who have
referred to my country inappropriately today are
mistaken in believing that humankind has forgotten
the crimes against humanity perpetrated by States
against civilians, including in my country and in many
Members of the United Nations, during the times of
slavery, colonialism and the two world wars, or when
they invaded and occupied States Members of this
international Organization.

Is not an apology for the perpetration of such crimes
consistent with the principle of protecting civilians,
or are civilians ranked according to biased interests?
Early last century, the United Kingdom and France
destroyed the geopolitical and strategic map of the
region. To date, we have heard no apology for that. On
the contrary, both those States and others now seek to
impose another such cycle on the region's States solely
in the interests of Israel and in order to weaken the
concept of the State in the region in support of sectarian
and religious sedition. That is an abuse ofIslam, which
promotes lofty spiritual values, and distorts the image
of Muslims in the world.

It seems that Libya has not changed following the
ousting of the previous regime. Narcissism, nonsense
and the use of extremist language that contravenes
the principles of the Charter, international law and
international humanitarian law indicate that the
Libyan representative is in a state of legal and political
hysteria. I would compare the Libyan representative
today to the representative of Israel, as the political
heresy that we have heard from him serves only Israel.
I advise the representative of Libya to commit himself
to the protection of the remaining Libyan civilians
and to use his political eloquence to try to regain his
country's sovereignty, independence and stability, as
well as the hundreds of billions of dollars plundered
from the Libyan people by the same forces that invaded
his country after manipulating resolutions 1970 (2011)
and 1973 (2011). If the Libyan representative has a
personal grudge against his own country and his own
people, then let him keep this hatred to himself instead
of projecting his betrayal of the trust that his people
have placed in him onto the events in Syria.

I did not want to be so explicit or go into such
detail, but I have been compelled to do so, and with this
I conclude my statement. Salafi and Takfiri terrorists,
financed by Qatar and Saudi Arabia, are training in
Zintan, Libya, in a special camp administered by the
intelligence agencies of those countries that invaded
and destroyed Libya, killing and displacing innocent
Libyan civilians. This camp in Zintan is also home to
armed gangs that are being trained to be dispatched to
Syria. Some of them have already been dispatched and
killed by the security agencies in Syria. Others have
been captured.

It would therefore behoove the representative
of Libya to remain silent and to stop talking as if his
country actually promotes the protection of civilians. If
it does, it does not resemble the protection of civilians
anywhere else in the world.

As for the Israeli representative, suffice it to say
that his country has accounted for more than 50 per cent
of the issues on the agenda of the Organization since
its inception. The occupation of Arab territories by
his country, its abuse of the Palestinian cause and of
the Palestinians, and its settlement campaigns have all
led directly to the exercise of the veto on 60 different
occasions by certain Powers in the Council with a view
to protecting Israeli breaches of international law. In
this sense, the statement made by the representative of
Israel is the same as the statement by the representative
of Libya.

