Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to address the Council today in the presence of His Excellency Mr. Ticebile Drame, Minister for Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali, on the recent developments in the situation in Mali. I welcome Mr. Dramee. The security situation in Mali and in the Sahel region as a whole is deteriorating at an alarming rate. Last week, 18 peacekeepers were wounded in an attack on the camp of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) in Tessalit, and recently 89 Nigerien soldiers were killed in an attack on their base near the Malian border. On 4 January, 14 children lost their lives in an attack on a bus close to the Malian border in northern Burkina Faso. Terrorist groups are proliferating in the Menaka and Gao regions. We have seen an increase in improvised explosive device attacks on our convoys, which have wounded several Blue Helmets. These incidents occuralmost daily or at least with great frequency. I also note that the protective measures that the force has been taking for over a year have helped to limit casualties, although more must be done in that regard. Terrorism continues to fuel intercommunal violence in central Mali. There are now more displaced people suffering from hunger in the Mopti region than in the past. Politically, the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali has been slow and uneven. Important decisions have been postponed due to disagreements between and among the signatory parties. However, significant progress has also been made. The inclusive national dialogue was concluded in Bamako on 22 December, nine months after it was announced. The process was at times difficult, but the consultations within the framework of the dialogue were thorough and inclusive, without any taboo subjects. I congratulate the Government of Mali and all stakeholders who have participated peacefully and constructively throughout the country. Their ideas, opinions and concerns are important and should be taken into account as we move forward. I am particularly encouraged by the high level of participation of women in that respect. There can be no lasting peace without their contribution. I also commend the Coordination des mouvements de l'Azawad for having joined the final stages of the dialogue and for its valuable contribution to the discussions. We regret, however, the absence of opposition parties from the national dialogue. The conclusion of the inclusive national dialogue is a welcome development. It is now important that the Government of Mali respect its commitment to implementing the outcome and continue to reach out to members of the opposition. That will require charting a clear path for the future, including the adoption and implementation of a revised electoral and reform timetable, as well as the holding of legislative elections and a constitutional referendum. I urge all political actors to work together constructively to implement the conclusions of the dialogue. The Malian people need to see and feel that their voice has been heard and their concerns taken into account. We hope that the conclusion of the dialogue will also give new and urgent impetus to the implementation of the peace agreement. It is now important that the Agreement Monitoring Committee resume its meetings. In that connection, I welcome the forthcoming session of that high-level Committee on 19 January. It is essential that the signatory parties seize that opportunity to agree on concrete next steps to achieve the goals set out in resolution 2480 (2019). Significant progress has been made, including the disarmament and integration of former combatants into the defence and security forces and the creation of the legal framework for the establishment of the northern development zone. But more needs to be done in a context where growing security challenges threaten to reverse the hard-won gains made since the signing of the peace agreement. (spoke in English) The rapid and thorough implementation of the peace agreement remains the only viable path for the stabilization of Mali. It provides a framework for the political and institutional reforms required to restore and decentralize State authority in order to build a Malian State that reflects the diversity and interests of all its citizens. The peace agreement also provides for mechanisms to address the grievances of those Malians who feel excluded from the country's political life and economic development and who see little hope for their future. The redeployment of the reconstituted units of the Malian defence and security forces to northern Mali remains an urgent priority. On 6 January, the Malian authorities started the deployment of the first reconstituted battalion from Bamako to Kidal via Gao. It is expected to arrive in Kidal by the end of the month. That is an important step towards restoring State authority across the country. The deployment of the reconstituted units will also pave the way for the redeployment of a more effective State administration and public services - most importantly, justice officials, teachers and health workers in the north. I commend the Malian parties for reaching agreement on the modalities for the redeployment and the progress made to date. Their continued commitment and perseverance will be essential to achieving that important goal. I would also like to express my gratitude to Special Representative of the Secretary-General Annadif and MINUSMA colleagues, who have provided critical support for the accelerated disarmament, demobilization and reintegration process and for facilitating the deployment of those units to Kidal and eventually the entire north, further demonstrating the critical role that MINUSMA plays in creating the conditions for the peace process to unfold.In recent months, in line with resolution 2480 (2019), MINUSMA has done its utmost to implement its second strategic priority in the centre of the country, while continuing to carry out tasks in support of its primary strategic priority in the north. Its increased presence and activity in the Mopti region has contributed to preventing a further escalation of intercommunal violence and large-scale massacres. The establishment of temporary operating bases has increased MINUSMA's ability to provide security, protect the local population and facilitate the return of the national security forces and Government services to the Koro, Bankass and Bandiagara cercles. Recent visits to the Mopti region, conducted by the Malian authorities and MINUSMA, have further reinforced the collaboration between the Mission and_ the host Government. The Mission's added focus on central Mali has required it to divert key capabilities - such as air assets, its quick reaction force, and intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance assets - from Gao to Mopti, as outlined in the report (S/2019/983). It is not feasible for MINUSMA to implement its additional strategic priority in the centre without additional resources. Attempting to do so has resulted in dangerous gaps in areas in northern Mali where the Mission's presence is critical and urgently needed, such as Menaka and Gao. In order to address that challenge, MINUSMA has developed a viable plan to adapt its uniformed components within the authorized troop and police strength, while taking into account the needs of the civilian component to effectively implement its mandate in central and northern Mali. The plan is an integral part of an overarching strategy to support and enhance the Mission's good offices, mediation, reconciliation, capacity-building and technical and logistical support to Malian authorities in order to stabilize and secure population hubs in the centre; create favourable conditions for the restoration and expansion of State authority across the country; and provide basic social services so that those who have suffered the most - ordinary Malians - will finally reap the benefits of the peace process. The plan provides for the establishment of a mobile task force that will enhance the Mission's ability to implement its mandate and protect civilians. It will make MINUSMA more agile, flexible and mobile, with tailored units, enhanced capabilities and - most importantly - with additional air mobility. The plan is ambitious and its successful implementation hinges upon the support of the Council and other member States, troop and police contributors, the host Government and other partners. Obtaining the required capabilities will be challenging, but I insist that it is indispensable for MINUSMA to deliver on its mandate. It is also an integral part of efforts to further enhance the Mission's performance. I therefore call on all partners to support the implementation and help the Secretariat mobilize the required resources and capabilities to ensure that MINUSMA remains fit for purpose. In addition, in order to achieve the implementation of the plan and fulfil its mandate the Mission urgently requires access to additional land in both Gao and Mopti. I urge the Government of Mali to make it available as quickly as possible as per ongoing discussions. Increased and sophisticated capabilities notwithstanding, MINUSMA can only be as effective and efficient as the parties and partners want it to be. Political will remains the most important enabler for any peacekeeping operation to be effective. I therefore reiterate the Secretary-General's appeal to all Malian leaders to display the necessary leadership and work together to address the challenges their country faces, with the support of the international community. (spoke in French) Lastly, MINUSMA is only one element of a broader collective response to address instability and violence and their root causes in Mali and the Sahel and to protect civilians. We are encouraged by the strong commitment expressed by the Heads of State of the countries of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to combat terrorism in Mali and the Sahel, with the support of other international forces. National and international forces play an essential role and their contribution remains vital, even if a military solution alone will not be enough to solve the problems faced by Mali and the region. The United Nations remains strongly committed to working with all its partners to address the root causes of terrorism, instability and violence in Mali and the Sahel. As part of its work in the Sahel, the Mission will spare no effort to provide the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel with operational and logistical support, in line with resolutions 2391 (2017) and 2480 (2019), and hasresponded positively to all requests it has received from the Joint Force. However, to date, the Joint Force has been unable to take full advantage of that support, as it does not have the capacity to transport the essential consumables that MINUSMA provides to all its sectors and contingents. Therefore, we are prepared to implement more creative and proactive solutions to ensure that the necessary support reaches the Joint Force, in line with the current mandate.
