Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this important
debate on Afghanistan. I also thank Mr. Haysom and
Mr. Fedotov for their briefings. I take this opportunity
also to pay tribute to my long-time friend, Ambassador
Zahir Tanin of Afghanistan, who is leaving us very
soon, for his great service to his country as well as to
the United Nations. I wish him, as many have done,
good luck in his new post in Kosovo.

As a former special representative for Afghanistan
and Pakistan ofthe Japanese Government, it is my great
pleasure to speak on the situation in Afghanistan. Japan
is proud to be one ofAfghanistan's strongest supporters.
We have been accompanying Afghanistan on its path
towards reform and self-reliance. Japan's assistance, in
the amount of $5.8 billion since 2001, has extended to a
wide range of areas. We have worked with Afghanistan
and its people in strengthening law enforcement and
justice, infrastructure, rural development, human
resources and agriculture.

Among the numerous forms of assistance we
provide, I would like to focus today on one success story
in the field of agriculture that illustrates Afghanistan's
great potential for realizing self-reliance. Indeed, the
key word in my statement today is "self-reliance".

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations, 37 per cent of Afghanistan's land
is considered barren and thus infertile. Against this
backdrop, in 2003, Dr. Nakamura, a Japanese medical
doctor and director of the Japanese non-governmental
organization Peace Japan Medical Services, launched a
project in the Gamberi desert, in Nangarhar province,
with the aim of transforming it into fertile soil.

I would like to draw the Council's attention to two
photographs attached to my written statement, which
has been circulated to members. What was a forbidding
desert of 16,500 hectares in Nangarhar province in 2005,
as seen in the first photograph, by 2012 had been, as can
be seen in the second one, dramatically transformed
into fertile croplands abundant in greenery. By utilizing
eighteenth-century Japanese irrigation technology
combined with Afghanistan's own traditional methods,
the Green Ground Project succeeded in establishing a
highly effective irrigation system. Relying on age-old
skills, the new irrigation system was able to withstand
the seasonal spring floods, which had impeded previous
attempts.

The transformation did not stop there. Wheat
production increased from almost zero to a capacity
that is now able to feed more than 600,000 people. For
those Afghans who had long fled from one destination
to another, the transformation offered a place for them
to finally settle and make a stable living. People began
to enjoy greaterjob opportunities. Prior to that project,
only 30,000 people had worked in agriculture in the
area. However, in the span of 12 years, the number
increased five-fold to 150,000. With vastly improved
job opportunities, we began to see greater social
stability and a significant reduction in crime. This past
summer, when the Minister of Rural Rehabilitation and
Development and the Minister of Agriculture, Irrigation
and Livestock observed what had taken place, they
were at a loss for words. The transformation had far
exceeded their expectations.

That extraordinary success story traces its
beginnings down to the grass-roots level. It was initially
funded solely by the aforementioned non-governmental
organization, Peace Japan Medical Services. In 2010,
the Japan International Cooperation Agency joined
in providing technical and financial assistance. We
are now looking at the possibility of cooperating with
the Afghan Government and other organizations to
disseminate the Peace Japan Medical Services model
irrigation system to other areas of Afghanistan.

The story of the Gamberi desert is just one vivid
example of Afghanistan's potential for realizing
self-reliance. Japan firmly believes that, when the
international community and Afghanistan work
hand-in-hand, similar achievements are possible in
other fields as well. Afghanistan has made great strides
in its path towards self-reliance.

Nonetheless, political uncertainties and instability
have been undermining its economic potential. Under
such difficult situations, we look to the National Unity
Government of Afghanistan to intensify its reform
efforts. We look to the Afghan Government to tackle
crucial challenges to sustainable growth, such as the
need to improve security, strengthen political stability,
eliminate corruption, achieve fiscal sustainability and
promote electoral reform.

For its part, the international community seeks
to reaffirm its commitment to providing necessary
assistance under the principle of mutual accountability
agreed in Tokyo. In that regard, we also extend
our appreciation to the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan, which has been very ably led
by Mr. Nicholas Haysom, for its meritorious efforts
in successfully compiling the Tripartite Review
Commission's report (S/2015/713, annex).

In conclusion, Afghanistan's path to self-reliance
presents vast opportunities and important challenges.
Nonetheless, the transformation of the Gamberi desert
illustrates that Afghanistan is indeed progressing, step-
by-step, towards a brighter future. Japan, along with the
international community, stands ready to accompany
Afghanistan on its path toward peace, prosperity and
self-reliance.

