Mr. Prieto (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): First of all,
I would like to thank the Uruguayan presidency of the
Security Council for convening this open debate on
the protection of civilians and medical care in armed
conflicts. I would also like to thank the Secretary-
General, Mr. Antonio Guterres; the Vice-President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross,
Ms. Christine Beerli; and the Deputy Executive
Director of Human Rights Watch, Mr. Bruno Stagno
Ugarte, for being present here today.

The Security Council, through resolution 2286
(2016) - which specifically addresses the subject
of this open debate - "strongly condemns acts of
violence, attacks and threats against the wounded and
sick, medical personnel and humanitarian personnel
exclusively engaged in medial duties", and "deplores
the long-term consequences of such attacks for the
civilian population and the health-care systems of the
countries concerned". That document also reiterates the
relevant legal framework and calls upon all parties to
armed conflict to fully comply with their obligations
under international law, including respect for the rules
of international humanitarian law.

In that regard, Peru is party to the Geneva
Conventions, which declare illegal any attacks against
hospitals or workers providing medical assistance, which
includes convoys providing humanitarian assistance
as well as to all those who bear distinguishing marks.
We call on the international community to effectively
enforce that ban. Peru considers that the sacrificial and
risky work of protection developed by humanitarian
agencies and workers should be the object ofthe highest
recognition by the international community.

Resolution 2286 (2016) also requires Member
States to take measures with regard to the protection of
civilians and medical care in armed conflicts, such as
facilitating the safe passage of personnel and supplies
to those in need; preventing attacks against medical
services in armed conflicts; and implementing practical
protection measures when planning and executing
their operations. In that vein, and in line with the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report in document S/2016/447, for more than 20 years
Peru has been training its armed forces personnel in
accordance with the applicable norms of international
humanitarian law. Incorporating recognized norms
into personnel doctrines has allowed the peacekeepers
that Peru contributes to peacekeeping operations to be
soundly prepared in areas of international humanitarian
law, which translates into impeccable performance on
the ground.

Peru encourages the active involvement of
the Security Council in the protection of civilians
affected by armed conflict. Only strong action by
the Security Council is appropriate in that regard.
Attacks on medical facilities and humanitarian workers
are considered war crimes. The perpetrators must
be brought to justice, because impunity encourages
conflict. In the light of that, Peru recognizes the
jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and
hopes for its universalization. Likewise, we are in the
process of ratifying the Kampala Amendments. We call
on States to comply with the relevant obligations under
international law to put an end to impunity and to hold
those responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law accountable for their acts.

Peru commits to work with other States to address
outstanding issues in this area, in order to ensure
accountability, punish those responsible and improve
the protection of the wounded and sick and of health and
humanitarian personnel, their equipment and means of
transport, hospitals and other health facilities.

