Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): Somalia is
experiencing important changes at several levels. We
fully subscribe to the Secretary-General's assessment
that it is time to take advantage of the existing window
of opportunity in three different but interlinked
dimensions: the security, humanitarian and political
dimensions.

I should therefore like to start by thanking you,
Madam President, for having convened today's debate,
which brings together key partners to exchange views
at this critical juncture for Somalia, and also for your
important statement.

Allow me to greet the Ministers of Azerbaijan,
Kenya and Uganda and to thank them for their very
useful contributions to our debate, and also to thank
Under-Secretary-General Lynn Pascoe and
Commissioner Lamamra for their very comprehensive
briefings.

Portugal agrees with the assessment that it is
essential to consolidate the gains made on the ground,
both in Mogadishu and elsewhere in the country, by
ensuring the delivery of basic services to the
population, promoting good governance and
safeguarding peace and security in Somalia. Doing so
will ensure that the efforts and sacrifices made by the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM),
regional partners and the Somali security forces, all of
which we commend, will also be honoured.

Safeguarding peace and security is a task to be
fulfilled in the first instance by the Somali military and
police forces. That is an objective to which we will
continue to contribute, namely through the European
Union's training mission in Somalia.

Nevertheless, AMISOM. has played, and will
continue to play, a crucial role in supporting and
protecting the Transitional Federal Institutions. We
reiterate our support for the Mission and look forward
to the Secretary-General's report in the light of the
recent recommendations of the African Union Peace
and Security Council for AMISOM's future operations.

At the same time, Portugal believes that the
acceleration of the deployment of additional troops will
positively contribute to filling the security vacuum
created in the areas liberated from Al-Shabaab's
presence. In that regard, we express our appreciation to
Burundi and Uganda for their willingness to deploy
additional troops to reach the current United Nations-
authorized strength of 12,000 troops, and we pay
tribute to the courage of and the sacrifices made by
their soldiers.

We take this opportunity also to acknowledge the
efforts made so far by all partners involved in military
action to minimize the negative impact of military
intervention on Somali civilians, and we encourage
them to continue to do so, as well as to promote the
safety and welfare of civilians fleeing conflict and the
food crisis in the country.

Despite the positive trends, Al-Shabaab attacks,
which are still a reality, along with continuing famine
throughout the country and the piracy off the coast of
Somalia, highlight the importance of ensuring the
successful implementation of the road map, as military
action alone will not create lasting peace in Somalia.

Within the framework of the Kampala Accord and
the road map to end the transition in Somalia, some
progress has been achieved, the most recent being the
holding of the Garowe constitutional conference.
However, many challenges still lie ahead. We call on
the signatories to the Kampala Accord to ensure
cohesion, unity and focus on the completion of the
priority tasks, so that the transitional period may
indeed come to an end in August.

As Portugal has stated previously, it is also of
paramount importance to ensure inclusiveness and
representativeness throughout that process - and we
recall to that end the constructive role that women can
play in that context - as well as ensuring full respect
for human rights.

On the humanitarian front, we remain deeply
concerned over the prolonged nature of the crisis and
the famine that continues to prevail throughout the
country. We are nevertheless encouraged by the
enduring efforts being made on the ground by all the
humanitarian partners against a background of very
challenging conditions. However, assistance will be
fruitful only if it reaches those in need in a timely way.
To that end, we urge all partners to ensure full and
unhindered access for humanitarian aid across Somalia.
The Secretary-General's visit to Somalia was an
unequivocal sign of the political commitment of the
international community to the country and its people.
We call on the Somali parties to continue to pursue the
path towards peace and stability. For its part, Portugal
will continue its efforts within various forums to help
to define a strategy that comprehensively addresses the
multiple challenges that Somalia faces at the political,
security, humanitarian, human rights and socio-
economic levels. In that context, we very much
welcome the upcoming conference in London.

In concluding, let me also extend a word of
appreciation for the work carried out by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mahiga,
and the commitment of the African Union and other
regional partners to make the current moment, as
Mr. Ban Ki-moon underlined last month, "a moment of
fresh opportunities" for the future of the Somali people
(see S/PV.6681).

