Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank the briefers
for their interesting updates.

I must begin by offering my sincerest condolences
to Mr. Amr Abdellatif Aboulatta, the Permanent
Representative ongypt, following the horrific bombing
in Cairo on 11 December. This attack is yet another
reminder of the unrelenting cruelty and barbarity of
the terrorist threat that we face. Today, we grieve with
Egypt. However, in truth, terrorism threatens us all.
Too many of us around this table have experienced the
savagery of these groups in recent years. They are a
clear threat to international peace and security, and
they are threat that we must tackle together. It is a fight
that requires our fullest cooperation - cooperation
between our police and security forces, between our
diplomats and, as we are discussing this afternoon,
between our judicial institutions.

Today we have shown our shared commitment
to that cooperation through the welcome unanimous
adoption of resolution 2322 (2016). I would like to pay
tribute to you, Mr. President, and to your excellent
delegation for your initiative in bringing this important
issue before the Council because when terrorists act
without any regard for international borders - without
any regard for the laws of one country of the next - we
must work together to ensure thatjustice crosses borders
in response. My country saw this sadly when terror
came to the streets of London in July 2005. One of
the attempted bombers, Mr. Osman Hussain, fled the
United Kingdom on 21 July 2005 after his bomb failed
to detonate on the London Underground. Thanks to our
cooperation with Italy, Mr. Hussain was arrested eight
days later in Rome and extradited to the United Kingdom
less than two months later. He is now serving a 40-year
minimum sentence. Sadly, since 2005, there has been
a steady increase in the need for similar cooperation.

With the rise of the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters, the complexity of such cases has grown. Let us
take the case of a French national who traveled to Syria
join Al-Nusra in January 2014. By May 2014, he had
fled to the United Kingdom. He was arrested on 9 May
2014 and extradited to France just over a month later.
His case follows an increasingly common pattern - a
national of one country commiting a crime in another
country before fleeing to a third country. Yet, there
are countless returning fighters who have yet to face
justice in the way that that French national has. Let
us use all the tools at our disposal to ensure that there
is no impunity for any of them. Those tools should
include even more cooperation on extraditions, even
greater mutual legal assistance and more engagement
with INTERPOL. To underpin such efforts, we face
new challenges gathering the evidence needed for the
extradition, arrest and prosecution of terrorist suspects.

The Internet is now a front line in the battle against
terrorism. Twitter, Facebook and other social media
channels are sadly hijacked as a recruiting ground for
extremists. In turn, we must also use those networks to
find the evidence needed to stop their hateful activities.
That requires closer cooperation with tech companies
and greater, faster information-sharing between
countries. We should not underestimate the complexity
of such a task. In the United Kingdom, each terrorism
investigation brings with it on average 10.7 terabytes
of data. Put another way, that is 4.4 billion pages or 35
miles of paper.

In the pursuit of that evidence, we cannot allow
ourselves to undermine the freedoms that the terrorists
want to destroy. Restrictions on social media, abuses
of online privacy and any type of censorship are
simply not the answer. We also need to recognize that
evidence is not only to be found in the Twitter feeds
and emails of foreign terrorist fighters. It is also found
in the liberated towns of Iraq at the scene ofthe terrible
crimes of Da'esh. Preserving and sharing that evidence
is just as important ifwe are to see justice finally being
delivered. That is why the British Foreign Secretary,
Mr. Boris Johnson, alongside the Foreign Ministers
of Iraq and Belgium, launched an initiative on Da'esh
accountability here in September.

As a first step, we look to the United Nations to
take action to gather and preserve evidence of the
crimes carried out by Da'esh in Iraq. The Government
of Iraq is clear that it would welcome international
support to complement their efforts. Together, experts
of the United Kingdom and Iraq have been working on
a proposal to that end and we look forward to bringing
it to the United Nations very soon.

Ms. Sison (United States of America) I thank
the Minister of Justice of Spain for convening this
meeting. We especially welcome your participation,
Sir, as a senior official who has first-hand experience in
dealing with international judicial cooperation to fight
terrorism. I would also like to thank today's briefers.

Let us all think about the terrorist threat that we face
today. Terrorist organizations span borders. Terrorists
hide in one country before attacking in another.
Terrorists may obtain funds from criminal enterprises
that traffic people, illicit goods, narcotics or cultural
property across different continents. When terrorists
talk to each other, their emails may be transmitted from
one city to another but the records of such emails sit on
servers scattered around the world.

So, how do we prosecute a terrorist who is captured
in one State but who is a resident ofa second State - a
terrorist who may be a citizen of yet a third State whose
emails are scattered on servers in a fourth, fifth or even
sixth State? The obvious answer is that prosecutors and
judges need to cooperate with each other and cooperate
closely. The challenge that we must discuss today is
how to make that cooperation effective. Let me address
three ways in which we can do that.
First, each Member State needs to have the right
laws and agreements on the books - right on both
substance and procedure. The Council has played an
important role in enshrining the legal framework for
countering terrorist activities through resolutions 1373
(2001) and 2178 (2014). Those resolutions focused on
ensuring that all Member States make terrorism a
criminal offence, take action to cut off the financing of
terrorism and prosecute and penalize foreign terrorist
fighters. Resolution 2322 (2016), which we have just
adopted this afternoon, builds on that progress. It
reaffirms that all States should establish as a serious
criminal offence under each State's domestic law
willfully financing terrorist organizations or individual
terrorists for any purpose.

However, it is not enough that States have laws that
permit them to prosecute terrorists. States may need
to gather evidence that is held in other jurisdictions
or even request the extradition of a terrorist. That
is why the resolution's focus on mutual legal
assistance - obtaining evidence from another country
and extradition, a form of transferring a defendant
from one country to another - is so critical. One might
assume that those are more or less straightforward
processes. However, the United States has invested
considerable effort to streamline and update both tools
to help fight terrorism.

In the past, mutual legal assistance was a slow and
often cumbersome process. It was hard for States to talk
to each other and judges often had to authorize requests
for evidence. In our modern mutual legal assistance
treaties, prosecutors, through coordinating central
authorities, can work with each other to make requests
for evidence. Modern extradition treaties pave the way
for the extradition of terrorists. The United States is
working to make it easier for countries to share evidence
and extradite terrorists with robust legal safeguards.

Thatbringsmetomysecondpoint-implementation.
We can strengthen our laws and agreements, but
actually disrupting terrorist networks requires that
our law enforcement agencies talk to one another.
Proximity helps here. The United States sends 60
resident legal advisers from its Department of Justice
to our embassies around the world to offer training
and technical assistance to prosecutors, along with
nine justice attaches who focus on extradition and
coordinating international legal cooperation on legal
cases. The United States also supports assemblingjoint
investigative teams in which investigators from different
States come together to look at a specific incident.
We can talk a lot here in the Security Council
about building cooperation on counter-terrorism, and
of course we, as diplomats, are used to speaking with
representatives of other countries. But all of us should
do more to make sure that our prosecutors and law-
enforcement officials also have the chance to work
directly with one another. That would go a long way to
speeding up the sharing of information and resolving
the highly technical issues that come with international
requests for legal assistance. It also goes without saying
that our national law enforcement agencies should
improve their cooperation with existing multilateral
entities and help share information, such as through
INTERPOL. That is especially true when we talk about
how to counter foreign terrorist fighters, regularly
uploading information on them to INTERPOL's
I-24/7 secure global police communications system.
Systematically checking against I-24/7 at ports of entry
can make a substantial difference in preventing travel
by foreign terrorist fighters.

The third thing we have to do is to help one another
build the requisite capacities. Judicial cooperation is no
easy task. Our laws differ from country to country, as do
our courts, prosecutors and law enforcement agencies.
The paperwork related to judicial cooperation can be
complicated and time-consuming, and rightly so, since
we are talking about arresting people and putting them
on trial, and therefore do not want to make mistakes.
But we do have a lot to learn from one another. We can
help each other understand our requirements for sharing
information. We can talk to each other about the ways
we have disrupted terrorist organizations. We can share
strategies for how to gather evidence and build a case
against terrorist networks, which do their best to keep
their activities hidden. That is why the United States
strongly supports the calls in today's resolution to make
sure that United Nations entities are helping to provide
that expertise.

There are many opportunities for Member States to
work closely in fighting terrorism, but that cooperation
should not come at the expense of human rights or
civil liberties. We can find ways to share digital data,
and we should. But we should minimize the sharing
of extraneous, private information, and ensure that
these protocols do not suppress freedom of expression.
Similarly, timely extraditions are important, but we
must ensure that Member States follow all the applicable
legal requirements. A desire to expedite matters cannot
be an excuse for denying rights to the accused.

There is no question that this issue is a technical
one, but let us zoom out and look at the big picture.
Terrorism is a threat to our collective security. If
a terrorist struck any of us, we would want the tools
that today's resolution outlines in order to make sure
that all of our investigators and prosecutors can work
together. Today's debate should encourage each of us
to re-examine what we are doing to bolster those ties.

