Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): It is an honour for me to
welcome you, Mr. President, to the Security Council
today. Your presence testifies to Nigeria's commitment
to the maintenance of international peace and security.

I thank Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose
Migiro for her presence and her important remarks.
And I am grateful to Sarah Cliffe for her very
interesting presentation. I particularly appreciated the
points that she has just made on the links between
peace consolidation and development and how best to
support efforts in that area.

The Security Council has on many occasions
recognized the importance of the prevention of
conflicts, particularly in Africa. The focus of today's
debate on optimizing preventive tools allows us to
consider concrete and potentially innovative means to
strengthen preventive diplomacy.

The Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, whereas the primary responsibility
for preventing conflicts lies with Member States.
Effectively articulating the dimensions of conflict
prevention requires strategies that neither pre-empt the
primary duty of Member States to prevent conflicts nor
delay action by the Council. In order to achieve such a
balance, constant dialogue between the Council and
key stakeholders in potential conflicts is of utmost
importance.

In this context, and as is widely recognized, the
role of regional and subregional organizations in
preventing conflicts cannot be overemphasized,
particularly in Africa. By way of example, I wish to
refer to the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) and its early warning system, which
relies on a network of actors, including civil society
organizations, to collect and analyse data on potential
conflicts and provide early warnings. Another major
tool, the Council of Elders, is engaged in important
preventive diplomacy efforts. In addition, a Conflict
Prevention Framework has guided ECOWAS actions to
both avoid disputes turning into conflict and address
the causes of conflict.

These institutional achievements are being
translated in results on the ground. As has already been
mentioned, that was the case in Niger, where ECOWAS
was instrumental in preventing a serious political crisis
in 2009 from degenerating into violence. That was also
the case in Guinea and other countries. I should also
like to mention the efforts of the three organizations,
with the Community of Portuguese-speaking
Countries, which play a very important role in Guinea-
Bissau. Conflict-prevention activities and early
warning mechanisms have also been important aspects
of the work under way within the Southern African
Development Community, the East African
Community, the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development and Economic Commission for Africa.

At the regional level, the African Union has made
conflict prevention a cornerstone of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. Its Panel of the Wise is
engaged not only in preventive diplomacy, including

through fact-finding missions in areas of potential
conflict, but also in examining some of the root causes
of conflict, such as electoral crises and impunity.
Considerable progress has been made in
operationalizing the Continental Early Warning
System.

These success stories show that enhancing United
Nations support to the preventive capacity of African
regional and subregional organizations is fully
warranted. The Mediation Support Unit has made an
important contribution to the work of the African
Union Panel of the Wise. More should be done.

Improved communication between the regional
and subregional bodies and the Security Council is also
needed. In this regard, we were pleased by the recent
consultations between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council.

Another significant aspect to pursue in conflict
prevention strategies and tools is the careful
consideration of the usually manifold root causes of
conflicts. Efforts to manage disputes and avoid their
degeneration into conflict are necessary. However, they
are insufficient if they do not effectively address the
deep motives of the parties.

Coordination and coherence are also key
elements of successful strategies for conflict
prevention. In this context, it is fitting to mention the
call made in the 2005 Outcome Document (General Assembly resolution 60/1) for the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council to coordinate their activities, under their
respective Charter mandates, so as to adopt an
integrated approach to prevent conflicts.

The whole United Nations system should act
together to effectively address the root causes of
conflicts. In Africa, that means, for example,
redoubling efforts to fully implement the New
Partnership for Africa's Development and supporting
the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals
and the prevalence of the rule of law. It also means
supporting African Union efforts to address the issue of
unconstitutional changes of Government in the
continent.

Enhanced prevention activities by the Security
Council require a strong capacity in the Secretariat to
identify, assess and provide early warning on disputes.
The Secretary-General should make full use of Article 99

of the Charter and of resolution 1625 (2005). Further
recourse to fact-finding missions and confidence-
building measures in the early stages of a dispute may
also foster its peaceful settlement. At the same time,
prudence and foresight are necessary to avoid
involving the Security Council before its consideration
of the issue is truly necessary and helpful.

Preventing the relapse of conflicts is also key.
Peacebuilding, including its socio-economic
component, and accountability are especially relevant
to consolidate stability in post-conflict situations. The
Peacebuilding Commission, an important institutional
step in that direction, should be further strengthened.
Truth and reconciliation commissions and transitional
justice mechanisms also play an important role. In
addition, the International Criminal Court has an
important deterrent effect.

In conclusion, I wish to stress Brazil's continued
commitment to the efforts of the Security Council to
prevent the occurrence and recurrence of conflicts. As
always, the Council can count on the support of my
delegation.

