Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Iwould like tojoin previous
speakers in welcoming the Swedish presidency and in
thanking Foreign Minister Wallstrom for setting a very
ambitious agenda from the start and for this particular
debate, which promotes reflection on the vision of the
Secretary-General.

My country would like to align itself with the
statement delivered by the observer of the European
Union, and in my national capacity, I would like to
make the following statement.

We welcome the Secretary-General's first priority,
namely, to promote a surge in diplomacy for peace in
order to resolve ongoing conflicts and prevent others
from erupting. A holistic vision and strategic decisions
on the part of the new leadership are critical in order
to counter the static stance that the United Nations has
taken on early action, along with its frequent failures
to prevent or resolve conflicts, as we saw in Syria,
Ukraine, Georgia and other places.

Georgia welcomes the effort to build a new political
consensus in support of maintaining peace and security
worldwide by preventing conflicts before they occur,
which is in line with the concept of sustaining peace
and which underlines the imperative of addressing
all stages of the conflict cycle. Georgia shares the
view of many on the importance of early action and
proactive work on the part of United Nations entities,
both at Headquarters and in the field, across the main
pillars of the United Nations system, to identify early
warning signs and address the risks confronting peace.
Let me recall the pledges and commitments undertaken
by Member States at the World Humanitarian Summit
in May 2016 with a view of preventing conflicts and
stress, where we agreed that sustaining peace can only
be achieved through joint determination and adherence
to the principles of international law, including the
Charter of the United Nations.

We view peace prospects as directly linked
to advancing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and to the international community's
continuous focus on strengthening human rights. As a
strong supporter of greater involvemen by women in
preventing conflicts, we also place particular emphasis
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda.

Noting that the Security Council has a unique
responsibility in the area of peace and security and
conflict prevention, Georgia has had its own sad
experience, from which we should all learn valuable
lessons about what happens when a permanent
member of the Security Council, a party to the
conflict, singlehandedly vetoes the presence of an
United Nations observer mission as an international
monitoring mechanism. That can take place right
after a full-scale war, at a time when the international
security presence should be increased, as was the case
with the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
in 2009. Since then, both Georgia and the regions of
Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which are under illegal
military occupation by the Russian Federation,
continue to be completely closed off from international
monitoring mechanisms. Following several waves of
ethnic cleansing, hundreds of thousands of people have
been displaced, and, in the absence of international
monitoring mechanisms, the humanitarian situation
in the occupied regions remains critical. People are
deprived of their basic human rights and freedoms,
including, but not limited to, the freedom of movement.
Given that experience, Georgia believes that the veto
right should be restricted so as to prevent its misuse.

When a permanent member is involved in a conflict
under consideration by the Security Council, it cannot
exercise its veto right impartially. That is the only way
that we can prevent mass violations of human rights and
further escalation of conflict. In the same vein, Georgia
has also endorsed the joint French-Mexican proposal
regarding the use of the veto in the Security Council,
as well as the initiative introduced by Liechtenstein on
a code of conduct regarding Security Council action
against genocide, crimes against humanity and war
crimes. Those concepts have been presented to the
Council, and now it would be expedient, in our view,
to develop the relevant procedural rules to accomplish
those goals.

