Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
like to thank High Commissioner Pillay and Special
Adviser Dieng for their disturbing briefings today.

My Government joins with them and others in
condemning the outrageous and deliberate targeting of
civilians in South Sudan. Instead of ceasing hostilities,
as was pledged three months ago, the parties have
chosen to intensify fighting and to do so in ways that
have shredded humanitarian norms. In April, forces
loyal to former Vice-President Machar attacked
civilians in Bentiu, pursuing them into a hospital, a
church and a mosque, killing at least 200 and likely
many, many more, and leaving the dead lying in the
streets. In Bor, against a backdrop of hostile rhetoric
against the United Nations from senior South Sudanese
Government officials, several hundred armed youths
entered the camp of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS) by force and fired on displaced
civilians in an ethnically motivated assault that was as
cowardly as it was ruthless. The death toll in the clash
exceeded 110, including 48 civilians who were fleeing
for their lives.

Violence against civilians has also taken place in
Juba, Malakal and Wau, accompanied by sexual abuse
and recruitment of child soldiers. We have also heard
of the ominous emergence of radio broadcasts that
foment ethnic hate and incite further violence. And,
as we all know, more fighting means more displaced
civilians in need of safe haven and sustenance, more
lives disrupted, more schools closed and an even
larger burden for the increasingly hard-pressed United
Nations relief agencies and donors.

We recall the jubilation less than three years ago
when South Sudan achieved its independence. Amid
honking horns and vivid expressions of national
pride, cheering citizens raised their new flag and
newly appointed diplomats took their seats in the
General Assembly. Friends of South Sudan, who were
familiar with the many sacrifices that preceded that
day, celebrated. Exiles returned home to help the new
nation get on its feet. The international community lent
ample support, including a United Nations mission that
pledged to work hand in hand with the Government
and the Sudanese people to help build this new States.
Civil society pitched in, and the vast majority of South
Sudan's citizens focused on the hard work of bolstering
their economy and building stronger communities.

But a country requires effective leadership, and
in South Sudan, after a promising start, the leaders
in office and in the opposition have chosen to place
personal rivalries and suspicions above the best interests
of their country. Those fuelling this conflict - many of
them the very same individuals who were instrumental
in bringing about South Sudan's independence - have
chosen coercion over cooperation and violence over the
democratic process. The result is catastrophe.

It is unconscionable that South Sudan's leaders
have failed to take the steps necessary to restore peace
and end the needless suffering of their people. The
continuation of this failure could very well push the
country further into a cycle of retaliatory ethnic killing,
a deepening civil war and an even more devastating
humanitarian disaster that will further worsen with
the full onset of the seasonal rains and the looming
prospect of famine. To prevent this, we call on all sides
to do right by the people of South Sudan, who place
their trust in them, and by the international community,
which stood by them for decades and promised to roll
up their sleeves and help build their new country.

We call on South Sudan's leaders to cease military
action, as they promised to do when they signed the
cessation-of-hostilities agreement. They must allow
UNMISS to carry out its mandate, without harassment,
threats or fear of assault, to protect the people of South
Sudan. They must respect the rights and dignity of
every citizen regardless of his or her ethnicity, enable
the unfettered delivery of humanitarian supplies, stop
the warlike rhetoric and incitement to violence, and
publicly condemn any and all attacks on civilians. They
must return in good faith to the peace process moderated
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development;
cooperate with United Nations and African Union
human rights investigators and monitors, and resolve
their differences by peaceful means. And they cannot
just promise to do all this, as they have before. They
must mean it, and do it, and do it now.

Primary responsibility for ending the violence in
the Sudan rests with the country's leaders, but there
are helpful steps that the Council and the international
community can take. On 3 April, the President of the
United States issued an executive order providing for
targeted sanctions against those individuals determined
to have contributed to atrocities or taken actions
harmful to peace and stability in South Sudan. The
Council should urgently consider whether to put in
place parallel targeted Security Council sanctions so as
to try to deter the outrageous attacks on civilians of the
kind we saw in Bor and Bentiu last month. We will also,
of course, never give up on diplomacy.

Earlier today, Secretary of State John Kerry
was in Juba, where he reiterated to President Kiir
both the support of the international community to
the people of South Sudan and our refusal to stand
by if the country's leaders continue to go down the
path of violence and destruction rather than that of
negotiation and cooperation. President Kiir has said
that he will implement the cessation-of-hostilities
agreement immediately and meet directly with former
Vice-President Machar. We have heard many promises
from South Sudanese leaders, with no follow-up. We
hope, for the sake of the people of South Sudan who are
suffering through this terrifying crisis, that this time is
different. And we urge President Kiir and Rick Machar
to swiftly agree on a date for face-to-face talks.

The meeting is an emergency meeting, and
should be treated as such by both sides. Every day the
ethnic polarization and violence is growing worse. I
emphasize that the United States strongly supports the
critical work of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan, as well as the relief agencies doing their best in
difficult conditions to meet the needs of men, women
and children in dire straits. I remind the Government of
South Sudan that it has an obligation to the international
community to prevent attacks on the United Nations
and those agencies. That means, to repeat it again,
that the Government itself must cease intimidation,
harassment and slander of the United Nations Mission
and its personnel.

In the coming days, my Government will join
in circulating a draft resolution that will revise the
UNMISS mandate so that it focuses more fully on
civilian protection, human rights monitoring and
investigation, and the delivery of food and other
emergency supplies. Given the key role UNMISS plays,
the Council should take up that draft resolution with the
urgency that this crisis demands.

Those who choose the path of further violence and
hatred have been given fair notice. No one has licence
to attack United Nations peacekeepers, international
monitors or civilian non-combatants of any nationality
or ethnicity. No one has the right to target others
because of their ethnicity, to incite violence or breach
the protective walls of a United Nations base. Those
who ignore this warning should have no doubt that the
international community will do all within its power
to hold those individuals accountable. The culture of
impunity must end.

My colleagues, it is imperative that we remain
determined and united in pressing the Government and
leading opposition figures in South Sudan to reverse
their dangerous course and genuinely, actually, pursue
peace. Last month, the world stopped for a moment to
remember the genocide that took place in Rwanda 20
years ago. President Kiir attended that ceremony to pay
his respects. Now President Kiir, former Vice-President
Machar and other rebel leaders have a duty to themselves
and their fellow citizens to pull their country back from
the abyss. It is not too late, but the window is closing.
