Mr. Vohidov (Uzbekistan): It is a great pleasure for
me to address the Security Council under your presidency,
Sir, in this debate on the agenda item entitled "The
situation in Afghanistan".

The Republic of Uzbekistan is deeply concerned about
the recent escalation of military confrontation in
Afghanistan and considers it a major threat to international
and regional peace and security, particularly to the region
of Central Asia.

I would like to stress that the Afghan conflict has
grown from an internal problem of Afghanistan into a
conflict of regional scale. Dangerous consequences of this
war can be seen today, not only inside that war-torn
country but also beyond its borders and in practically all of
its immediate neighbours. In this context, some of our main
concerns are the use of Afghan territory for terrorist
activities and for the training and concealing of
international terrorists and their organizations, a policy
whose consequences create a great danger not only for the
region of Central Asia itself, but also for wider international
peace and stability; the growing involvement of mercenaries
from other countries in the Afghan conflict, which is
acquiring a dangerous character; and the use of Afghan
territory for the cultivation, production and trafficking of
drugs.

The result of these facts is that Afghanistan has today
become one of the main exporters of international terrorism
and religious extremism, as well as the largest producer and
supplier of narcotics in the world. The whole international
community suffers from this dangerous activity, which is
spreading in most parts of Afghan territory.

One of the main concerns of my Government is the
continued supply of arms and ammunition to the parties to
the Afghan conflict and the unabated foreign interference in
Afghanistan. We are confident that it is necessary to cease
such interference immediately in order to create the
necessary conditions for the resumption of a peaceful
dialogue.

We resolutely condemn recent reports on the mass
killings and forced displacements of civilians, as well as
other violations of human rights in Afghanistan.

We welcome the statement of the Secretary-General
delivered on the occasion of the first anniversary of the
murder of Iranian diplomats in Mazar-e-Sharif, especially
his appeal to the Taliban to carry out a serious and
speedy investigation into this grave violation of norms of
international law.

The escalation of hostilities has brought new
sufferings for the people of the country and has resulted
in the suspension of deliveries of international
humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. We hope that the
Afghan parties will respect the norms of international and
humanitarian law and do everything possible to create the
necessary conditions for the United Nations and other
international humanitarian organizations to provide
humanitarian assistance to all in need of it in Afghanistan.

Uzbekistan believes that the United Nations must
continue to play its central and impartial role in
international efforts towards a peaceful resolution of the
Afghan conflict, and, in this regard, we support the efforts
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, his Special
Envoy for Afghanistan, Mr. Brahimi, and those of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan.

I would like to take this opportunity to wish Mr.
Brahimi, an outstanding diplomat in the United Nations,
a speedy recovery.
At the present time, the work of the "six plus two"
group, which has conducted its activities under the
auspices of the United Nations, has acquired great
significance and gained unique experience in multilateral
diplomacy, promoting by joint efforts the creation of the
favourable external preconditions for the negotiation
process of the intra-Afghan fighting parties. The group
has taken a special place in the international efforts aimed
at the achievement of the political settlement of the
Afghan crisis and, from our point of view, has proved
itself to be the most efficient international mechanism for
the consolidation of the efforts of the friends and
neighbouring countries of Afghanistan.

The recent meeting of the group in Tashkent on 19
July this year adopted the political Declaration on
Fundamental Principles for a Peaceful Settlement of the
Conflict in Afghanistan and once again reaffirmed the
common adherence and support of all member countries
to the activity of the group. The Tashkent meeting of the
"six plus two" and its political Declaration have provided
a solid basis for the achievement of a regional consensus
among the members of the group, elaborated common

 

principles and a single approach to the resolution of the
Afghan conflict, and provided an opportunity for the
Afghan parties to renew the negotiating process.

The position of the Government of the Republic of
Uzbekistan on the settlement of the Afghan conflict fully
coincides with the provisions of the Tashkent Declaration
and consists of the following points: that there is no
military solution to the Afghan conflict, which can be
resolved only through political settlement in accordance
with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and
the Security Council; the central and impartial role of the
United Nations in the international efforts to achieve a
peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict; firm
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan; formation of a
broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully representative Afghan
government; and cessation of foreign military support to
any fighting Afghan party and the prevention of the use of
the territories of neighbouring countries for such purposes.

I would like to note once again that the recent
escalation of military action in Afghanistan clearly
demonstrates to all of us the necessity of further
coordination and strengthening of the international efforts.
Proceeding from this opinion, the Government of the
Republic of Uzbekistan has proposed to the member
Governments of the "six plus two" group the holding of a
meeting of the group at the level of Ministers for Foreign
Affairs during the general debate of the forthcoming fifty-
fourth session of the General Assembly. That would be the
second meeting of the Ministers of the group, with the aim
of conducting further discussions of the ways of achieving
a peaceful solution to the Afghan conflict.

