Mr. Vieira de Mello: Thank you, Mr. President,
for inviting me to address the Council.

Since I last briefed the Council, on 29 September,
a mission from the Council has visited and reported on
the situation in East and West Timor. As that report is
barely one week old, I will focus my remarks today on
some of the specific issues highlighted therein, relate to
members our plans for the donors conference in
Brussels next week and update members on discussions
we have had concerning the path for political transition
in 2001.

It is also worthwhile to highlight the critical
juncture - positively so, I should add - at which we
once more now find ourselves in East Timor. Beyond
the emergency phase and beyond the start-up of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East
Timor (UNTAET), we are now well advanced in the
transition to independence. Our consultative
mechanisms through the cabinet structure and the all-
Timorese National Council have become more
sophisticated, and we are beginning to see the start of a
more avowedly political climate in East Timor. This is
a healthy and timely development, allowing us to turn
our attention to how best the final march to full
independence should be managed and to begin thinking
now of what type of international assistance East Timor
might need once that independence has been attained.

But before I begin my brief proper, I would just
like to say a few words of thanks to the Council for
sending to East Timor the mission that Ambassador
Andjaba led to see at first hand the progress that has
been made and the challenges that remain. We all
found the visit to be of immense help, stimulating our
thinking about the way forward, highlighting areas of
priority and reassuring us that we are not alone in our
endeavours.

As the Security Council mission has reported, the
security situation in East Timor is stable. In West
Timor, we continue to have concerns about the
existence and the impunity of those among the militias
who remain incorrigibly committed to a violent path.
But there has been some progress in terms of the
repatriation of refugees and reconciliation talks. I am
pleased to report that the repatriation of a group of 410
refugees, made up predominantly of what we call the
former MILSAS - militarized civil defence
elements - and their families, and to which task I have
assigned my own Chief of Staff, took place very
successfully last week, with excellent cooperation both
from the Indonesian authorities and from the East
Timorese leadership and local community, into which
these returnees were welcomed home. I am hopeful
that this example of high-level cooperation, also
involving the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) and
other humanitarian agencies, will encourage an
increase in overall returns, both organized and
spontaneous. From 6 September to date, there have
been over 2,200 spontaneous returns. While it would be
premature to declare a trend, this is yet another positive
Sign.

At the same time, there have been a number of
encouraging meetings and contacts in the cause of
reconciliation. On 24 October in Surabaya, Indonesia,
UNTAET facilitated a first formal meeting between
pro-autonomy political leaders, who are federated
under an umbrella organization called the Uni Timor
Aswain (UNTAS) and the National Council of
Timorese Resistance (CNRT). We will be following up
on this next week with a second such meeting, in the
hope that, through developing these contacts, common
ground can be found among East Timorese leaders to
aid the process of true reconciliation.

On 14 November my Chief of Staff led a
delegation, including representatives of the CNRT and
the Armed Forces for the National Liberation of East
Timor (FALINTIL), to a border meeting with three of
the four senior militia leaders who had addressed
petitions to the Security Council, starting with the
letter of 14 October addressed to Ambassador Andjaba,
who was then President of the Council. Incidentally,
the fourth signatory has since backed off from the
position adopted in those petitions. This meeting was
followed by further contacts with the same three in
meetings held in Kupang between them and my Chief
of Staff on 19 and 21 November during preparations
for the refugee repatriation to which I briefly alluded
earlier.

While there have been no definitive results from
these discussions, there are signs that the three militia
leaders may be able and willing to facilitate the return
to East Timor of a large number of refugees, in
particular, 6,000 to Baucau and 16,000 to the district of
Ainaro. Furthermore, the possibility of these three
militia leaders returning to, and peacefully
reintegrating into, East Timor, is also under active
consideration.

Finally, I should like to say a word about the Joint
Border Commission, a mechanism intended to provide
a forum for the discussion and resolution of all cross-
border issues, the agreement for which I signed with
Coordinating Minister Bambang Yudhoyono on 14
September in Denpasar. The latest information, which I
received from Dili yesterday evening, is that we now
have a date for the first meeting of the Joint Border
Commission, which, as the Council knows, has been
delayed time and again. It will now take place this
coming Thursday, in Jakarta. I have, of course,
approved the participation of our delegation in those
discussions.

Let me now turn to a few of the key points of the
Security Council's mission to East Timor and
Indonesia. First of all, the Council has heard me
mention before that the availability of resources in the
East Timor consolidated budget remains one of the key
constraints that we face. I was therefore very pleased
by the mission's recommendation that consideration be
given to increased flexibility in the use of assessed
resources for missions such as UNTAET, and that this
was so promptly followed up by a letter from you,
Mr. President, to the President of the General
Assembly, recommending, through the President of the
General Assembly, that the Fifth Committee and the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions exercise such flexibility. I myself discussed
the matter with the Chairman of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
yesterday morning. I think we all recognize that it is,
frankly, absurd for a Transitional Administrator to
preside over a United Nations mission that spends 10
assessed dollars on itself for every voluntary dollar
spent administering the country for which the Council
made it responsible.

As the Security Council Mission has highlighted,
the justice sector has been struggling with a serious
lack of resources, both financial and human. Progress
on bringing to justice those responsible for the serious
human rights violations of 1999 has been slower than
hoped, and I share the concern that this, in turn, could
have a negative impact on efforts towards
reconciliation, ifjustice is not seen to be done.

With this is mind, we have developed a
comprehensive strategy to step up investigations into
the serious crimes and complete the investigation of all
documented cases by December 2001. Our challenge
now is to provide the required resources to implement
this strategy. I have reallocated funds and materials
from other areas within UNTAET, and we have
prepared a list of urgent additional resources, both
material and personnel, which we will require if our
strategy is to be fully realized, and which we will share
with all interested donors, starting, obviously, with
members of this Council. I urge members to look upon
these requests favourably. Furthermore, I welcome the
informal suggestion by members of the Security
Council Mission to East Timor that short-term SWAT
teams - as it were - of investigators be deployed to
bridge the gap. Those teams would be welcome sooner,
rather than later, in Dili.

We also remain extremely anxious for the
Indonesian judicial process to begin trials as early as
possible. I understand from the Attorney-General of
Indonesia, Marzuki Darusman, with whom I am in
constant telephone contact and who is our partner in
the judicial and human rights sphere, that the trials of
Eurico Guterres and the suspects in the Atambua
murders may begin this year, and that other trials
relating to the serious crimes committed in East Timor
in 1999 may begin in early 2001, once the ad hoc
tribunals on human rights, which were approved by the
Indonesian Parliament only two weeks ago, have been
established. Needless to say, it is imperative for
concrete progress to be seen to be happening in
Indonesia in this regard, sooner rather than later.

Infrastructure development, especially outside
Dili, remains one of our main challenges. Essential
rehabilitation of the roads throughout East Timor is
now taking place in anticipation of the rainy season.
Power has now been connected to all districts, although
limited capacity and the cost of operations mean that
service is not full-time. In Dili, rapidly increasing
demand, no doubt largely a result of the important
international presence, exceeds our output capacity,
resulting in regular power outages. To help address
these problems, the recent review of the Transitional
Administration's budget has been able to free up some
$650,000 in additional funds that we intend to use
straight away for reconstruction projects outside Dili,
as well as $1.6 million for the power authority. There
have also been regrettable delays in the implementation
of the education and health reconstruction programmes.
In short, the extent of East Timor's destruction means
that reconstruction will remain an urgent need well
beyond independence.

I have sent word to the President of the World
Bank, Jim Wolfensohn, which I shall be following up,
recommending that the Bank and the United Nations
get together in the near future to see what lessons we
can learn for the future in accelerating our approval
and implementation of key reconstruction projects.

At this juncture, I would also like to take this
opportunity to ask the Council to consider favourably
the possibility of allowing UNTAET assets, where
practical, to remain in East Timor after the mission
winds up. I have already mentioned the remarkable
disparity in funding between that which goes to the
United Nations itself in East Timor and that which goes
to the transitional administration of the territory. This
would be compounded, and much of the progress that
has been made would be set back, were we to remove
computers, radio equipment, vehicles and other
essential hardware. I also discussed this with the
Chairman of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions yesterday
morning, and he was very sympathetic to our request.

Another crucial element of the transition to
independence is defence. Plans for the creation of an
East Timor defence force took a major step forward
last week in Dili, with the convening of a defence
donors' conference, attended by 12 countries. During
those deliberations, Australia and Portugal made
generous commitments to play the lead role in
establishing an initial training programme by January
2001. Several countries expressed interest in providing
assistance to strengthen the Office of Defence Force
Development, which will ensure civilian oversight. The
objective of having a fully trained first battalion of the
defence force in place by late 2001 is now well on
track.

The East Timor defence force is not, however,
expected to be at full strength until the end of 2003.
Clearly, a United Nations peacekeeping presence will
be required in some form until possibly that date. Such
a presence has the full support of the East Timorese
leadership. The actual rate at which peacekeepers can
be withdrawn from East Timor will ultimately depend
on the external security environment, along with the
capacity of the East Timor Defence Force to fill the
vacuum.

Next week I will be travelling to Brussels, with
my East Timorese colleagues, to meet with donors
regarding East Timor. There, in a meeting hosted by
the European Commission and co-chaired by the World
Bank and UNTAET, we will review the progress to
date of the reconstruction and rehabilitation activities
against performance indicators, as requested at the
donors' meeting in Lisbon last June. The meeting will
focus on an integrated strategy for transition towards
independence.

Among the key issues, the recruitment and
development of senior managers in all sectors of the
public service remains a major outstanding challenge.
We face significant difficulties in encouraging the
skilled diaspora to return to assume these positions,
given the consequent drop in living standards that such
a sacrifice would entail. Timorization cannot be
successfully accomplished without a considerable and
sustained investment in capacity-building, a need that
will not end with independence. Transition will not
only mean the replacement of international staff with
East Timorese, but will also have to involve the
development of a cadre of technical advisers, recruited
not only from international staff, but also from private
sector resources.

Another challenge to be discussed in Brussels is
the sustainability of public finances. Choosing a
sustainable level of public spending is difficult, given
the uncertainty over the revenue-raising capacity of the
economy. East Timor's single greatest source of
revenue is likely to be the petroleum resources in the
Timor Sea. Conservative estimates indicate a likely
annual revenue from petroleum many times the size of
the current East Timor budget, but these are only
estimates. Negotiations are now fully under way with
Australia on the hugely complex task of establishing a
satisfactory regime for the management of petroleum
activities in the seas between East Timor and northern
Australia.

The continued support of donors in the coming
year is vital to the achievement of a successful
transition plan.

The process of transition towards independence,
which began last year with the popular consultation
and subsequently with resolution 1272 (1999), entered
a new phase on 23 October this year with the
inauguration of the 36-member, all-Timorese National
Council. This proto-legislative body was appointed
after a broad consultative process, and was designed to
ensure representation of the various districts of East
Timor, the major political parties, both inside the
National Council of Timorese Resistance and outside
it, as well as a broad cross-section of civil society.

The Transitional Cabinet, which was created in
July, was expanded in October with the addition of
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta. The creation of this Cabinet
and the appointment of the National Council together
represent a significant new phase in the transition
towards East Timorese rule, one where power is
increasingly shared between the Transitional
Administrator and broadly selected representatives of
East Timorese society. It is my firm view that a
successful transition requires that we gradually put
executive and legislative power into the hands of the
East Timorese, so that the day of independence marks
the culmination of a smooth Timorization, a smooth
transition, and not the point of a sudden transfer of
power.

The political calendar for the final phase of
transition, culminating in the democratic election of a
legitimate East Timorese Government, has been the
subject of intensive discussion with the members of the
Cabinet, the National Council and other East Timorese
leaders. A number of common understandings have
emerged from these discussions. It is not, however,
possible to give precise dates at this time, save that we
are likely looking towards East Timor declaring its
independence at the tail-end of 2001.

The key event next year- most likely in the
middle of 2001, depending on the advice of our
electoral experts- will be a general election for a
constituent assembly, which will have as its task the
final drafting and adoption of a constitution. It is not at
this stage anticipated that a referendum will be held to
ratify the constitution, since the elected constituent
assembly will carry full democratic legitimacy. Once
the constitution is adopted the constituent assembly
will be sworn in as the first parliament. Depending on
the process set out in the constitution, elections for a
president- assuming a presidential system is
chosen- the appointment of a government and the
declaration of independence would all take place in the
last quarter of 2001.

To assist the constituent assembly, Xanana
Gusmao, who is the Speaker of the National Council
and the Chairman of the CNRT, has suggested that the
National Council establish a special committee on
constitutional and electoral affairs, to include National
Council members, UNTAET and representatives of
East Timorese civil society. This committee would help
bring the debate to the people and develop core
principles for the constitution for consideration by the
elected constituent assembly, which would, therefore,
be presented with a preliminary draft text of the
constitution.

The Cabinet will this week in Dili begin
deliberation on a draft political parties regulation
which sets out the conditions for political party
registration. Electoral registration, civil registry and
civic education are all now in progress, and we will
begin implementation in these three areas early in the
new year.

This calendar should make it possible for us to
successfully fulfil our mandate and transfer power to a
legitimately elected East Timorese Government at the
end of 2001. But, of course, there is much more to
transition than handing over political power. As the
Security Council mission to East Timor and Indonesia
has highlighted, the pace and success of the
Timorization of the administration is closely linked to
our ability to build, in the most qualified East Timorese
candidates, the capacities they require in order to
succeed. This effort is crucial before transition can be
successfully achieved, but will also be required well
after independence. The role of the United Nations in
East Timor will not end with the last day of UNTAET's
mandate. We will clearly be required well into the
future in a supporting capacity for technical and
security matters, but also in many areas of capacity-
building in public administration.

In conclusion, given the current climate of
stability, I am hopeful that the security troubles I
reported to the Council during my last visit to
New York are behind us now, and that we can focus on
the successful fulfilment of our mandate over the
coming year. I believe we now have the major
milestones of the transition to independence in front of
us, and I am confident that the remaining steps can be
successfully accomplished to ensure a smooth
transition in 2001. While political transition is readily
achievable, I believe that the long-term success of the
transition will depend on a continued engagement of
the United Nations and of individual donor countries in
support of an independent East Timor into the future.

