Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I, too, would also like to
welcome Nickolay Mladenov and the representatives of
Israel and Palestine. We would like to say a few special
words to the Foreign Minister of Jordan. We consider
Jordan to be the key pole of stability in the region. I
welcome the Foreign Minister to today's meeting.

The last time I spoke to the Council (see S/PV.8623),
I highlighted the importance of and need for respect for
the rule of law and the implementation of international
law. We believe that respect for international law is
best for the harmonious coexistence of countries and
the well-being of their people. Resolution 2334 (2016) is
part of international law. It is a binding resolution that
was adopted by the Council three years ago. There was
no objection to it.

Germany believes that the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) would be best for the coexistence
ofIsrael and Palestine and the well-being oftheir people.
For once, let us just imagine that we had implemented
resolution 2334 (2016) in 2016. There would be no
more settlement activities, no announcements about
annexation, no acts of terrorism, no violence against
civilians, no incitement, no provocative actions and
no inflammatory rhetoric. There would be no firing of
rockets from Gaza into Israel by Hamas and others. If
resolution 2334 (2016) had been implemented in 2016,
I am sure we would now be following real negotiations
for a two-State solution, based on internationally
agreed parameters.

We believe that only a two-State solution could fulfil
the aspirations of Israel and Palestine - Palestine's
aspirations for statehood and sovereignty and Israel's
aspirations to live in peace as a democratic Jewish State.

I again thank Mr. Mladenov for his report. His
conclusion was quite depressing, as he spoke about
the deteriorating situation and grim future. We believe
that we must not stop trying to work towards the
implementation of resolution 2334 (2016) to ensure the
well-being of Palestinians and the security of Israel, to
which Germany remains committed.

