Mr. Salame: Allow me to congratulate Poland
upon its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. I am grateful for this opportunity
to brief the Council on our work in Libya.

There are various ways to look at Libya, a country
of some 1.5 million square kilometres. From one city
to another, one finds cause for concern as well as
reasons for hope. Although many cities and towns
merit mention, I shall cite just a few, beginning with
the capital. This month Tripoli was struck by tragedy.
On 2 May, a murderous attack on the headquarters of
the High Commission for National Elections claimed
13 lives. The attack was claimed by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant and was an attempt to derail
the electoral process. However, despite the tragic loss
of many staff and the need to move to a new premises
after the suicide explosion damaged the building, its
Chair has stressed the continued readiness of the High
National Elections Commission to conduct elections.
The perseverance ofthe Commission in the face of such
adversity deserves our admiration.

However, there have also been positive developments
in the city. The elections for the presidency of the High
State Council were conducted on time, peacefully and
democratically, bringing an entirely new leadership
to the institution, while reminding all that official
positions are only temporary. More important for
Libyan citizens, the Government of National Accord
has agreed the 2018 budget.

To the east, the city of Derna has been subject
to escalating ground, air and artillery assault since
7 May, when Mr. Haftar announced an offensive by the
Libyan National Army. Numerous civilians have been
killed, while aid and medical access have been severely
limited. Hundreds of families have been displaced. So
far, most of the fighting has taken place on the outskirts
of the city. We are concerned that, if it proceeds to the
urban areas, civilians will be in even greater danger.

I urgently call on all parties to exercise restraint
and to take all feasible precautions to protect civilians,
and I strongly advise that the Council do likewise.
The United Nations is working hard to address the
humanitarian situation and is preparing in case the
conflict worsens, and requests all actors to permit
unfettered humanitarian access and safe passage for
civilians out ofthe area. We have formally offered - and
do so once more now - the Mission's good offices to
de-escalate the conflict.

To the south, the city of Sabha has also suffered
an alarming escalation in armed clashes. Fighting for
control of strategic locations has led to rising fatalities,
including many civilian casualties. The city's main
hospital has been the subject of direct attacks, putting
the infirm at risk. In that regard, as in every instance
where civilians are at risk, we stress to all parties their
obligations under international human rights law and
international humanitarian law.

Besides being the main city in Libya's southern
region, Sabha is a source of specific concern because,
first, many agreements to stop the fighting among the
groups there have been signed and then subsequently
and repeatedly violated; secondly, there is a serious
risk that those clashes will deteriorate into an ethnic
conflict; and, thirdly, because that conflict has the
potential to become regional, given that armed groups
originating from many neighbouring countries have too
easily transformed that part of Libya as their alternative
battle ground.

We therefore support rapid negotiations between
Libya and its southern neighbours, and we are
wholeheartedly prepared to facilitate them if need be.
The Sabha case demonstrates the need for Libya to
work with southern neighbouring States to secure its
borders and resolve the matters of human trafficking,
the flows of fighters and the smuggling of goods.

On a more positive note, 40 kilometres to the west
of Tripoli, on 12 May, the city of Zawiya, the fourth-
largest in Libya, conducted the first municipal council
election since 2015. In an open and competitive race,
the local community, supported by the Municipal
Election Committee, worked to ensure a peaceful and
organized process, with national observers in every
polling centre. That successful election marks the
start of a series of municipal polls that will take place
across the entire country. Libyans have come to rely
upon their mayors and municipalities for essential basic
services, who in turn struggle to obtain the necessary
resources to meet their needs. Hence the importance
of the renewal of local leadership. The United Nations
supported that election, both politically and materially,
and shall do so for the forthcoming elections.

Another city I will mention is Tawergha. That is a
city that lost its inhabitants after a very serious conflict
with the neighbouring city of Misrata. The inhabitants
should have come back on 1 February, according to
the plan of the Government of National Accord. They
were forcibly prevented from doing so. Many have had
to stay without cover, under rain and now under heavy
sun. United Nations agencies have done much to make
their conditions bearable. I have submitted a plan to
implement the 2016 Misrata-Tawergha agreement. We
are still pushing for its implementation.

Beyond the Tawergha case, I would point to the more
than 300,000 internally displaced persons of different
political persuasions who long to go back to homes, in
Benghazi or other cities. They were compelled to flee
because of fighting or hostility from neighbours with
whom they have lived for centuries.

The last city I shall note is the oasis of Ghadames,
where citizens came together to paint the old town
square in preparation for their national conference
event. Citizens shared their aspirations for their State
and the principles that should guide it, their vision for a
way out of the current crisis.

Forty-two similar events have taken place in twenty-
seven locations across the country since the process
was launched in April. Opening with simultaneous
events in the eastern city of Benghazi and the western
city of Zwara, the national conference has spanned
the country. Meetings have been held from Tripoli to
Shahat, the western Nafusa mountains to the eastern
Green mountains, the south-west border town of Ghat to
the town of Qatrun in the extreme south - all without
a single security incident recorded. Libyans from all
political stripes and segments of society gathered to
enter the political conversation, many for the first time,
with an enthusiasm that could not have been predicted.
They have made it their own.

After holding its national conference, Benghazi
established 30 committees to follow-up. Cities have
reached out to demand their own events. Local
communities and officials have volunteered to organize
their events. Even in the warring city of Sabha, the
parties to the conflict called a temporary truce so that
the city could hold its National conference. Special
events are being held to focus on the concerns of
women, youth and internally displaced persons. By the
end of the process, events will have been held in over
40 locations for communities in Libya and residing
abroad. I commend the thousands of people who chose
to join the meetings, as well as the municipalities and
institutions that hosted them. I also thank the Centre for
Humanitarian Dialogue, which organized the process.
This series of events is the national conference: not
a forum for select elites, but for all people. Once the
meetings conclude, at the end of June, the findings will
be collected and shared at a special event in Libya, as
well as with the Council.

Some points of consensus from this large inclusive
consultative process held in the various cities and
towns have begun to crystallize. There is a yearning
for a united and sovereign nation and a common belief
that, to achieve that, the State must be decentralized.
There is an urgent need for a fairer, more transparent
and effective distribution of public resources for the
benefit of all citizens. There is a strong desire for
unified State institutions, working transparently with
leaders selected based on their competency, not their
identity, as well as for a unified, professional military
and a coherent security apparatus, free from political
interference and operating under clearly defined rules.
The people also want elections that can unite the
country. Finally, there is a very clear longing to emerge
from transition.

That is why the advancement of the political
process is so vital. At the core of the public mood is
a strong desire for a renewal of the political scene, the
assertion of local power and a return to a more normal
life with more regular institutions. That has fuelled
the people's call for elections, which has been heard
increasingly loudly and clearly, through the voter
registration update, within opinion polling and, now,
during the national conference meetings.

While elections must be held as soon as possible,
the proper conditions must be place. A new round of
voter registration, prior commitment to accepting
the results and appropriate funds and strong security
arrangements are needed.

Nolessimportant,theHouse ofRepresentativesmust
deliver on its promise to produce electoral legislation
for all forms of electoral events, in consultation with
the High State Council. Those laws must be produced
in a manner that makes them acceptable to the majority
of the population. We are ready to provide immediate
advice in line with international practice.

The Constitutional Drafting Assembly was
democratically chosen in free and fair elections. Its
proposal enjoys the legal majority required under
the constitutional declaration, and a majority of the
Assembly's votes from each of Libya's three historical
regions. We have assisted the Assembly in its outreach
efforts to the Libyan people and the international
community. However, with respect to the current
draft of the Constitution, Libyan views dramatically
diverge. While many are keen to proceed directly to a
referendum, others are dissatisfied with the text and call
for its amendment, a return to a previous constitution,
or specific guarantees, insisting that otherwise
they will strongly oppose the very organization of
the referendum.

The adoption of a constitution is a crucial moment
in the life ofa nation. It should not be a reason for more
division, feuds or tension. The Mission will conclude its
consultations with the widest array of Libyans possible
in order to set an appropriate timetable for the people to
democratically express their will, in either a referendum

or national elections. I look forward to conveying the
proposal at my next briefing to the Council.

At the conception of the action plan, the amendment
of the Libyan Political Agreement was requested by
various Libyan interlocutors. We have tried over and
over to explore different formulas, reconcile various
opinions and find means to accommodate ambitions.
However, the parties are unwilling to make the
necessary concessions. In my previous briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8211), I stated that we would allow
a last chance for the amendments to come to pass, and
they have not. Instead they have become a distraction.

It is now time to turn the page. By focusing on
elections this year, amending the Political Agreement
rapidly shrinks in importance. However, we must
demand far more from the current Presidency Council in
its remaining final months, in terms of both concretely
preparing for elections and providing services to
the people.

We never lose sight of human rights. In our two recent
human rights reports, the first on detention centres and
the second, due to be released tomorrow, on medical
services, we have documented countless violations
by armed actors against civilians. Furthermore, the
continued influence of armed groups upon politics
and the economy is perilous and, unless resisted, is in
danger of expanding, as recently shown in a disputed
decision by the Government of National Accord to give
to an armed group powers that can belong only to the
sovereign State.

To that end, we have developed a new strategy to
help Libya deal with the armed groups. We have engaged
the armed groups directly, in close consultation with the
Government. We are in the final stages of consultation
with the Libyan authorities to finalize the strategy and
form the plan for its implementation. It will not unravel
armed groups tomorrow but will help the long process
begin in earnest.

Helping Libya tackle armed groups addresses one
of the many challenges Libya faces in the security
sector. There also needs to be a renewed push to
build professional armed and police forces, including
redoubling our own work. Those efforts need to proceed
in lockstep.

With the passage of the budget, Libya's wealth
should flow to the people, and it must do so unimpeded
and free of corruption. But with this year almost half
gone, Libya must also look to its future. Subsidies
remain unaddressed, as does the severe mismatch
between the official and black-market exchange rate.
Trafficked people and illicitly traded goods continue
to flow through its borders. Those apects provide
Opportunities for those few who sit at the heart of
Libya's political stalemate, plundering the nation's
coffers and resisting any actions that might challenge
their sway over a predatory economy. It is this perverse
economic model that must be shattered if the political
process is to make meaningful progress.

We are working to tackle these challenges and,
accordingly, in April, a special event was held at the
margins of the spring meetings of the Bretton Woods
Institutions in Washington, DC. The efforts of
Member States are vital, both in supporting the Libyan
authorities to manage their fiscal and monetary policy
and in pursuing perpetrators of criminal financial
behaviour. But there are limits to what can be done
unless there are unified institutions that have the
strength to challenge vested interests and the credibility
to introduce meaningful reforms.

The social and political fluidity observed during
the previous briefing has continued to grow. It is a
great pleasure to see Libyans from opposing factions
meet and have discussions themselves, such as those
between former regime groups in Benghazi or among
representatives from Misrata, Tarhouna and Zintan.
However, those meetings must be in pursuit of peace.
We have also seen the welcome interest of Member
States in support of Libyans meeting with each other. In
Cairo, when officers from all parts of the country came
together to try to unify their institutions; in Rabat, when
the Speakers of the two Houses met for the first time;
or in Dakar, where various groups of Libyans gathered
to discuss their place in the political process - such
meetings have the capacity to be useful, but only when
they are congruent with the action plan for Libya.

The solidarity of regional organizations was high,
as expressed in the last Libya quartet meeting held
Cairo, as was the solidarity shown during the regular
tripartite meeting of neighbouring States, including
Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia. I must thank the African
Union, the League of Arab States and the European
Union for inviting me to their respective forums to
brief their member States. I also want to express my
appreciation to the African Union and the European
Union in the light of our joint task-force efforts aimed
at supporting the voluntary return of migrants to their
homes and improving, while still insufficiently, the
conditions of the detention centres they are being held
in. Along with Member States, we must continue our
work with the Libyan authorities to improve the lives of
migrants living in centres or in communities.

The aspirations of millions cannot be halted by
those few who wish to maintain the status quo for their
own personal benefit. Parallel bodies that continue to
exist beyond their mandate must be dissolved. Elections
must be held. The country must move forward. But that
can be achieved only with the support of the Security
Council. When Libya hears conflicting messages, we
only add to division and give opportunity to those
seeking to derail the process. But when the Council
speaks with a clear and single voice, Libyans, believe
me, listen.

