Mr. Logar (Slovenia): I would first like to thank
the Azerbaijani presidency for convening today's open
debate.

Slovenia is a member of the Accountability,
Coherence and Transparency (ACT) group and aligns
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Switzerland on behalf of the ACT.

Ensuring the legitimacy, efficiency and strength
of the Security Council, as the body entrusted with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
should be based on transparent, accountable and
coherent procedures in order to address the concerns
of the entire international community and involve all
Members of the United Nations. Open briefings and
debates have been an opportunity for States to share
their views and actively engage in the work of the
Council. We also warmly welcome the practice that
some of the permanent Council members, as well as
those from non-permanent-member States, have begun
of distributing concept papers, and we call on the other
members to follow their example.

We should consider further improvements relating
to the order of speakers and the adoption of outcome
documents, which present an opportunity to help
strengthen the Council. Drafts of presidential statements
and resolutions should be made available before they
are adopted, and non-Council members should be
consulted about them - when, of course, appropriate.
The availability of modern technologies makes such
action possible in a variety of ways. Decisions should
be adopted at the end of debates, not the beginning.

Transparency should be a core element of the
Council's working methods and can serve as a way to
engage non-members in its work. When mandates are
being drafted, we would welcome early participation
in the process on the part of all Council members, as
well as consultations with the regional organizations
concerned. For the sake of transparency, we would
encourage the Council to open meetings for briefings
by United Nations officials and relevant special
rapporteurs to all United Nations Members, while
allowing for the possibility of holding consultations
privately afterwards.

Every Member of the United Nations has had
to deal with an increasing number of decisions by
the Council. Since all States Members of the United
Nations have a responsibility to support the Council
and hold it accountable for the consistent and effective
implementation of its decisions, we believe that each
and every resolution or decision ofthe Council should be
accompanied by an action plan for its implementation,
which should, of course, be regularly monitored. In
recent decades, we have witnessed the evolution of
new areas of conflict and issues of concern to the
international community, an evolution that the Security
Council should reflect by reviewing its agenda.

States that have been entrusted with membership
in this body must uphold and promote international
law and ensure that their own decisions are firmly
rooted in that body oflaw. Accountability and the fight
against impunity must be a foundation for their work
when dealing with breaches of international peace and
security. In that regard, the International Criminal Court
(ICC) should be perceived as an effective mechanism,
one that is based on firm respect for the rule of law,
the protection of civilians and the punishment of grave
atrocities regardless of the perpetrator in a conflict.
We encourage Council members to refer cases of the
most serious crimes of concern to the international
community to the ICC and to establish an effective
follow-up mechanism for such actions.

In addition, we repeat our call to the permanent
members to refrain from the use of the veto in situations
involving genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes
or serious violations of international humanitarian law.
We welcome France's initiative condemning the use of
the veto in cases of mass atrocities and encourage the
other permanent members of the Council to address the
issue seriously and in good faith.

To conclude, it is crucial to ensure that the Security
Council continues to regularly assess how its practice
matches the goals as outlined in presidential note
contained in document S/2010/507 and all its updates,
and that it continues to collect and build on the valuable
input from the United Nations membership as a whole
on ways to further improve its working methods.

