Mr. Schieb (Germany): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this open debate on a very
pressing issue.

I align myself with the statement made on behalf
of the European Union and the statement to be made by
the representative of Spain on behalf of the Group of
Friends of resolution 1540 (2004). I would like to make
the following four points.

First, the use of weapons of mass destruction by
terrorists is a growing threat. Since 2013, the repeated
use of chemical weapons in Syria, particularly by the
Syrian regime but also by Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL), as well as ISIL's use of chemical
weapons in Iraq, has dramatically exacerbated concerns
about the use of those universally condemned weapons.
However, holding the perpetrators accountable for those
heinous acts remains a major challenge. We believe that
preventing non-State actors from accessing chemical
weapons and their precursors is the most effective way
to prevent non-State actors from ultimately using them.

For that reason, Germany supported the
international community's efforts to remove and destroy
the remaining stocks of chemical-weapon precursors
in Libya. The German Government is contributing to
those efforts by allowing the precursors to be destroyed
at a specialized facility in Germany. To address these
growing risks, it is crucial that the international
community continue to strengthen the Biological and
Toxin Weapons Convention and support capacity-
building in countries in which proliferation risks
exist. The Group of Seven's global partnership plays
an active role in that area, and Germany contributes to
those activities through its partnership programme on
biological and health security.

Secondly, together with its partners, Germany is
pushing for a treaty to end fissile material production.
By limiting the pool of available fissile material, such
a treaty could significantly reduce the risk of non-State
actors acquiring those highly dangerous materials. We
congratulate Canada for the progress that it has made
towards that goal while chairing the High-level Fissile
Material Cut-off Treaty Expert Preparatory Group.

The international community has also made great
progress in the field of nuclear security. The Nuclear
Security Summit process has not only drawn worldwide
attention to the risks of nuclear terrorism, but has also
triggered concrete actions and initiatives to close
existing gaps. We encourage all Member States to adopt
existing legal norms such as the amended Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism. Furthermore, those Member
States that require assistance to fully implement
those norms must be able to turn to the international
community for sustainable support. Germany is one of
the major donors to relevant organizations and bodies.
For example, Germany contributes substantially to the
Nuclear Security Fund of the International Atomic
Energy Agency, which supports nuclear security
capacity-building projects. We count on others to
follow our example.

Thirdly, in our globalized world, the private sector
has an important role to play in non-proliferation. After
all, it is the private sector that must implement export
controls and adhere to non-proliferation legislation.
In recognition of this fact, Germany initiated the
Wiesbaden process with the support of many other
Member States and in cooperation with the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs. The process
seeks to increase private sector engagement in the
context of resolution 1540 (2004). The next Wiesbaden
conference, in late November, will focus on due
diligence by private sector companies and questions
related to cross-border development and production.
We have initiated a similar dialogue with industry
through the Nuclear Security Contact Group.
Fourthly, last year's comprehensive review of
resolution 1540 (2004) proved to be a useful exercise.
Germany especially supports the aim to reinforce the
role of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) in facilitating
technical assistance, particularly by improving the
matching mechanism. We welcome all other initiatives
that seek to strengthen resolution 1540 (2004) in the
long term, such as the work of the Group of Friends of
resolution 1540, in which Germany actively participates.
Together with partner nations and international
organizations, Germany will continue to play its part in
reducing the global risk of terrorism perpetrated with
weapons of mass destruction.

