Mr. F eltman: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the second report
(S/2016/501) of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh) to international peace and security and the
range of United Nations efforts in support of Member
States in countering the threat. The report is submitted
pursuant to paragraph 97 of resolution 2253 (2015),
which requested the Secretary-General to submit an
initial strategic-level report, followed by updates every
four months, that demonstrate and reflect the gravity of
the threat that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) represents to the international community
and the principles and values of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The Secretary-General's initial report (S/2016/92),
published on 29 January, addressed the areas identified
by the Council, including the risks posed by foreign
terrorist fighters and ISIL's funding sources, and
contained recommendations for strengthening the
capacities of Member States to mitigate the threat posed
by ISIL, as well as ways by which the United Nations
could support those efforts.

This update report provides an updated assessment
on the gravity of the threat posed by ISIL and
associated groups and entities, their funding sources
and geographic and thematic trends of the threat. It
also highlights Member States and United Nations
efforts and progress in implementing related counter-
terrorism measures.

The report was prepared with the input of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the contribution of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Security Council
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and
in close collaboration with the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre (UNCCT) and other relevant
United Nations actors and international organizations.

The report stresses that the threat posed by ISIL and
its associates remains high and continues to diversify.
ISIL's military setbacks in Iraq and the Syrian Arab
Republic could be one of the factors behind the marked
increase in the rate of return of foreign terrorist fighters.
However ISIL is yet to be strategically or irreversibly
weakened. The inflow of arms and ammunition,
directly or indirectly, into ISIL-held territory remains
a serious concern.

Given its recent military setbacks, ISIL may be
moving into a new phase * elevating the role of its
affiliates, trying to move funds outside the current
zones of conflict and increasing the risk of complex,
multi-wave and international attacks. The bombings
and shootings in Paris in November 2015, and in
Brussels in March, demonstrate the important role that
returned terrorist fighters can play in coordinating
terrorist operations.

The report also notes that, for the first time since
the declaration of its so-called caliphate, in June 2014,
the ISIL core is under financial pressure. ISIL is trying
to compensate for the loss in oil revenues, mostly due
to international air strikes, by intensifying efforts in
taxation and extortion. It is not clear how much revenue
ISIL earns from antiquities smuggling, which now
also may be from Libya and Yemen, but that practice
remains a source of income as well.

The report emphasizes that, in that context, ISIL
may attempt to exploit additional revenue-generating
activities, such as the kidnapping of international
hostages, to move funds internationally, through
informal and formal channels, and to convert local
currency into currency or commodities, such as gold,
that can be more easily transferred internationally.
ISIL's provision of funds to its affiliates and networks
also represents a major concern.

Significant numbers of foreign terrorist fighters
continue to travel to join ISIL in the Syrian Arab
Republic and Iraq from States around the world, often
using so-called broken travel techniques and false or
stolen travel documents. In terms of current trends,
the report notes the risks that returned foreign terrorist
fighters represent for regions such as South-East Asia
and countries such as Libya.

The report also highlights evolving aspects of the
threat posed by ISIL.

First, in Libya, the terrorist group has gained control
over territory in a relatively short time. Despite ISIL's
difficulties in consolidating gains, building alliances
and competing with other actors, Libya risks becoming
a hub for ISIL's expansion in the wider Maghreb and
Sahel region and beyond.

Secondly, in Afghanistan, despite some military
setbacks in 2015 and 2016, ISIL has proved its ability to
hold limited terrain and to conduct terrorist attacks in
cities beyond its core territory.

Thirdly, information and communications
technologies continue to be a key enabler for ISIL and
its affiliates and to play an essential role in helping these
groups function, recruit, gather supplies and attack.

Fourthly, sexual violence continues to be used as a
tactic of terrorism to increase ISIL's power, revenue and
recruitment base, as well as to shred the social fabric of
targeted communities.

The report also highlights the efforts and
progress of Member States and the United Nations in
implementing related counter-terrorism measures in a
number of thematic areas.

Since the Secretary-General's initial report
on the threat posed by ISIL, Member States have
continued to update their legislation in response to
resolution 2178 (2014); strengthened their capacities
to effectively investigate and prosecute complex
terrorism-related cases; sought to identify barriers
to the sharing of financial information; worked on
designing and implementing comprehensive border-
management strategies; and paid increased attention
to the development of comprehensive approaches to
countering recruitment and preventing and countering
violent extremism, among other areas.

During the same period, the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force finalized
the Security Council-mandated capacity-building
implementation plan for countering the flow of foreign
terrorist fighters. The implementation plan includes 37
mutually reinforcing project proposals submitted by 12
CTITF entities, prioritized by the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate geographically and
thematically. The plan addresses the entire life cycle of
the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, from their
radicalization to travel, operationalization, fighting,
reintegration and rehabilitation. The total budget of the
entire project is $100 million to $120 million over three
to five years. To date, we have identified approximately
10 per cent of the needed funding from donors and
commenced a number of the projects included in the
plan, including on advanced passenger information.

To implement all the projects and help Member
States make an impact on the foreign terrorist fighter
phenomenon, further funding will be required. To that
end, the Council will recall that in S/PRST/2015/11, the
Security Council encouraged

"[m]ember States to provide needed financial and
other assistance to CTITF and the UNCCT".

Since January, CTITF entities have also
implemented specialized capacity-building
programmes to counter the financing of terrorism,
strengthen border controls and implement advanced
passenger information systems; developed a counter-
terrorism prosecutors' network; launched an innovative
project on private-sector engagement in responding
to terrorists' use of information and communications
technologies; and organized a major international
conference with our Swiss partners in Geneva on
preventing violent extremism.

In the field, the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya (UNSMIL) has prepared assessment reports
on ISIL that it shares with Member States to support
their efforts to counter the threat of ISIL. UNSMIL
has continued to support the efforts of the Presidency
Council in leading Libya's transition and the
establishment of the Government of national accord to
curtail further expansion of ISIL.
Despite the efforts of the international community,
including the United Nations, to counter ISIL, and
despite ISIL's military setbacks in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic and its financial pressures, ISIL
continues to pose a significant challenge to international
peace and security.

In the face of this common threat, I would like
to reiterate the Secretary-General's call to unity and
action, including in finding political solutions to the
conflict in Syria, and to assure the Council that the
United Nations will continue to support Member States
in implementing the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly.

The Secretary-General will provide an update
of this report to the Council in four months' time, as
mandated by resolution 2253 (2015).

