In my national capacity, I would like to express my delegation's appreciation to my brother Ambassador Tarek Ladeb for his briefing and work as the Chair of Counter-Terrorism Committee. We have been working very closely with our brothers from Tunisia on this very important issue of terrorism and will continue to do so in future, with Tunisia as well as with other members of the Security Council, even though we will no longer be serving in the Council. This is a very important issue that is near and dear to our hearts. I would like to make three very brief points. First, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the Group of Experts of the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the Office of the Ombudsperson and the secretariats of the Committees. We commend them for continuing to carry out their activities in accordance with their respective mandates despite the difficult circumstances caused by the pandemic. Secondly, with regard to the implementation of the mandates of the Committees, my delegation applauds their continuous efforts to cooperate and coordinate better. Joint briefings and working visits to several countries, including to Indonesia earlier this year, are examples of the coordinated efforts that need to be strengthened. We hope that this will continue to be on the agenda of the Committees after the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) because, without the visits, we will not have a very clear picture of the situation on the ground. And that brings me to my last point - that of advancing the mandates of the three Committees. We must acknowledge that there have been encouraging developments. However, we also share concerns about the fact that, during this challenging time, threats have evolved and transformed but have far from diminished. This situation has forced us not only to be flexible but also creative in finding solutions to make sure that we can continue to work effectively, but without compromising our rules and guidelines. We have shown that, during this time of COVID-19, we can also be adaptive and flexible enough to ensure that this very important work of addressing the issue of terrorism does not fall behind simply because of procedural issues. Once again, I underline our collective responsibility to continue to explore ways and means, find compromise and ensure the continuity of work of the Committees for as long as they are needed. This is not a parting statement, but we wish the next Chairs of the Committees all the best in undertaking their very important work. And just a simple suggestion on my part - maybe it is time for all of us to rethink the names of the Committees, because they are quite a mouthful.
