Mr. Grandi: I thank everyone for the many
expressions of appreciation and support that I have
heard this morning. As expressions of support both
from the Security Council as an institution - the
supreme body responsible for peace and security, and
one that is intimately related to our work - and from
many - in fact, all - representatives of the individual
countries on the Council, they are encouraging for us.

For the sake of brevity, I will try to group the
numerous questions and remarks that I have heard,
starting perhaps with the issue of returns, which has
been mentioned by many. It is a quite a complex issue.
I touched on it in my opening remarks. Of course,
we have to be clear, once again, on the fact that, for
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the return of refugees to their homes has
to be safe, dignified and secure. These are the three
pillars of return; they are necessary if we want to
ensure that returns are happening in a context of
international protection. It is also true that returns that
are safe, dignified, well supported and voluntary have
a chance to be more sustainable. Returns that happen
in less-than-ideal conditions very often translate into
fresh displacement. We have seen it in many places.
Then it becomes even more difficult to help people, and
a situation is created that could be a seed for further
conflict. It is therefore also in an issue that I would
invite Council members to consider from their stability/
security perspective.

But, of course, when people choose to go
back - and sometimes people do choose to go back in
difficult circumstances - we see some of them going
back to Syria, and we see some of them going back
to other difficult situations - then those people need
humanitarian support. We all know that the question
of aid and reconstruction in Syria is fraught with
many political elements and dimensions. I invite and
encourage to Council members is to delink the politics,
which are inevitable after such a long war, from the
humanitarian needs of the people, which have to be to
be met.

What is also very important - and I said this in
my opening remarks, but the Council is giving me the
opportunity to raise it again - is that in situations
like Syria - but the same applies to Myanmar and
other situations of potential future return - is that my
organization be present in the areas of return. That is
also part of our protection mandate, especially if we are
to convey a message of confidence to the people that
there is a neutral, impartial observer to their returns,
a presence that can be encouraging to them. This is
sometimes quite difficult.

In Syria, we have established a protocol with the
Government whereby, if we learn of things that can
happen to people returning, we have a mechanism
now established to raise these reports with the Syrian
Government. But we can do that only if we are present.
Otherwise, we could we cannot bring those reports to
the authorities. When I was in Syria just a few ways
weeks ago, I discussed this issue at length with the
Syrian Government, and we are making some progress
in that regard. Still, we need further encouragement and
progress, and this applies - to reply to the question
asked by the representative of the United States -to
Rukban as well.

In Rukban, there is a very mixed population that
has been deprived of humanitarian assistance for a very
long time. We were last able to conduct a convoy from
the Syrian side - that is, no longer from the Jordanian
side - into Rukban in March, with the help of other
United Nations agencies. But we assume that this will
become increasingly difficult, so a solution is urgent.
We have been able survey the intentions of the people
in Rukban, and most of them want to go back home,
once guarantees of safety are in place. The situation
is very much like the situation of many refugees, and
I have raised this issue, not only with the authorities
in Damascus but also in Homs province, from which
most of the people in Rukban come, to say that it is
important that if these people go back - and I hope
that they can go back - we can be present there to
ensure a climate in which returnees can be confident. I
know that Rukban is a very complex situation because
it is at the intersection of different security problems,
but I would encourage those members of the Council
that have influence and access to facilitate this solution
and promote our presence as an additional guarantee
that if people return - which they want to do - they
will be doing so in safety.

There was an important question raised by the
representative of Indonesia, which is often the case. I
would like to say that it is true that, when I say that
people also have the right not to return if they think that
the conditions are not right to do so, there is the question
of what is going to happen. I am thinking not only of
the more recent crises, but of the Afghans, for example,
who have been in exile for decades - 40 years this
year - and of the Somalis who have been in the Horn
of Africa for 25 to 30 years, and the list, unfortunately,
is long. Conflicts tend to be very protracted. What do
we then do for countries that are hosting these people
literally for generations? I think that this was gist of
the representative of Indonesia's question, and it is an
important one.

I think that this is where the Compact can play a
role. The Compact was put in place not just for new
emergencies, but also for protracted ones. The Compact
aims at mobilizing different types of resources, not just
humanitarian but development resources, the role of the
private sector and civil society and so on. It is really
a new paradigm. The issue of alternative modes of
financing was raised, and I think the Compact is already
promoting such financing. We are already applying the
Compact in about 15 countries in Africa and in Latin
America, and we see that there is progress there in
helping the host countries bear the responsibility they
have been shouldering for so long. But we must continue
to work on a solution, especially returns. We must also
continue to say that resettlement, which many Council
members have cited as an important solution, continues
to be important. I am indeed concerned that the global
resettlement figures have declined a great deal in the
past couple of years. Resettlement will never be a mass
solution for lots of people, but it is a solution of choice
for people who are extremely vulnerable and exposed.
I would therefore encourage the Council to continue to
look at that aspect.

Returning to the Compact and what it represents
and the new resources that we want to mobilize, I
would very much like to echo the appeal made by
the representative of the United States - by far our
biggest financial backer - in saying that the scope
of "contributor" needs to be expanded, and not just
through UNHCR. The Compact promotes a great deal
of bilateral support to the countries hosting refugees.
The World Bank and others have really shown the way.
There is a great deal of interest in the private sector.
I was at the Boao Forum for Asia in China just a few
days ago. I was amazed at the interest of the Chinese
private sector in supporting humanitarian operations
worldwide. I think that there are new avenues that we
can explore and are exploring that are very important.

Taking the cue from the Polish statement with
regard to trafficking, it is a scourge that we all want to
combat. That is also something of which the Council
has been seized. Much of the emphasis has been on
the control and security side. That is fair enough. It
is a criminal activity that needs that kind of response.
I think it also needs to be looked at more broadly.
Creating legal pathways, and resettlement is one, but
also, in the migration field, which is not mine, creating
legal migration channels is the best competition to
trafficking. Ultimately, that can really push it back.

There were a few questions on specific situations,
such as from the United Kingdom representative
on Libya. I think that the first priority, which the
Council well knows, is to halt the current escalation
of hostilities. Let me join the Secretary-General in
appealing to all members for that to be done in a unified,
strong manner. The voice of the Security Council must
be heard because what is happening now in Libya is
very dangerous. If that happens, I think it is important
that the question put by the representative of France
of the relationship between agencies such as UNHCR
and the International Organization for Migration and
the authorities needs to be reset. We cannot continue to
operate under constant pressure, threats, intimidation
and volatility of commitments made. If we want to
address this problem, we need another paradigm of
cooperation, and we would like the Council to help us
to do that, but first and foremost is the cessation of this
kind of hostility.

Unfortunately, I must say that since I do not know
what the prospects are for scaling back the current
surge in hostilities, I think that we must also be
prepared for further displacement, including in some of
the neighbouring countries, which we are working on.

On Myanmar, the 34 projects that have recently
been approved are the results of two of the three rounds
of assessment that UNHCR and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) were able to conduct
on the basis of the memorandum of understanding. The
assessment should be in the range of 10 times more than
that but that is what we were able to do in the narrow
space that became available in the past few months
before the Arakan Army offensive. That really was a
setback. But it is a good sign that some of the projects
identified and approved by the Government have now
been approved for implementation. We need to continue
to do that.

But let me say once again that we need to look at the
other tracks. We need to look at freedom of movement for
the Rohingya. There are many who are still in Myanmar.
If nothing is done to alleviate the discrimination against
their marginalization, there would be no incentive for
those who are in Bangladesh to return. That is the
key issue. It is not a matter of making a decision that
these people go back. It needs to be created. But I am
encouraged by it being said that I radiate optimism. A
little optimism is needed if we have to work in such
difficult situations. I am encouraged by this approval.
As I said, I hope to visit soon. I will visit ifI can go to
northern Rakhine. I think that it is very important for
me to see the situation there. I hope that we will also
be able to continue. UNDP and UNHCR have indicated
to the Government of Myanmar that they are ready to
extend the memorandum of understanding but that they
hope that the extension, if it happens - we do not yet
know - will be accompanied by some practical results.

There was a question from the representative of
Kuwait in that regard. Let me again say what could be a
really important take-away here is access. In Myanmar
also, access and presence are important. I reiterate that
access by humanitarian organizations where people are
in fragile situations continues to be key.

Finally. I want to go back to the first statement of

the representative of Equatorial Guinea to thank him for
reminding us, because I was given only 15 minutes at
the beginning I could not mention that it is the African
Year of Refugees, Returnees and Internally Displaced
Persons: Towards Durable Solutions to Forced
Displacement in Africa and the fiftieth anniversary of
the 1969 Convention Governing the Specific Aspects of
Refugee Problems in Africa. That is a very important
instrument and Equatorial Guinea has the task of
conducting a series of activities to mark that solidarity,
which is so strong and widespread in Africa. We should
remember that I am not talking only about States but
the solidarity that is given to refugees in countless
African villages that I have visited in my travels and
that often means sharing the very little that is available
in the absence of any other resources.

I believe that it is very significant that we work
together. The partnership with the African Union is
very strong and I think it can be further developed. We
increasingly see that the right approach to addressing
the refugee crisis and finding solutions is on a regional
basis. We have learned many lessons working with
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the African Union on the Somali refugees
in terms of both strengthening the protection in host
countries and looking at solutions in Somalia. The
next opportunity will be that if the peace process in
South Sudan progresses, and we are watching that
very closely, it will provide openings for cooperation
to also solve the massive displacement. One third of
the South Sudanese population is in exile. As we
have been discussing with the parties, IGAD and the
African Union, it is important than those in exile be
kept informed of the progress of the peace process and
have a voice in that. We have obtained some results in
that regard. We must remember that this is a population
that has left its country at least three times in the past.
Their trust in peace is very fragile. If we want to gain
it, we need to nurture it in the right manner. That is an
example of cooperation with the African Union that we
need to cultivate.

I should also mention that this year marks the
midpoint of another important UNHCR campaign,
launched by my predecessor, who is now the Secretary-
General, on reducing and eliminating statelessness.
That is another very important aspect of our work
mentioned by the representative of the United States.
Around the Executive Committee meeting in October,
we will have a special event on statelessness. In
December there is the Global Refugee Forum, which
will mark the first anniversary of the Compact and in
which we hope Member States will participate at the
ministerial level to showcase progress made since the
New York Declaration and pledge commitments and
engagement for the future.

I have two final points. I thank the representative

of France for having mentioned the necessary support
to our sister agency the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). It is very important. The stability of the
region also hinges on the possibility for the refugee
population, assisted by UNRWA, to remain in schools
and to have access to jobs and health services. As a
former Commissioner General, I not only thank him
for that but also because the countries that are affected
by that unresolved issue are those that are also hosting
Syrian refugees. It is a combination that needs to be
kept in mind in providing support to UNRWA.
The final point is to say that I appreciate what many
said about the importance of linking humanitarian,
human rights, development and peace and security
work. I think that that is at the heart of the reforms in
which the Secretary-General is encouraging all of us at
the United Nations and Member States to participate. I
think that it is really his ambition, ifI have understood
correctly, to bring together these different perspectives,
which are sometimes in tension with one another, and to
try to chart a way forward in which the United Nations
can play a positive role.

When the Secretary-General conducts his executive
committee meetings on various issues, we are often
invited to participate, although we are not a standing
member. This is really where all the dimensions of the
crisis are analysed and the position ofthe United Nations
forged. I believe that this is very high on the list of
priorities of the current United Nations administration.

It is important, in talking about peace and security,
not to forget those who must not be left behind - the
most marginalized and excluded. Refugees are such
people. In discussing solutions, it must be remembered
that they, too, must be included.

Some here were kind enough to say that we should
have more frequent exchanges. I just want to say that
this is the Council's choice. I am always available,
as the Council is aware; I also come here to speak
about specific situations. I think that the relationship,
described so well by the Ambassador of Kuwait,
between refugee issues and the peace- and security-
related issues that the Council deals with is very clear,
as this morning's debate has proved once again.

I thank Council members once again for having
listened patiently to our Views.

