The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

I wish to thank my colleagues for the many kind
words extended to me and my delegation. We are
truly appreciative of the support extended and for the
constructiveness demonstrated by all Security Council
members throughout the month of August, during
which Malaysia had the honour and privilege to preside
over the Council. I also wish to thank all delegations for
participating in the wrap-up session today.

The joint statement delivered by the representative
of Egypt on behalf of the three African members of the
Council -Angola, Egypt and Senegal - highlighted
the flexibility of this meeting's format, as envisioned
in the note by the President S/2010/507. Malaysia
continues to believe that formal wrap-ups such as these
provide an excellent opportunity for the Council's self-
reflection in an open and transparent manner. While
acknowledging that interactivity, especially with
non-Council members, is an issue, we continue to
believe that alternating between formal and informal,
or Toledo-style wrap-ups, as has been the practice
for most of the year, at least provides a good mix and
balances the need for accountability and interactivity.

As a final word on working methods, my delegation
would strongly encourage Japan, in its capacity as Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation
and other Procedural Questions, and in the context of
the upcoming comprehensive review of note 507, to
thoroughly consider the need for the Council to better
manage the expectations of the wider membership,
especially with regard to transparency in the Council's
work.

From the vantage point afforded by the President's
seat, I am pleased to note that, despite the expectation
that August would be somewhat less eventful, that was
hardly the case. That is by no means to suggest that we had
expected or anticipated the many situations that broke
out or flared up. Rather, the programme of work that we
adopted provided sufficient flexibility to accommodate
a range ofissues. For the record, the Council adopted a
total of nine products throughout August. Two of them
were key resolutions, namely, resolution 2304 (2016), on
South Sudan, and resolution 2305 (2016), on the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which we adopted
yesterday. We also adopted an important presidential
statement (S/PRST/2016/13) in support of the ongoing
political and election processes in Somalia. Five press
statements were adopted. Two of them expressed the
Council's strong condemnation of terrorist attacks in
Turkey and in Kabul. Other situations on which the
Council pronounced itself included denouncing the
killings of civilians in North Kivu province in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and on the Sudan
and South Sudan, particularly our support for the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel road
map agreement. Finally, a press statement was adopted
that expressed the Council's collective concern about
developments in the Korean peninsula.

Beyond those outcomes, significant discussions
were held on a range of other issues and situations.
As mentioned by earlier speakers, the Council's early

action to support the peace process in Colombia is
noteworthy. In that regard, we look forward to working
closely with other Council members to ensure that the
gains made can be consolidated through the United
Nations coordinated support and facilitation, with
the assistance of the guarantor and accompanying
countries, including fellow Council member Venezuela.

I also wish to express my delegation's deepest
sympathy and condolences to the Chinese delegation
on the suicide car-bomb attack against the Chinese
Embassy in Bishkek yesterday. We strongly condemn
the attack against premises that are inviolable under
international law.

Malaysia strongly believes that there remains
much scope for the Council to improve its record
and practices with regard to conflict prevention. To
that end, the initiative of improving the Council's
situational awareness, spearheaded by New Zealand,
is important and should benefit from thorough and
positive consideration by all Council members.

Malaysia is also pleased to have convened the
Council's annual open debate (see S/PV.7753) on
children and armed conflict this month. We continue
to believe that the mechanism on children and armed
conflict remains one of the most effective instruments
at Council's disposal to advocate for the protection
of children in situations of armed conflict around the
world. That important role and mandate must continue
to command the Council's undivided support.

The high-level open debate (see S/PV.7758) on
the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction
(WMDs) was another initiative that Malaysia undertook
this month. The debate was convened primarily to
support the ongoing comprehensive review of the
status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004),
led by Spain. At the same time, the debate also sought
to highlight the importance of continued international
focus on the threat posed by the possible proliferation
of WMDs and related materials and technologies to
non-State actors and violent extremist groups. We
believe that the debate successfully highlighted the
linkages between ongoing conflicts and the possible risk
of the proliferation of WMD material and technologies.

Finally, Malaysia is also honoured and deeply
privileged to have been twice entrusted with facilitating
the appointment process for the next Secretary-General
this month. We continue to believe that the appointment
process could benefit from greater transparency. After
all, we are in the process of selecting an individual who
will lead the United Nations at a time when it is beset by
significant challenges that require strength and tenacity
of will to overcome. As such, our decision as a Council
must not depart from the expectations of the full range
of partners and stakeholders, namely, the international
community at large.

I wish to conclude by expressing once again,
on behalf of the Malaysian delegation, our deepest
appreciation to all Council members for the support and
constructive cooperation rendered to us throughout the
month. We sincerely hope that the spirit of flexibility,
compromise and goodwill that is a hallmark of the
Council and its members will continue to prevail.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the last
scheduled meeting of the Council for the month of
August, I would like again to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Malaysia to the
members of the Council, especially my colleagues the
Permanent Representatives and their respective staffs,
as well as to the secretariat of the Council, for all the
support they have given us. It has been a busy month
indeed, and one in which we rallied to consensus on
several important issues within our purview. We could
not have done it alone without the hard work, support
and positive contributions of every delegation and of
the representatives of the secretariat, includinig all the
relevant Conference Officers and interpreters. As we
end our presidency, I know I speak on behalf of the
Council in wishing the delegation of New Zealand good
luck in the month of September.

The meeting rose at 4.25 pm.
