Mr. Lacroix (spoke in French): Fifteen years
ago, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) was deployed to Haiti to support
stability in the country. Today, on the last day of the
mandate of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH), and with Haitians
themselves, we are turning the page on peacekeeping
in Haiti, but we are not turning the page on United
Nations support for Haiti. The chapter that is coming
to an end has been characterized by successes shared
with the people of Haiti, the tragic earthquake and
lessons learned about what we should have done better.
On this day, we must reflect together on all the aspects
that are the foundation on which we can enter the next
phase of Haiti's partnership with the United Nations.
In that perspective, I am delighted that His Excellency
Mr. Patrick Saint-Hilaire, Charge d'affaires of Haiti
at the United Nations, and Her Excellency Mona Juul,
President of the Economic and Social Council, are
participating in the meeting today.

(spoke in English)

The current situation in Haiti certainly gives
us a lot to reflect upon. The country is facing
a significant political crisis, intertwined with
socioeconomic challenges. Those in turn affect the
security environment, which further feeds political
instability - a cycle that the country has seen one
too many times. I want to highlight the following key
elements and latest developments in the crisis.

First is institutional functioning. The President's
fourth Government has not received confirmation in
Parliament, following two violent interruptions of
senate sessions that were expected to do so last month.
The scenes of political violence in the senate were
deplorable, and the absence of a follow-up session did
not allow for a democratic vote to determine the senate's
position. Without a confirmed Government, key tasks of
the executive, such as the submission of the budget for
the current year, remain stalled. As legislative elections
cannot take place in the current political stalemate, the
stage is set for an institutional vacuum at the beginning
of next year, when the mandate of the members of the
Lower Chamber and at least one-third of the Senate
comes to an end.

The second aspect is national dialogue. The
President's call on 25 September for national dialogue
and for the formation of a unity Government is viewed by
the opposition as being "too little, too late". Opposition
groups are putting forward the President's acceptance
of the principle of his departure as a precondition for

dialogue, thereby leaving little room for negotiating
a unity Government. Mistrust is making compromise
difficult, yet the formation of such a Government may
well provide a way forward to find the lasting political
solutions that are desperately needed. It remains to be
seen whether the formal designation by the President
of former Prime Minister Evans Paul and six other
figures, on 9 October, to conduct outreach with the
opposition will create more space for problem-solving
and rapprochement.

The third aspect is security. The security situation
has deteriorated in the past month as large segments
of the population, dissatisfied with their leaders and
the socioeconomic conditions in the country, are being
mobilized in renewed demonstrations by opposition
leaders demanding change, including in the presidency.
Some among them are ready to use violence to achieve
political goals, including by attacking national
institutions and destroying public and private property.
Preliminary MINUJUSTH estimates indicate that at
least 30 people were killed during the protests between
15 September and 9 October, including 15 by police
officers; an additional 71 individuals were injured. A
rise in hate speech and the use ofmedia to incite violence
also represent worrying trends. Notwithstanding a
demonstration in front of the MINUJUSTH logistics
base on 4 October, there have not been any direct
threats against United Nations staff or premises.

The Haitian National Police (HNP) has already
been facing its first test in managing security without
international operational support, following the
end of operations of the last formed police unit on
9 September. It has performed well, but continued
advisory support by the United Nations, as well as
material support from bilateral partners, are still
needed to boost its operational, internal oversight and
human rights capacities.

The fourth aspect is the humanitarian situation. A
struggling Haitian population is faced with additional
challenges as roadblocks and general insecurity
are paralysing normal activities and obstructing
humanitarian operations. The current situation has
affected the most vulnerable people's access to food.
Hospitals, orphanages, civil protection units and other
emergency services have been severely impacted,
functioning with limited capacity due to fuel shortages,
lack of safe water and medicine and other essentials.

(Spoke in French)

The ability and responsibility to end the crisis,
which risks undermining the progress made in recent
years, belongs to Haitians of all political persuasions.
Only their commitment to good-faith political dialogue,
their rejection of violence and their willingness to seek
compromise can pave the way for finding solutions
to address, through reforms, the deepest political and
institutional roots of recurring instability in Haiti.

I commend the efforts, right up to the very last
day of the mission, of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Helen La Lime, and MINUJUSTH
colleagues to maintain dialogue, in consultation with
international partners, with a wide range of interlocutors
in order to bring them to the table and promote Haitian
solutions to current challenges. Those efforts will have
to be continued in the context of the new configuration
of the United Nations in Haiti and beyond the resolution
of the current crisis. That will be essential to help
establish the conditions for longer-term dialogue from
which a national vision of reforms can emerge.

As we look to the future, I would also like to honour
the sacrifice of the 188 Blue Helmets - military, police
and civilian - who have given their lives in Haiti over
the past 15 years. I would also like to pay tribute to the
memory of all the victims of the tragic earthquake in
2010, which left its mark on everyone.

(spoke in English)

The current context is not ideal for ending 15 years
of peacekeeping in the country. We must, however,
look at how peacekeeping has contributed to progress
in many areas over those years, as reflected in the
handout distributed to members of the Council. That is
particularly the case regarding the rule of law. The work
undertaken to support the development of the Haitian
National Police has led to significant changes on the
ground. Between 2004 and 2019, the yearly intentional
homicide rate has been almost cut in half - a result
due in large part to an increase in the number and
effectiveness of Haitian National Police personnel.
Their number has increased from 2,500, when
MINUSTAH was deployed in 2004, to approximately
15,404 officers today - 10.5 per cent of whom are
women - thereby doubling the police-to-population
ratio. Today, all of Haiti's 145 communes have a full-
time Haitian National Police presence, with a total of
349 functional HNP facilities, including 171 police
stations that have been constructed or refurbished
thanks to United Nations support.

There have also been improvements in the area of
justice. Key legislation has been promulgated since
2004, including on the status of the magistracy school,
the Superior Council of the Judiciary and the status
of the magistracy, the latter paving the way for the
recruitment ofa corps ofmagistrates, including women,
supported by United Nations-backed efforts. Of course,
prison overcrowding remains a crippling issue, with a
pretrial detention rate of 65 per cent, though down from
80 per cent in 2004. But it is encouraging, for instance,
that in the jurisdiction of Port-au-Prince, the rate of
prolonged pretrial detention has decreased by 14 per
cent since October 2017.

Throughout the past 15 years, the good offices of
the Secretary-General have sought to continuously
contribute to defusing periods of political uncertainty
and tension. The community violence reduction
programmes have also proved to be a valued element of
MINUSTAH's and MINUJUSTH's work. By providing
short-term employment to former gang members and
disenfranchised youth, they have, for example, led to
the construction of over 100 kilometres of canals and
the rehabilitation and revegetation of 200 kilometres
of ravines.

The support provided by MINUSTAH and
MINUJUSTH in the area of human rights has
strengthened the ability of the national human
rights institution and civil society organizations to
promote and protect human rights, as well as to foster
accountability for human rights violations and redress
for victims. Those achievements do not, however, mask
the fact that Haiti continues to need the support of the
international community and of the United Nations.
While peacekeeping in Haiti has done a lot to create
an enabling environment for political and democratic
processes to take place, there is a need for more political
solutions to systemic political challenges.

The unfolding crisis, in all its dimensions, is also a
powerful reminder of the interlinkages between peace,
security and development. Lasting stability must be
anchored in sustainable development. Turning that
principle into practice has proved to be challenging
in Haiti.

(spoke in French)

In that difficult context, the closure of
MINUJUSTH does not mean that the United Nations
will leave Haiti. On the contrary, it will lead to ongoing
United Nations support for Haiti in another form.
Building on the achievements and lessons learned from
MINUSTAH and MINUJUSTH and facilitated by the
reforms undertaken by the Secretary-General within
the Organization, the transition of peacekeeping is
an opportunity to refocus the priorities of the United
Nations system in order to bring the right kind of
support at the right time for the Haitian people.

Through that transition, the capacities of the
United Nations will be adapted to meet the needs on
the ground and the political role and good offices will
be undertaken by the United Nations Integrated Office
in Haiti (BINUH), which will focus on promoting
political solutions while the country team will take
over all programme and technical support activities.
The principle of the peace, security and development
nexus has guided all our planning for the transition, by
identifying the specific priorities of the United Nations
for the coming period and by providing integrated
support for their implementation. Similarly, the new
indicators, requested by the Council and presented in
the Secretary-General's report (S/2019/805), reflect a
stronger political orientation and include socioeconomic
objectives that are essential for Haiti's stability, in line
with the Sustainable Development Goals.

(spoke in English)

Today, we also remember the difficult parts of
MINUSTAH's life and legacy, and those who have
been adversely affected by it. The end of peacekeeping
does not put an end to the work of the United Nations in
eliminating cholera nor does it put an end to our efforts
to address sexual exploitation and abuse and related
paternity cases.

The sustained efforts to support the Government
of Haiti in eliminating the transmission of cholera and
alleviating the suffering of the Haitian people remain a
key focus of the United Nations, under the leadership
of the Special Envoy for Haiti, Josette Sheeran. Those
efforts have led to enormous progress. Ms. Sheeran will
make a public announcement on the results achieved
and on the requirements for follow-up actions in the
coming days.

The United Nations will also continue to address
pending sexual exploitation and abuse and paternity

cases from the peacekeeping period and provide
support to the victims and their families. We will work
with national authorities and institutions in Haiti and
other Member States concerned to ensure that the rights
and dignity of the victims remain at the centre of all of
our efforts.
(spoke in French)

Considerable progress has been made in Haiti
over the past 15 years but the gains of stability remain
fragile and must be further rooted in democracy
and development. The start of BINUH's operations
tomorrow will mark a renewed United Nations
commitment to the stability and prosperity of Haiti. I
take this opportunity to encourage the Haitian people
to continue to work closely with the United Nations in
order to preserve and strengthen the progress made and
to realize their aspirations for the future.

