Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank Special CoordinatorNikolay Mladenov
for his briefing, which as always was comprehensive
and precise, and for his personal commitment and that
of his team.

The scenario we have just heard described recalls
a reality that the Council must not be distracted from.
While crises have been increasing in the Middle East
for several years, the oldest conflict in the region
remains unresolved. However, time has not made the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict less dangerous. On the
contrary, the situation prevailing on the ground is a
false status quo, marked by a daily deterioration, linked
in particular to settlement activity and more generally
the occupation. The situation could degenerate into an
open crisis at any time, in Gaza as well as in Jerusalem.

Decade after decade, peace is receding not only
on the ground, but also in speeches and in minds, as
successive generations Palestinians and Israelis lose
hope of a resolution of the conflict. There are two
narratives, the bridges between which are increasingly
rare and unstable. By promoting ignorance of the other
party, this threatens to mechanically fuel antagonism
between them.

The deadly crises erupting across the region
have not resulted in trivializing or marginalizing the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Through its symbolic
dimension, its regional echo and its place in the
collective imagination, the conflict retains its central
and mobilizing character. Its reach goes far beyond
the borders of Israel and the Palestinian territories.
The permanence of the occupation and the tensions
it generates offer an unhoped-for argument for
recruitment to terrorist groups active in the region.
And any escalation on the ground carries the risk of
uncontrollable regional consequences.

The paradox lies in the fact that, while the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict is now the oldest of those tearing
the Middle East apart, it is also the only one whose
solution is so well known and shared by the international
community. The solution is based on the vision of two
democratic States, Israel and Palestine, living side by
side in peace and security. The destinies of Israelis and
Palestinians are intimately linked; neither of the two
peoples will achieve its national aspirations on a lasting
basis at the expense of the other. That is why the clash
of narratives that are hermetically irreconcilable to
which I referred earlier is so dangerous.

We note the commitment of the United States to
seeking a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
for a final-status agreement. It is now up to the United
States to make proposals to that effect, which we hope
will be part of the framework agreed by the international
community, on which all our peace efforts are built. This
was recalled by President Emmanuel Macron during his
recent talks with Benjamin Netanyahu and Mahmoud
Abbas. It was also recalled by French Minister for
Foreign Affairs Jean-Yves Le Drian at the meeting of
the European Union Foreign Ministers with Mahmoud
Abbas in Brussels on 22 January. On that occasion, the
Palestinian President reaffirmed his commitment to a
peace based on the principle of two States.

There is no credible alternative to the internationally
agreed parameters, which themselves are based on
international law. Let me recall these parameters once
again: two States living in peace and security within
secure and recognized borders; borders drawn on the
basis of the 1967 lines, with mutually agreed exchanges
of territories; Jerusalem as the future capital of those
two States; and a concerted, realistic and fair solution
for Palestinian refugees. In that context, a regional
approach and economic incentives could be important
complements to a peace agreement, but cannot replace
it. Today we are at a crossroads, at a critical moment
when each of the parameters I have just listed has
been weakened.

With regard to the 1967 lines, the settlement of
Palestinian territories and all accompanying legislative
and administrative measures are imposing another
reality on the ground. There are 600,000 settlers today,
200,000 of them in East Jerusalem. The 2017 year was
a record year for settlement activity, and since the
beginning of this year announcements of nearly 1,800
housing units have already been made. Many involve
settlements deep in West Bank territory, including
the approval of the construction of seven structures
on private Palestinian land in a so-called outpost,
which is illegal even under Israeli law and which the
Israeli Supreme Court has ordered to be dismantled.
The position of France is clear. We condemn
settlement activity in all its forms. It is illegal under
international law, as recalled in resolution 2334 (2016).
It is counterproductive and even dangerous, since it
destroys on the ground the possibility of two States and
undermines trust between the parties.

On Jerusalem, our position is well known, as we
recently had the opportunity to recall in detail. The
status of Jerusalem will have to be determined by the
parties within the framework of a peace agreement.
Under such a future agreement, the city is destined to
become the capital of two States, Israel and Palestine.
In the absence of agreement, in accordance with the
consensus that has prevailed for 70 years within the
international community, France does recognizes no
sovereignty over Jerusalem. As French authorities at
the highest level have indicated, we disagree with the
United States announcements of late last year, which
deviate from this international consensus and relevant
Security Council resolutions, in particular resolution
478 (1980). Similarly, we regret the adoption early this
year of an Israeli law on Jerusalem that will make it
much more difficult to share Jerusalem as part of a
future peace agreement.

Finally, the situation of the Palestinian refugee
camps is a time bomb in the Palestinian territories and
in particular in Gaza, as well as in the region. Until we
have been able to achieve a just and realistic solution to
the refugee issue under an Israeli-Palestinian agreement,
the provision of basic assistance and services by the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) to more than
5 millions of Palestinian refugees will be indispensable.
This is of course a humanitarian requirement,
especially through the provision of health services and
food aid. Just as importantly, it is also a question of
human development. Through the network of UNRWA
schools and the role of the agency in job creation, it
represents the very possibility of a preserving a future
for a population that, as we know, is particularly young.

Lastly, that assistance is essential for the security
and stability of the region. An interruption in UNRWA's
services could lead to an escalation in Gaza as well as
to security implications in refugee-hosting countries
of the region, in particular in Lebanon, where the
financial situation of UNRWA is now critical. The
weaker UNRWA is, the more terrorist groups can use
Palestinian refugee camps as recruitment grounds.
Recent announcements of a partial freeze and a reduced
scope of the United States contribution to UNRWA are
therefore of great concern to us. The United States is a
key contributor to UNRWA, and the role it has played
in financing the Agency for decades is decisive. We
urge them not to give up that role and not to weaken
the regional stabilization tool represented by UNRWA.
Apart from the United States role in the peace process,
we call on them to maintain an assistance that is as
necessary for the Palestinians as it is for security in
the region.

In the difficult context I have just described, I want
to solemnly reiterate that there is no viable alternative
to the two-State solution. The single State that some put
forward as a possible answer to the current deadlock
would lead to two parallel citizenship regimes in the
same territory, thereby creating an unequal situation
that would be unacceptable in principle and catastrophic
in its consequences. Such a situation would represent a
double impasse: for the Palestinians, the abandonment
of their aspirations for a State; for the Israelis, the ruin
of their national democratic project.

An urgent need today is to provide Israelis and
Palestinians with a political horizon by actively working
to restore the hope of both States and the possibility
of negotiation between the parties. The extraordinary
meeting to be held in Brussels on 31 January of the
Ad Hoc Liaison Committee, which brings together the
main economic supporters of the Palestinians, should
be an opportunity to reiterate the commitment of the
parties and of the international community, politically
and financially, to the two-State solution. We need
everyone's commitment to that end, beginning with the
United States as a major partner.

Nevertheless, there will be no lasting political
solution without unity between Gaza and the West
Bank under the authority of the legitimate Palestinian
institutions and within the framework of the principles
endorsed by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In that regard, we reiterate our commitment to the
implementation of the agreement signed in Cairo
on 12 October by Fatah and Hamas, which should
enable the Palestinian Authority to fully exercise its
prerogatives in the Gaza Strip, including in the area of
safety. That process must result in a rapid improvement
of the living conditions of the population in Gaza. It
must also be accompanied by a lifting of the blockade,
as well as credible security guarantees for Israel.

France is a friend to both Palestinians and Israelis.

That is why we must speak frankly to them, as real friends
would expect, and call on them to take courageous
measures to allow for the resumption of negotiations.
There is no shortcut in the demanding path to peace,
a route requiring negotiation based on the parameters
I have recalled here. Whatever the difficulties, France
does not intend to give up on that goal and will play its
full part in the efforts to achieve it.

