Mr. Bonser (Canada): Let me start by commending
you, Mr. President, for breaking the usual mould in
convening this debate, which raises important questions
about the role of justice, reconciliation and historical
memory in achieving lasting peace.

This debate is also taking place at an opportune
time. Over the past 20 years, we have witnessed a
consolidation of democracies, both in Central and
Eastern Europe, as well as in the western hemisphere,
with major benefits for both regions. Since late 2010,
we have seen populations throughout the Middle East
express their desire for more freedom, more justice,
more accountability and more transparency from their
political leaders.

(spoke in French)

In Canada's View, that experience illustrates the
need to recognize our collective human dignity. To live
together in peace, we must recognize the fact that dignity
cannot be made conditional or compartmentalized and
that we cannot protect some human rights and freedoms
and choose to not respect others. That recognition is
the very foundation of thriving democratic societies. It
reflects their determination to manage differences by
fighting oppression and discrimination. It informs their
commitment to respecting every individual's freedom
of conscience, belief and worship. These values are at
the very heart of Canada's principled foreign policy.
That policy is dedicated to peace, prosperity, and
freedom. Adopting such an approach entails several
commitments.

(spoke in English)

Respecting human dignity demands a commitment
to act. Canada is dedicated to preventing and halting
genocide, ethnic cleansing, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. Indeed, every State should have a
solemn duty to defend the most vulnerable, challenge
aggressors, protect human rights and promote human
dignity, both at home and abroad. Societies that
encourage respect for diversity, protect religious
minorities, fight discrimination, hold perpetrators
legally accountable, resolve political differences
democratically and seek reconciliation are much less
likely to suffer atrocities. Good governance, the rule of
law and human rights matter.

The long history of humankind has shown
that religious freedom and democratic freedom are
inseparable. Where democracy has been overthrown,
the spirit of free worship has also often vanished.
Societies that protect religious freedom are more likely
to protect all other fundamental freedoms. They are
typically more stable and prosperous societies. They
are just societies.

It is essential that we not forget those most
affected by conflict. A commitment to peace requires
a commitment to the protection and empowerment of
all members of a society, especially women and girls.
A society's development is inextricably tied to the
engagement and leadership of women. Peace cannot
exist when the rights of half of the population are
compromised. Peace cannot exist when the rights of
women are compromised. Given access to resources,
tools and opportunities, women are drivers of post-
conflict reconciliation and recovery; when not, they
are the greatest victims. A commitment to freedom
and dignity requires the empowerment of all citizens.
It is only by strengthening the rights of women that
a country will achieve greater security and, in turn,
greater prosperity.

Respecting human dignity demands a commitment
to learning from the past. In 2013, Canada chaired the
International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance, whose
31 member States are committed to the implementation
of national and international policies and programmes
in support of Holocaust education, remembrance and
research. The Government of Canada believes that such
work is critically important to helping to prevent future
acts of genocide.

Canada has noted with great interest Jordan's
emphasis on the importance of securing and making
available the national archives of documents of States
in order to address reconciliation in a post-conflict
environment. Those archives can also play a role in
holding to account those who have perpetrated the most
serious crimes.

Canada notes that UNESCO has programmes
dealing with the protection and preservation of national
archives. Its Memory of the World programme,
established in 1992 , was born out ofa growing awareness
of the preservation of and access to documentary
heritage to ensure that critical documents are not lost or
destroyed during war and social upheaval. Perhaps one

outcome of today's discussion might be the renewed
attention of the international community to that work.

Finally, respecting human dignity requires a
commitment to prevention. The United Nations system
and its intergovernmental bodies have a long history
of working together to prevent, contain and manage
conflict. Canada supports strengthening the capacity of
theUnitedNationsinthatarea so as to move fromreaction
to prevention. Conflict prevention is as important as an
effective response. Political, humanitarian, security
and development resources and tools must be brought
to bear more effectively in order to strengthen national
capacities for conflict prevention. By doing that, we
can preserve human dignity and protect the lives and
rights of the innocent.

