Mr. Toure (Mali) (spoke in French): First of all, I
would like to congratulate Ambassador Chowdhury of
Bangladesh, President of the Security Council, on his
the excellent leadership during our visit to Kosovo and
Belgrade. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
for his report of 7 June 2001 on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
and Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-Secretary-
General, for his very detailed introduction of the
report.

This morning's open meeting offers an
opportunity to reiterate Mali's full support for Mr.
Hans Haekkerup, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of UNMIK, for all of his
team and for all of the international personnel who
have been working tirelessly for two years now to
attain the goals of peace, security and sustainable
development in Kosovo.
Despite the many political, economic and security
problems facing UNMIK, we must recognize that
considerable progress has been made in the
implementation of its mandate. While we welcome this
tangible progress, my delegation strongly supports the
sustained efforts of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and the Kosovo Force (KFOR)
Commander in implementing resolution 1244 (1999)
and thus to establish democratic and multi-ethnic
institutions in Kosovo.

In view of the information given us by Mr.
Guehenno and what I was able to see and hear during
our very important visit to Kosovo, I shall focus on the
following few highlights. First of all, at the political
level, my delegation is grateful to Mr. Haekkerup and
all UNMIK personnel for the promulgation of the
Constitutional Framework for Provisional Self-
Government in Kosovo and the declaration that
elections would be held on 17 November this year.

It is true, however, that during our visit we were
able to see that the Constitutional Framework was not
the subject of consensus among the political actors in
Kosovo. Nevertheless, we think that the Constitutional
Framework, which in no way prejudges a final
settlement for Kosovo, provides the people of Kosovo
with an opportunity to manage their daily life and
encourages moderates to advance the political process,
while keeping the extremists on the margins. Because it
is the outcome of cooperation among UNMIK, the
Joint Working Group, the political leaders of Kosovo,
international experts and the international community,
my delegation calls on all inhabitants of Kosovo to
participate actively in the structures already established
and in the future government of the territory.

Regarding the Kosovo-wide elections to be held
on 17 November, my delegation believes that the
electoral process can strengthen the democratic process
in Kosovo and stability in the region. Thus, we urge all
the peoples of Kosovo to participate massively in the
elections, which are essential to combat intransigent
extremism and to encourage all kinds of moderates to
take a decisive role in the affairs of the territory.
Because the wholehearted participation of all
communities is crucial to the election process, my
delegation supports UNMIK's initiatives to establish a
multi-ethnic society in Kosovo. We believe that the full
and responsible participation of all sectors of Kosovar
society in drawing up a reliable electoral roll can help
ensure the free participation of all ethnic groups in the
elections. We must do everything possible to ensure
that the vote is held in conditions of security and that
the return and participation of refugees and displaced
persons is guaranteed. All communities, particularly
Kosovar Serbs, must participate in the elections and the
institutions of provisional self-government to be
established. This is a major challenge that the
international community, UNMIK and KFOR must take

up.

Secondly, in the area of security, my delegation is
deeply concerned over continuing ethnic and political
violence and organized crime in Kosovo. Without any
doubt, violence against minorities in the province is the
greatest obstacle to achieving the international
community's goals of peace, democracy and prosperity
in Kosovo. During our visit to Kosovo, this kind of
blind violence as cited time and again as the main
obstacle to the return of refugees and displaced persons
and their participation in the democratic structures in
Kosovo. My delegation welcomes the Special
Representative's establishment of Pillar I, and
legislation against organized crime, illegal weapons
possession and terrorism. We hope that these measures
will lead to considerable improvements in security
conditions in Kosovo. We also support specific
measures taken by UNMIK and KFOR on monitoring
boundaries in Kosovo.

Thirdly, at the economic level, we are still
concerned over the very high unemployment rate in
Kosovo and the disastrous state of the economy. Yet we
welcome the establishment of tax collection points
along Kosovo's borders, where duties are levied on
some goods. Economic development is a major element
of stability, and my delegation recommends that the
international community make available additional
funds for the Village Economic Rehabilitation
Programme.

Fourthly, a source of concern for my delegation in
the humanitarian sphere is the situation of the
thousands of Albanian-speaking refugees from the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia who have
been in Kosovo since 3May because of clashes
between Macedonian forces and Albanian extremists.
The international community must come to their
assistance.

The question of individuals who have disappeared
and of detainees remains crucial for my delegation.
This continues to be a major obstacle to reconciliation
among the communities. We encourage UNMIK to
make further progress in this key area, and we urge the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia authorities to release
those who are still languishing in Serbian prisons.
Fifthly, my delegation welcomes the close
contacts between the Government of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and UNMIK and KFOR. The
opening of the UNMIK Office in Belgrade will foster
communication and cooperation between UNMIK and
the Yugoslav authorities. We thank the Yugoslav
authorities for their willingness and determination to
cooperate with UNMIK to improve inter-communal
relations, in Mitrovica in particular, and throughout
Kosovo. The cooperation of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia authorities is crucial if minorities,
especially Serbs, are to participate in the 17 November
elections.

Finally, my delegation understands the immensity
of the task facing UNMIK, and we pay tribute to Mr.
Hans Haekkerup for his steady hand as leader of
UNMIK; we thank all the local and international
personnel of UNMIK and of KFOR for their
determination and for their commitment to
implementing resolution 1244 (1999). We call on the
international community to step up its efforts to help
UNMIK at this crucial stage of its involvement in
Kosovo to enable it to attain its objectives: peace,
security and sustainable development.

