Mr. Afifi (spoke in Arabic): The world is today
experiencing disturbances and instability as a result of
the constant violence and the intolerance, extremism
and excess that have brought harm so many nations, in
particular in the Arab and Muslim worlds, where security
and stability are threatened and strife and killing have
become widespread. That has led to the destruction of
homes and infrastructure in acts of barbarity unseen in
history. This phenomenon has surpassed all religious
and moral limits and human traditions. It is extremely
painful that those crimes are being perpetrated in the
name of Islam. That has been exploited by the media
in the worst way possible to distort the image of Islam
and to present it to the world as if it were a barbaric
religion thirsty for the blood of the innocent. In reality
we do not need to defend or refute the fact that these
crimes have no relation whatever to religions or human
traditions.

The Koran states that God only sent Mohammed
the Prophet as a blessing unto all beings and unto the
world, which is much broader than the word "Muslims".
In Islamic philosophy it is even broader than the world
of humans, to include the world of plants and animals,
as well as objects. The Koran includes a verse directed
at the Prophet Mohammed:

"We sent thee not but as a mercy for all
creatures." (The Holy Koran, XX]: 107)

Addressing all people, the Prophet Mohammed
stated that he was a gift of mercy from God. But he
was also merciful of animals, telling us that a woman
had entered the fires of hell because she had kept a cat
without feeding it or allowing it to eat from the land. He
also told us that a man had been forgiven and allowed
to enter paradise for giving water to a dog on a hot day.
Therefore, if Islam teaches mercy unto animals, then
mercy unto human beings is something that Islam of
course also calls for. The dignity of human beings in
Islam derives from their very humanity, regardless
of colour, religion or race. Islam views the world as
a single family with a global citizenship that enjoys
knowledge of one another and cooperation. God has
addressed humankind, stating:

"Oh, mankind! We created you from a single
(pair) of a male and a female and made you into
nations and tribes, that ye may know each other"
(ibid, XLIX'B).

The Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy has
worked to combat the ideology of these organizations
that practice violence and killing and threaten peace
in societies. It has demonstrated the relationship of
these groups to the Khawarij, who emerged in the early
history of Islam owing to a deviation in their theology,
which led to the takfiri ideology. While that group was
defeated in the past, the phenomenon has re-emerged
at the hands of young mean and women who are
not qualitied - by virtue of discipline, learning or
culture - to know Islam in its reality, except through
their excitement, passion and extreme reactions.
Accordingly, they fell victim to that ideology. As such,
their ideas are not based on genuine jurisprudence.
We have seen distorted ideologies and concepts that
run contrary to the religion spread through social
media, including the takfiri notion on governance and
the concepts of jihad, the caliphate, a Muslim State,
migration and the idea of a "home of war".

Those themes are common to all terrorist
organizations like the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), which have been based on the ideas of
Abi Allah Al-Maududi, Sayyid Qutb and other founders
of intolerant and extreme ideology that when combined
with violence becomes terrorism. However, extremism
exists not only in the area of intellectual discipline;
when it takes on violent behaviours to attack property
and lives, they are then armed terrorist organizations
used to attack States and societies.

The Al Azhar Islamic Research Academy is
making strenuous efforts in the area of education in
order to highlight the real ideas and concepts of Islam.
That includes the many scholarships we provide for
students at our various institutes and colleges. There
are now 40,000 students at Al Azhar from 130 countries
throughout the world. As part of our global role to
spread Islam's tolerant teachings, without excess or
extremism, Al Azhar is also providing training courses
for imams and preachers from various countries of
the world so as to provide a strong foundation for the
coexistence of Islam and to denounce extremism and
urge respect for national laws and religious pluralism.

At the regional level, Al Azhar is working with the
various factions in Syria, Iraq and to bring them together
to address the politicization of sectarian conflict and
reject the efforts of ISIL, which is exploiting sectarian
differences to gain ground.

Al Azhar is also working globally through the
Muslim Council ofElders, which is led by the Sheikh of
Al Azhar and includes members from different nations
of the Muslim world, to spread international peace. The
Council, in cooperation with Al Azhar, has launched
peace convoys to 15 nations throughout the world. Al
Azhar has also established a digital observatory to
monitor what ISIL publishes on social networks, where
we discuss extremist ideas and refute their fatwas, that
is, their religious rulings, in a number of languages,
including English, French, Italian, German, Spanish
and Chinese, in order to warn young men and women
about the danger of ISIL's ideology and prevent them
from falling victim to that organization.

Al Azhar views the confrontation between ISIL
and other terrorist organizations in the world as a cause
that requires a number actions, the most important of
which are the following.

Due concern must be given to discussing extremist
ideas and refuting them. Young men and women
must be encouraged, through social networks and
international cooperation, to counteract the ability
of these organizations to exploit the virtual world to
market terrorism. Common human values must be
valued and emphasized. We must avoid relating the
conduct of terrorism to religion. We must uphold the
role of religious leaders and foster dialogue among
them. We must work to spread the concepts of the
peaceful coexistence among peoples. We must focus on
the role of young people, support them and integrate
them in the economy and politics of different societies
by offering them job opportunities and protecting them
from extremist ideologies. We must support women,
respect their capabilities and include them in all
efforts to achieve justice among peoples. We must not
discriminate and we must respect the particularities of
all societies. We must focus on education and develop
curriculums that promote peaceful coexistence and
respect for the other, for global citizenship and for the
plurality of religions and societies. We must engage
all leaders of the world in a genuine confrontation
of terrorism, which is now threatening international
peace and security and stability and whose threat is
rapidly growing. We hope for a world that enjoys peace,
stability and coexistence and respects humankind

