Mr. Vale de Almeida: I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union (EU) and its 28 member
States. The candidate countries Turkey, the Republic of
North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania; the
country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as
well as Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova, align
themselves with this statement, of which a complete
version will made available to the Secretariat.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General and
the briefers. I wish to offer special words of thanks to
the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan and to
Special Representative Yamamoto, with whom we have
closely cooperated and with whom we have the clear
intention to continue to work very closely, as well as
with the Secretary-General.

The European Union commends the United Nations,
not the least through the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), for the continuous
important efforts carried out and deployed both in
Kabul and at the international level aimed at supporting
Afghanistan on its way towards improved security and
prosperity and also in implementing the commitments
made at the 2018 November Ministerial Conference on
Afghanistan. We reiterate our full support for these
ongoing efforts and pledge to strengthen EU-United
Nations cooperation on Afghanistan and elsewhere.

The first half ofthis year has been important for EU-
Afghanistan bilateral relations: High Representative
of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
Federica Mogherini paid a visit to Kabul in March, and
the EU held several bilateral meetings in the framework
of the EU-Afghanistan Cooperation Agreement on
Partnership and Development. In all these discussions,
the peace file held a prominent place, as we looked
at how the EU could help the peace process to really
materialize. The EU Special Envoy for Afghanistan,
Mr. Roland Kobia, has frequently visited Kabul and
the region to support the peace process. The EU
strongly believes that all international partners need to
strengthen efforts and coordination in the coming weeks
and months to capitalize on the current momentum
towards peace.

On 8 April the EU Foreign Affairs Council
discussed Afghanistan and approved important Council
conclusions, reiterating our commitment to playing an
active role in Afghanistan's peace process and setting
out in detail the EU's position and expectations on the
process. On that occasion, all ofour 28 Foreign Ministers
endorsed the offer that Federica Mogherini had made at
the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference, namely, first,
helping the Government to make the peace process
more inclusive; secondly, supporting post-conflict
reforms, including security-sector reform; thirdly,
assisting the reintegration of ex-combatants; fourthly,
setting up a possible EU role as guarantor of the peace
process; and, fifthly, supporting cross-border trade and
infrastructure as well as regional connectivity.

It is in that framework that the EU is engaging in
dialogue with the Afghan Government and international
partners. The EU strongly believes that any future peace
agreement must preserve the political, economic and
social achievements of the last 18 years, in particular
the rights of women, children and minorities. Work
must also continue to enhance these achievements.

We support and appreciate the ongoing efforts of all
international and regional actors, in particular United
States Special Representative Khalilzad, aimed at
bringing the conflicting parties to the negotiating table.
Dialogue between the Government and the Taliban is a
priority and should start as soon as possible. Current
negotiations between the Taliban and the United States
should be integrated into intra-Afghan consultations.
Peace can be sustainable only ifit is shaped and accepted
by all Afghans, including women and minorities, and
anchored in the communities across Afghanistan.

A sustainable settlement requires compromises on
all sides, including on how to set up and begin a dialogue.
The EU is ready to facilitate such a consultation process
and a dialogue that will contribute to inclusivity by
involving Afghan civil society, including women's and
youth groups.

The EU supports the active participation of women
in line with the resolution 1325 (2000). Inclusivity
means addressing difficult but necessary issues
relating to the peace process at the outset. Management
of grievances and justice should not be overlooked but
should be dealt with at the right moment.

A peace agreement is not peace in itself. Peace
will take time. The implementation phase of the
peace agreement will be the key for achieving lasting
peace. The EU stands ready to continue its long-term
commitment to Afghanistan after a peace agreement has
been signed. If there are expectations that the EU will
provide substantial financial, political, diplomatic and
development support after the successful conclusion of
a peace agreement, the EU needs to be involved at all
stages of the peace process.

There is a continued need to strengthen Afghan
ownership and leadership ofthe peace process, including
intra-Afghan negotiations. The recent consultative loya
jirga could be seen as a useful contribution to achieving
this objective, especially if further consultations are
enlarged to additional constituencies and endorsed
by major political and civil society actors. Such
intra-Afghan formats should be able to contribute to the
current regional track 1 negotiations.

We call on the Afghan political class - both the
Government and members of the opposition - to
prioritize peace and remain constructively engaged
when it comes to the needs of the peace process. We
strongly urge political actors in Afghanistan not to
allow their differences on other issues to divide them on
the core question of peace. For the sake of sustainable
peace, all political stakeholders in Afghanistan must do
their utmost to achieve unity as regards ongoing efforts
to end the conflict. In particular, elections and peace
should remain two separate processes.

Despite the current ongoing efforts to start a
peace process, the conflict in Afghanistan continues,
and insecurity is affecting the lives of the Afghan
people. During the past month, we have witnessed a
sharp increase in terrorist attacks in both Kabul and
other regions of the country. The number of internally
displaced people is on the rise and humanitarian
needs are increasing, with 6.3 million people in need
of assistance.

The European Union remains deeply concerned
about the high level of civilian casualties that the
conflict is producing. According to UNAMA reported
findings, the situation, where one-third of overall
casualties were children, is deplorable, and the need
to protect civilians is of crucial importance. In this
context, we reiterate once again our calls on all parties
to protect the civilian population, especially women
and children. Conflict-related violence must no longer
destroy another generation's livelihood, homes and
property, as that displaces families and limits access to
education, health and other services.

I mentioned earlier the bilateral meetings the
EU recently held in Kabul. We had comprehensive
discussions covering many subjects, but I would like to
stress the outcome ofthe discussion on human rights and
good governance, which are areas of particular interest
for the European Union. The need for the legislation in
force on human rights and democracy to be properly
implemented was widely recognized in the discussions.
It is only in this way that Afghan citizens will reap
the full benefits of a democratic system. Moreover, in
the context of peace efforts, there was agreement on
the importance of preserving the constitutional order
of Afghanistan, guaranteeing the protection of human
rights and ensuring women's inclusion at all stages
of the peace negotiations and peace process. We took
note of the results of the consultative forum Afghan
Women's National Consensus for Peace. There is a
need for an effective and credible platform to achieve a
unified women's voice in the future peace process and
ensure their participation.

Promoting the rule of law and ending impunity
for corruption will also be core elements of a future
of sustainable peace. The European Union intends to
organize in the near future the fifth anti-corruption
conference in Kabul, aiming at a realistic discussion of
what has been done in this area and what concrete steps
are still needed for the full implementation of the national
strategy against corruption and related legislation.

Migration and forced displacement were also part of
our recent discussions. We have a good implementation
of the EU-Afghan Joint Way Forward on migration. At
the same time, the local and regional dimensions of
migration are high on the European Union's agenda.
The sustainable reintegration of Afghan internally
displaced persons and returnees from the neighbouring
countries, including lately from Turkey, remains a big
challenge for Afghanistan and is an area where the
EU will continue to enhance its support. Sustainable
reintegration is also important in the context of future
peace efforts, where any lessons learned on successful
reintegration will have good added value.

The pursuit of peace must not be done at the
expense of Afghanistan's democratic development.
Peace will be lasting only in a democratic and
prosperous environment. In that context, holding fair
and transparent presidential elections on time - that
is, on 28 September - is essential to strengthening the
legitimacy of State institutions, as well as the democratic
development and political stability of Afghanistan.
The Afghan authorities have an obligation to ensure a
level playing field. All candidates must take part in the
elections in good faith. The EU sees no alternative to the
holding of credible presidential elections in September.
Afghans should face the elections as if there were no
peace process and the peace process as if there were
no elections.

The European Union will continue its coordination
with the Afghan stakeholders and the international
community, providing support - more than
€18 million - to address some of the technical
difficulties of the previous parliamentary elections in
October 2018. We are a strong development partner
for Afghanistan and our development cooperation
responds to the officially defined and presented Afghan
Government's priorities.

The EU will continue its strong commitment to
on-budget support, based on Afghan progress and
impact in the implementation of its policies. We are
currently starting to work on the next programming
cycle for Afghanistan to cover the period from 2021
to 2027, and the potential priorities in the context of
a peace agreement. In that context, the EU would like
to thank once again the United Nations for its good
cooperation in the preparation of the Geneva conference
in November 2018 and its donor coordination efforts.

In conclusion, the European Union believes that the
following months will be crucial for a peace process to
succeed, but any peace negotiations and agreement will
be viable and accepted by the population only if they
support and maintain the values and achievements of the
past two decades. The democratization of Afghanistan
should continue, along with better protection of the
rights of all Afghans and safeguarding the country's
democratic institutions.

It is in that spirit that the European Union will
increase is efforts and support for peace, in coordination
and cooperation with Afghanistan and the United
Nations, as well as regional and international partners.

