Mr. Arias (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, allow me to thank Mr. Holmes, Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, for his
clear and precise briefing, which reflected the alarming
effects of human violence.

We also wish to acknowledge the outstanding
work of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, which is responsible for

providing assistance to millions of civilians suffering
the consequences of armed conflict, particularly
children and women.

We cannot speak of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict without first referring to the prevention
of such conflicts. This Council is obligated under its
Charter mandate to take measures to prevent conflicts,
which requires us to understand in depth the specific
causes that have led to them. Many such causes
transcend mere political and military confrontations.
Terrorism, the HIV/AIDS epidemic and the impact of
climate change are important factors to take into
account when we consider conflict prevention.

Moreover, the protection of human rights must
always be the guiding principle of the Security
Council's work, be it in the context of preventing or of
resolving conflicts. In addition to being one of the
pillars of this Organization, respect for human rights is
the basis for a peaceful society because, where those
rights are guaranteed, the principal structural,
psychological and cultural causes of conflict cease to
exist.

While we assert that preventing conflicts is an
important part of our work, solving them is equally so.
In undertaking that task, we must above all protect
civilians in armed conflict - those who take no part in
it, especially women and children. In armed conflicts,
civilians fall victim to violent attacks whose physical
and psychosocial effects often last longer than the
conflict itself. They may also lose their homes, their
livelihoods, their right to education and health care,
and other fundamental rights. In the worst cases, they
may lose their lives and their families.

Thus, international humanitarian law -
specifically the Hague and Geneva Conventions and
their protocols, other human rights instruments and
Security Council resolutions - provide a broad and
compelling framework for United Nations action to
protect civilians in armed conflict.

Nevertheless, this Organization has often failed to
resort to those mechanisms to act, shirking our
responsibility to protect civilians in the most atrocious
conflicts. The conflicts in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia in the 1990s, the current conflict in Darfur
and the recent events in Lebanon are clear examples of
that situation. The failure to act has cost this
Organization credibility, but the blow to our reputation
is insignificant when weighed against the loss of

innocent lives. We must never forget those victims if
we wish to avoid falling once again into inertia.

I cannot conclude without stressing the ultimate
role of this Organization with respect to international
humanitarian law, as reflected in paragraphs 138 and
139 of the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit, which refer to the responsibility of States and
the international community to protect populations
from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and
crimes against humanity.

It is our understanding that the responsibility to
protect implies that, over and above the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity and non-interference in
the internal affairs of States, when a State or, to phrase
it more aptly, its governmental institutions are
unwilling or unable to meet their responsibility to
protect the human rights of their citizens, it is up to the
international community, and the United Nations in
particular, to adopt timely and decisive collective
measures to do so.

