Judge Jallow: Today's meeting takes place against
the backdrop of the recent commemoration by the
Security Council, Rwanda, the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and,
indeed, the world at large of the twentieth anniversary
of the 1994 Rwandan genocide against the Tutsis. It is
also in anticipation of the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the ICTR by the Council.

In that context, we at the ICTR and at the
Mechanism share the expression of remorse by Council
members over the occurrence of that great tragedy. We
commend the Council's unflinching support for justice
and accountability, as well as its commitment to make
never again a reality. Rwanda's tragedy of 1994 acutely
highlights the need for effective measures to prevent
mass atrocities and for timely and effective steps by the
international community to protect communities that
face the threat ofor are already subject to such atrocities.
We hope that the role of the ICTR in the process of
post-genocide justice and reconciliation in Rwanda has
provided a basis for effective accountability for such
crimes and further strengthening of the international
community's resolve to ensure that such atrocities are
indeed never again allowed to occur.

The ICTR, in the course ofits mandate, has indicted
93 leading figures, of whom 61 thus far have been
convicted of genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes and 14 have been acquitted at trial or on appeal.
Two indictments were withdrawn prior to trial, three
accused passed away prior to trial, and we have now
referred ten cases to national jurisdictions for trial. We
still have nine fugitives at large, six of whom have had
their cases referred to Rwanda, and three fugitives have
had their cases reserved for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.

The process of justice and accountability has not,
it must be acknowledged, been exclusively the preserve
of the International Court. Rwanda, through both its
conventional courts and its traditional gacaca courts, has
undertaken the prosecution of the bulk of perpetrators
of the genocide and contributed significantly to the
restoration of peace and the reconciliation of the
community. Several other countries, in Europe and
the Americas particularly, have also contributed to
the process by undertaking the local prosecution of
genocide suspects, extraditions or deportations of
suspects or acceptance of cases for trial on referral
from the ICTR. The process of accountability has thus
been a truly global effort. Underpinning it all is the
sacrifice of thousands of victims and survivors who

have come forward and testified before the courts,
reliving their bitter experiences in order to assist the
courts in establishing the truth and rendering justice.
To all those States and to the witnesses, we owe a debt
of gratitude.

As we commemorate the twentieth anniversary of
that tragic event and prepare for the imminent closure
of the ICTR and the complete takeover of its functions
by the Mechanism, we need to recognize that, despite
many achievements, much remains to be done to bring
the process of legal accountability to a proper end.
Member States need to cooperate with and support
the Mechanism and Rwanda to ensure that the nine
remaining fugitives are arrested and transferred to
the appropriate jurisdiction for trial. The many other
persons suspected of involvement in the genocide
who could not be indicted by the Tribunal need to be
extradited to Rwanda for trial or to another appropriate
jurisdiction or prosecuted by the States in which they
reside. Witnesses who require protection need to be
secured against those continuously seek to subvert the
process of justice. Those who have been acquitted or
have finished serving sentences need to be assisted
with resettlement. These are all matters in which only
Member States can assist to provide solutions, and
we look forward to their full cooperation in all these
respects.

Turning to the work of the ICTR during this past
period, I am pleased to report that, with the completion
of the oral arguments on appeal in the Nizeyimana and
Nzabonimana cases, the Tribunal's remaining workload
continues to be reduced and is on track for timely
completion. Earlier in the reporting period, the Appeals
Chamber also completed the hearing of oral arguments
in the Karemera et al and Ngirumpatse appeals, at
which session it also delivered judgements against
three accused in the Ndindiliyimana et al (Military H)
appeal. Prior to that, judgement on the Ndahimana case
was delivered on 16 December 2013.

We are now awaiting a judgement is now awaited
in the case of Augustin Bizimungu, whose appeal was
severed from the other Military 11 accused, as well as in
the Nizeyimana and Nzabonimana cases. Oral argument
in our last appeal - the Butare case, in which there are
six accused - has not yet taken place, but my staff are
actively engaged in preparing for it, litigating a large
number of post-trial motions and preparing for final
submissions in that case.

Alongside the appellate work, which is the only core
work that remains, staff of the Office of the Prosecutor
(OTP) remain actively engaged with the completion of
the remaining critical activities, including the updating
of all records of past disclosures for a smooth transition
to the Mechanism. The archiving of the OTP's records
continues apace, and with the commissioning of the
OTP's archives store, which was mentioned in my most
recent report, more records are positioned for transfer
to the Mechanism's archives. In the past six months, a
further 225 boxes of documents in respect of 5 cases
were handed over to the archives. The processing,
appraisal and security classification of all Office
records continues in order to ensure proper archiving.

The staff also continue to assist the staff of
the Mechanism's Office of the Prosecutor in a
double-hatting capacity whenever required, particularly
in connection with the monitoring of referred cases and
the preparations for oral arguments in the Augustin
Ngirabatware case.

Our residual work, especially around good practices
and experiences and the preparation of manuals,
continues to attract interest from broad quarters and
practitioners, particularly in the efforts to meet the
challenges of transitional justice. Our cooperation
with other United Nations agencies in that respect has
been most useful. Our manual on the investigation
and prosecution of sexual Violence was completed and
launched at an international workshop that I hosted in
Kampala in January 2014 and is now available to all
Member States and other interested parties. A series of
regional training events are being planned on this subject
for later this year as a follow-up to the Kampala meeting.
I am happy to report that UN-Women has played and
continues to play an important role in those activities in
relation to a very difficult and critical subject. Like our
colleagues at the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), we are also collaborating with the
organizers of the global conference in London relating
to the investigation and prosecution of sexual violence
and look forward to participating in that event.

With regard to the activities of the Mechanism, I am
pleased to inform the Council that, with the completion
of the recruitment of the core staff of the Office in both
branches, in Arusha and The Hague, the work of the
two branches and the task of inter-branch coordination
is progressing well.

At the Arusha branch, the creation of a roster of
potential staff for recruitment in the event of the arrest of
a fugitive is in progress. To enhance further cooperation
in the tracking and arrest of the three fugitives, that

is, Fe'licien Kabuga, Protais Mpiranya and Augustin
Bizimana, I have visited, during the reporting period,
several countries in the Southern African Development
Community and Great Lakes region of southern Africa
and held high-level and productive consultations with
Government ministers and senior security officials.

I am pleased to report that the Mechanism has
been assured that it will receive effective cooperation
in pursuance of our requests. Further visits to more
countries in the region are planned before the end of
the year. It is my hope that, with increased cooperation
between Member States and staff on the ground, the
tracking activities and the arrest of the fugitives will
be accelerated and yield some results. Tracking will
continue to be a top priority for the Mechanism, and
so should also be for all Member States. Our Office
continues to receive a steady stream of requests
for assistance, and in the current reporting period,
51 requests from 10 countries were responded to.

Monitors appointed by my Office continue to
monitor the two cases, Uwinkindi and Munyagishari,
that were referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013,
respectively, and Bucyibaruta and Munyeshyaka, which
were referred to France in 2007. The trial of Uwinkindi
has actually commenced as scheduled on 14 May 2014.
Meanwhile, pre-trial proceedings in the Munyagishari
case in Rwanda are ongoing, although no firm trial date
has yet been scheduled. My recent consultations with
French judicial authorities also disclose significant
progress in the management of the two cases in France.
The oral arguments in the Ngirabatware case, the only
appeal pending from the Arusha branch, are tentatively
scheduled for 30 June.

The Hague branch has, in addition to establishing
itselfto its full capacity, been active during the reporting
period. We have established there an advance ad hoc
appeals team to deal with the appeals that we expect to
manage, and the branch works closely with the ICTY
Office of the Prosecutor, making use of double-batting
arrangements to prepare for future appeals and to make
efficient use of resources.

Regarding judicial activities, I am pleased to report
that the briefing of a request for a review of the ICTY
judgement against Milan Lukie has been completed.
The Hague branch has responded to nine applications
for variations of protective measures from national
judicial authorities in relation to more than 30 ICTY
witnesses. It has also provided information to the
Registrar regarding the enforcement of sentences in
relation to five persons convicted by the ICTY.

Cooperation with the national juridical authorities
with respect to that branch is going well. There has,
however, been an unforeseen increase in the number of
requests for assistance received by the Hague branch.
We have had to create a temporary position in order to
assist with managing that backlog. Since my last report
(see S/PV.7073), the Hague branch has responded to
121 requests for assistance, primarily from prosecutors
from the former Yugoslavia. The Hague branch has
been working closely with the liaison prosecutors
from Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia,
who are situated at the ICTY-OTP, and we are in the
process now of negotiating - and hopefully we will
conclude before the next meeting of the Council on
this topic - memorandums of understanding with the
respective State prosecutors in the region to entrench
cooperation and mutual legal assistance and ensure
smooth continuity as the Mechanism takes over mutual
assistance and cooperation responsibilities.

Further, we also had the pleasure of participating
in the annual conference of prosecutors in Brijuni this
year.

I remain confident that the ICTR is on track for
the timely completion and closure of its remaining
workload, with the conclusion of all cases save the
Butare appeal. We therefore consider 2014 a fitting
year to organize, as we plan to do, subject to voluntary
contributions from Member States, two critical
components of the ICTR legacy programme. The
seventh Colloquium of International Prosecutors, which
will seek to identify the challenges and prospects for
the national prosecution of international crimes and the
lessons that the work of the Tribunals can offer in that
regard. The Colloquium will also be complemented by
an international symposium on the contribution of the
ICTR to international justice, peace and reconciliation.
We look forward very much to the support of Member
States to make those events possible.

Finally, allow me to acknowledge, with appreciation,
the Council's resolution 2150 (2014) calling for the
urgent and active support of Member States, especially
in the Great Lakes region, to realistically show
their commitment to the fight against impunity by
supporting the Mechanism in tracking and arresting the
few remaining fugitives slated for trial in Arusha and in
Rwanda. That remains the biggest challenge, not only

for the Tribunal, but also for the cause of international
justice and accountability.
