Mr. Bhuckory (Mauritius): Let me first thank
you, Sir, for organizing this public meeting to discuss
the report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia. I take this opportunity to welcome Mr. Yusuf
Hassan Ibrahim, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, in
our midst and to thank him for his comprehensive
statement made earlier today.

Since our discussion of the situation in Somalia
in this Chamber last October there have been a number
of important developments in respect to Somalia -
first and foremost, the appointment of a new Prime
Minister, Mr. Hassan Abshir Farah, to whom we would
like to convey our best wishes for success. There has
also been a change at the level of the Representative of
the Secretary-General, with Mr. Winston Tubman
replacing Mr. David Stephen. I take this opportunity to
pay tribute to Mr. Stephen for the very important work
he has done over the past four years in supporting the
national reconciliation process in Somalia. We know
that his task was not an easy one. We welcome
Mr. Tubman in his new function as the new
Representative of the Secretary-General and express to
him our full support in his new assignment.

Mauritius has said time and again that the Arta
process remains the only viable framework that could
bring hope to the Somali people and eventually peace
and stability in Somalia. That is why it is so important
to remain focused in our efforts to pursue the Arta
process to its completion.

Last October, when we considered the situation in
Somalia, the Mauritius delegation mentioned that the
two major challenges facing the country and the
Transitional National Government were national
reconciliation on the political front and safeguarding
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and unity of
Somalia. We welcome in this regard the statement of
the Transitional National Government with regard to
making the reconciliation process a top priority
through talks with the factional leaders and regional
administrations. Since last November, there have been
a number of important regional initiatives to move the
reconciliation process forward. We need to encourage
these initiatives as much as we can.

One important initiative was the reconciliation
meeting convened last December by President Moi of
Kenya, during which a number of agreements were
signed between the Transitional National Government
and the faction leaders who were present at the
meeting. Those efforts culminated in the decision of
the Transitional National Government to form an all-
inclusive and broader-based Government. This is a
clear demonstration of the seriousness of the intent of
the Transitional National Government to reach out to
the faction leaders who have so far remained outside
the Arta process. This also shows that there is hope for
a reconciliation process in Somalia - especially when
the countries of the region are determined to help in
reconciliation efforts.

We support the proposal of the Secretary-General
to re-establish the Committee of Friends on Somalia.
We believe that such a group could be extremely useful
in furthering the objectives of the Arta conference -
objectives which the Security Council has reiterated
time and again. It is therefore imperative that members
of this group, to be established in both Nairobi and
New York, share this vision of the Council. They
should be genuinely committed to helping the
Transitional National Government advance the national
reconciliation process. Mauritius is ready to be part of
that group.

We also welcome the regional political initiative
recently undertaken by the lntergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to help the political
process in Somalia. IGAD is, indeed, playing a vital
role in advancing national reconciliation in Somalia.
That was well demonstrated at the 9th lGAD Summit,
which gave due attention to that issue. My delegation
welcomes the Summit's decision to convene the
Somalia reconciliation conference in Nairobi next
month. At this juncture, it is important for the
international community and the Security Council to
send a strong message of support and to assist, by all
means, the convening of the conference.

The report of the Secretary-General paints a bleak
picture of the humanitarian situation in Somalia. The
food security situation in Gedo is precarious. The
international community should therefore step up its
efforts to prevent a humanitarian tragedy from
unfolding in Somalia. We call upon the donor countries
to contribute to the United Nations Consolidated Inter-
Agency Appeal for Somalia.

With regard to the security situation in Somalia,
we have taken note of the findings of the inter-agency
security assessment mission. The report states that
Somalia remains one of the most dangerous
environments in which the United Nations operates,
and that is preventing the Secretary-General from
launching the much-awaited long-term peace-building
programme in Somalia. It is clear that the insecure
environment is the result of the action of the warlords
and their refusal to cooperate with the Transitional
National Government. It is unacceptable that the
United Nations continues to remain hostage to these
warlords, who are committed only to spreading
violence and undermining all efforts at reconciliation.

The intransigence of the warlords is exacerbated
by the proliferation and easy availability of small arms
and light weapons within Somalia. It is therefore
important that those who are engaged in arming the
various militia groups in Somalia be identified, and
that action be taken against them. The arms embargo
imposed on Somalia under Security Council resolution
733 (1992) is obviously being violated. It is
unacceptable that, when the Security Council is
striving to bring peace and stability to Somalia, there
are still some unscrupulous elements that are doing just
the opposite by arming the warlords.

We are grateful to Ambassador Tafrov of Bulgaria
for reactivating the work of the Somalia sanctions
Committee. We believe that there is an urgent need to
reinforce the arms embargo on that country.

As we discuss the situation in Somalia again
today in the Council, we should ask ourselves what
more the United Nations can do to assist that country,
which has suffered from more than a decade of anarchy
and chaos. We now have a process that appears to be
on track, and we have a Transitional National
Government that is showing that it is committed to
bringing peace and order back to the country. In his
statement to the Council last October, former Prime
Minister Galaydh stated,

"in all of our discussions with donors and with
the United Nations we have always said that the
best way to help us is to help establish the police
and security forces". (S/PV4392 (Resumption I),

p. 18)

That is precisely what the United Nations should
do to help the Transitional National Government
maintain security in Mogadishu and elsewhere. We
urge the various United Nations development agencies
to increase their efforts to train and equip the security
forces of the Transitional National Government. The
so-called police forces in Mogadishu are living in
camps and are not earning any salary. Assisting them
would send a strong message to the people of Somalia
that the international community cares about their
plight and to the warlords that it would be in their
interests to put down their weapons and join the peace
process.

Finally, we also fully support projects currently
considered by the United Nations Development
Programme for the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) of the militias. We hope that the
next report of the Secretary-General on the situation in
Somalia will indicate the number of police personnel
who have so far been trained and the number of
militias considered under the DDR programme.

