Mr. ngowe (Botswana): Let me first of all convey
our congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month. We also
wish to express our appreciation to Ambassador Merimee,
Permanent Representative of France, for the exemplary
manner in which he conducted the business of the Council
last month.

Botswana follows the developments in Rwanda with
keen interest. We are encouraged by the determination and
commitment of the Government and people of Rwanda to
the process of reconstruction and rehabilitation of their
country. The provision of water and electricity, the
reopening of primary and secondary schools and the
resumption of economic and agricultural activities, as
outlined in the Secretary-General's report (8/1995/457),
bear testimony to the efforts being made by the
Banyarwanda to build a better future with very limited
resources at their disposal.

There are obviously still many challenges ahead and
hurdles to be overcome. One of them is the need to create
an effective judiciary. We are encouraged that this is being
given urgent attention. We commend the decision of the
Government of Rwanda to submit, in accordance with the
Arusha Peace Agreement, a list of candidates from which
the National Assembly will elect six high-ranking judges.
We believe that this is an important step in rebuilding
Rwanda's judicial system, which is vital to the process of
national healing and reconciliation. The return of the rule
of law would have a positive psychological effect on the
people of Rwanda, and on genuine refugees in the
neighbouring countries, with the knowledge that their civic
liberties and fundamental human rights would be protected
against the rule of men. The speedy rebuilding of the
justice system would also ensure that suspects in the
over-crowded prisons, which have attracted considerable
media attention in the recent past, are tried expeditiously.

My delegation has no reason to doubt the authority of
the Government of Rwanda or that it is capable of
providing security and protection to its own citizens. No
one, as far as we know, has ever questioned the
credentials of the Government in maintaining relative
peace and stability in the country following the defeat of
the perpetrators of genocide.

In the light of what I have said, we believe it is
appropriate that the Security Council should review the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Rwanda (UNAMIR). My delegation therefore supports the
new mandate, with a reduced force level in accordance
with the wishes of the Government of Rwanda. We know
that the Government of Rwanda did not get everything it
had hoped for, but this can be expected in any negotiation
process.

UNAMIR has made a significant contribution to the
creation of a climate of peace, stability and national
reconciliation in Rwanda. It will continue to play an
important role as the embodiment of the readiness of the
international community to cooperate with Rwanda in the
difficult task of rebuilding a war-ravaged country. The
adjustment of the mandate is, in our view, not a reflection
of UNAMIR's failure, but, rather, an admission on our
part that qualitative changes have occurred which require
a quantitative change in UNAMIR personnel to take
account of the changed circumstances on the ground.

National reconciliation is the biggest challenge
facing the Government and the people of Rwanda. There
are 2 million Rwandan refugees in Burundi, Tanzania and
Zaire. We believe that it will not be possible to create
durable peace when such a large number of people remain
in refugee camps outside the country. While the
responsibility for creating a climate conducive to the
voluntary return of the refugees lies with the Government
of Rwanda, we believe that the international community
has a moral obligation to help, materially or otherwise, in
this process. The resettlement and reintegration of the
returnees will require substantial resources, which cannot
be provided by the Government of Rwanda alone. We
believe such resources would be less than what is
currently being spent on refugees in camps, who are
unable to engage in any meaningful productive activity.

The supplies of arms and the military training in
refugee camps in neighbouring countries and the
cross-border incursions into the territory of Rwanda by
elements of the former Government are a matter of
serious concern to my delegation. They are a threat to the
atmosphere of relative peace and stability that currently
prevails in the country. They are also a threat to efforts

 

which are being made for the voluntary and safe return of
the refugees. They poison the atmosphere of mutual
confidence and trust that is being engendered, and they
place serious obstacles on the road to rehabilitation and
reconstruction in the country. Moreover, they create
tensions along the borders of Rwanda, and therefore pose
a threat to regional peace and security. It is our hope that
every effort will be made to ensure that the perpetrators of
genocide do not return to Rwanda through the barrel of a
gun.

