Mr. Matuszewski (Poland): On many previous
occasions, my delegation has expressed its deep concern
about the situation in Liberia, about eruptions of violence
directed against innocent civilian populations and about
the Liberian leaders being unable to peacefully resolve
their conflict. Serious questions concerning future
involvement of the international community in Liberia
have frequently come to mind. These concerns have not
disappeared yet.

Nevertheless, the Polish delegation is going to vote
in favour of the draft resolution extending the mandate of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia
(UNOMIL) by three months, until the end of November
1996. By doing so we would like to confirm our
confidence in and support for the leaders of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
decisions they took at Abuja two weeks ago.

We also take note of the declared readiness of the
heads of the Liberian armed factions to abide by the

 

agreements they all signed and to allow the country to
resolve its problems by political means rather than by
resorting to violence, often in its cruellest form. It is our
hope that this time the warlords in Liberia will not follow
the well-known pattern of breaking their word.

The task of rebuilding the structure of the State, of
repairing its social fabric and of restoring the peoples'
confidence and morale is truly enormous. Nobody but the
Liberians themselves is responsible for their future and for
achieving peace, security and stability in their country.

Liberia is in need of international assistance. We
expect the people of that country, and especially their
leaders, to create and maintain an assistance-friendly
environment. We ask them in particular to respect the status
of the personnel of the Economic Community of West
African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), UNOMIL
and international organizations and agencies to facilitate the
freedom of movement of peace-keepers and ensure an
uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian goods.

And last but not least, the Liberian leaders and their
followers must live up to their obligations resulting from
the Agreement at Abuja, including the timetable for
implementation of this Agreement.

Let me conclude by expressing my appreciation of the
initiative of the Permanent Representative of Italy to
include in the draft resolution a clause condemning the
practice of making children fight and kill. As a
representative of one of the countries at whose initiative the
General Assembly adopted the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child, I feel it my duty to restate my
full support for efforts aimed at the immediate cease of this
inhuman practice.

