Mr. Wolff (United States of America): It is a
pleasure to have you here with us, Mr. Minister,
presiding over this meeting. We thank you for
convening it; this is a very important subject, as we
have already heard.

First of all, I would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General and the Office of Under-Secretary-
General Coomaraswamy for their diligence in
implementing their mandates under resolution 1612
(2005). I would also like to thank Ambassador Ripert
and his team for tirelessly and diligently guiding the
Council's Working Group on this subject.

Our subject today was first comprehensively
presented to the international community in 1996, in
Ms. Graca Machel's report on children affected by
armed conflict (A/51/306). The strong and committed
response to her report resulted in the creation of the
Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for Children and Armed Conflict and in the
evolution of an important series of Security Council
resolutions that established a process to assist the
United Nations and its Member States in addressing
this very serious matter.

The process has at its core the development of
action plans by States and non-State actors, identified
by the Secretary-General in his annual reports, to halt
the recruitment and use of child soldiers in violation of
the international obligations applicable to them. These
action plans have proved to be a positive way to guide
and measure progress, and we believe it would be
useful for all parties listed in annex II of the Secretary-
General's report (S/2007/757) to be similarly required
to submit such action plans.

The Security Council Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict, established pursuant to resolution
1612 (2005), reflects the Council's ongoing
commitment to address the tragedy of children and
armed conflict. So far, the Working Group has engaged
on situations as diverse as Burma, Burundi, Sri Lanka
and Sudan. Its efforts are being tried and tested to
bring positive changes in the lives of children affected
by armed conflict. As its work evolves, the Working
Group may need to use additional tools, including
targeted and graduated measures, against persistent
violators to persuade them to comply with applicable
international law.

We are pleased that the Working Group has been
able to see progress in Cote d'Ivoire, where parties
previously associated with the unlawful recruitment
and use of child soldiers have ended those practices
and have been removed from the list of violators
contained in the Secretary-General's report.

However, our work has just begun. The recent
press statement issued by Under-Secretary-General
Coomaraswamy informs us of an alarming statistic:
over a quarter of a million child soldiers remain
engaged in conflicts around the globe. One such child
is too many.

We remain deeply concerned by the situation of
children and armed conflict in Burma, one of the worst
in the world. The Burmese army continues to recruit
child soldiers, some as young as 10 years old, and to
arrest children for desertion. Some children are sent
into combat only days after deployment to units, or are
forced to participate in human rights abuses, such as
the burning of villages and using civilians for forced
labour. The Burmese regime prevents a comprehensive
assessment of the magnitude of this problem by
denying the necessary access for international experts.
My delegation urges immediate and unimpeded access
to communities in Burma for the United Nations
country team as well as for international humanitarian
organizations in order to permit progress in ending this
tragedy.

My delegation is encouraged by the reported
slight improvement in the overall situation concerning
children in armed conflict in Southern Sudan. We urge
full cooperation from the Government of National
Unity and the Government of Southern Sudan to follow
through on the commitments made and to put an end to
all violations against and recruitment of children,
including their recruitment and use in armed conflict in
violation of applicable international law.

However, we remain deeply concerned about
ongoing recruitment and use of child soldiers by
Government forces and various armed groups
throughout Sudan, particularly in the Darfur region and
in the camps for internally displaced persons on both
sides of the Sudan-Chad border. We also deplore the
continued use of rape as a weapon of war in Darfur,
with an increasing targeting of young girls. My
delegation urges the commitment of all parties to put
an end to these violations and to grant United Nations
entities unimpeded access for monitoring and
verification purposes.

In Chad, as the Secretary-General's report
describes, the forced recruitment and use in armed
conflict of children is all too widespread and is
practiced by all parties to the conflict, with thousands
of children continuing to be held by armed forces and
groups. My delegation urges all parties to permit
access by the United Nations monitors and others
attempting to ascertain the extent of the problem, and
welcomes the news that the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
currently working to increase its child protection staff
in Chad.

The United States would also like to take this
opportunity to focus on the important, but sometimes
forgotten processes that occur after a child has been
demobilized. Often, the reintegration of children into
their communities is not as thorough as we would
prefer. Recidivism or the inability of a child to function
properly within his family or community units is an
issue of great concern to all of us from a human
standpoint, and certainly to my Government as a major
donor to such programmes. The United States applauds

08-2361]
the hard work of UNICEF, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and their partners. We
encourage all Member States to allow full access and
cooperation in order to accomplish the goals of
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration.

My Government fully supports the effort by the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative and the
Security Council to end the unlawful recruitment and
use of child soldiers. However, we must note two areas
of disagreement with the Secretary-General's report.

First, with respect to the recommendation in
paragraph 166, we do not agree that the Security
Council should have a general policy or practice of
referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
Different States have different views about the best
mechanism for combating crimes against children. We
think it important to bear in mind that not all United
Nations Member States are parties to the Rome Statute,
and those who are not need to be taken into account.

Secondly, as to the Secretary-General's
suggestion in paragraph 171 that Member States should
address immediately the subject of cluster munitions,
my delegation would also ask that the Working Group
focus on the substantial issues already and clearly
within its mandate. Discussion of cluster munitions, for
example, is better left to weapons experts operating
through the United Nations Convention on Prohibitions
or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional
Weapons.

The recruitment or use of children in armed
conflict in violation of applicable international law and
other abuses, such as the killing and maiming of
children, rape and other sexual violence, abductions,
denial of humanitarian access to children and attacks
against schools and hospitals, are unacceptable acts. It
is our duty as members of the Security Council to do as
much as we can to eliminate the tragedy of children
affected by armed conflict, and we listened carefully to
suggestions shared by previous speakers on how the
Council can best do so.

My Government remains committed to using the
tools available, including regular assessments and
reporting, public condemnation, the deployment of
child protection advisers in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and political missions as
appropriate and targeted and gradual measures against
violators, to end this tragedy.

