Mr. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council during this busy
month. We are confident that you are up to this task
and will lead the work of the Council towards useful
results.

Allow me at the outset to extend, on behalf of the
Government of the State of Qatar, condolences to the
victims of the attack on the United Nations compound
in Mogadishu today, while expressing the solidarity of
the Government of the State of Qatar with the Federal
Government of Somalia and stressing the importance
of ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel and
missions.

When the Council held the previous meeting
on the issue of natural resources and conflict in
2007 (see S/PV.5705), the State of Qatar - which
was then a member of the Council - joined the
consensus on holding an open debate on this topic
and on the presidential statement adopted at that
time (S/PRST/2007/22). However, at that meeting we
affirmed a number of principles that we would like to
reaffirm today.

International conventions emphasize the right of
States to permanent sovereignty over and exploitation
of their natural resources, and that one of the pillars
of the economic and political independence of any
State is the full enjoyment of the right to exercise full
sovereignty over its natural wealth and resources and to
dispose of them according to its national interests. This
is consistent with the Charter of the United Nations
and is provided for in the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights of 1966; the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights of
1966; varfious General Assembly resolutions, including
resolution 1803 (XVII), of 14 December 1962, entitled
"Permanent sovereignty over natural resources";
and in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States annexed to General Assembly resolution 3281
(XXIX), of 12 December 1974. We also underline
that international law obliges occupying Powers not
to exploit or harm the natural resources in occupied
territories.

Ambiguity about the link between natural resources
and conflicts must be clarified. The presence of natural
resources such as extractive materials is not per se a
source or cause of, or an environment conducive to, the
outbreak of conflict, threats to international peace and
security, or the spread of corruption and human rights
violations. It is true that various studies and reports on
the causes of conflict in Africa and elsewhere describe
a wide range of causes of conflict, where mentions of
natural resources often recur. But that does not mean
that natural resources are the cause. On the contrary,
there are various reasons for corruption and conflicts
that feed on natural resources: from social and political
injustice to the accumulated results of the colonialism
era, to the illegal exploitation of natural resources of the
countries under occupation, to foreign ambitions and
regional variables, to the lack of exploitation of natural
resources for development, as well as other factors that
must be recognized and addressed.

We agree that addressing the root causes of conflict
is important and that the good management of natural
resources is important too. It is clear from our concrete
experience that natural resources can be a boon to the
countries that enjoy them ifthey are harnessed the right
way to drive economic growth, progress, development
and job creation, to develop indicators of social,
cultural and human development and human rights, to
support good governance, reinforce the rule of law and
the fight against corruption, to strengthen political and
economic stability, and to improve the livelihoods and
well-being of citizens.

Because of the importance of the issue of
non-renewable natural resources, we feel that a debate on
it should be undertaken in the appropriate international
forums, such as the General Assembly, the Economic
and Social Council and the Peacebuilding Commission,
as part of the development and peacebuilding agenda
of the United Nations, in order to assist countries,
particularly those affected by conflict, in the
establishment of effective and transparent institutions
and the optimal management of their natural resources
for their benefit. Here we would note that any assistance
provided in that regard must be at the request of the
legitimate concerned Government.
In our view, the way the Security Council should
address this issue must naturally be in accordance
with its mandate and authority, that is, within the
context of its country-specific work and on a case-by-
case basis in countries experiencing armed conflict
and in post-conflict situations that pose a threat to
international peace and security. The Security Council
is undoubtedly taking important measures to prevent
the escalation of conflicts linked to natural resources,
such as through the sanctions imposed in many cases
on the illegal exploitation of some of those resources to
fund conflicts. Those measures should continue to be
studied so as to increase their effectiveness and impact
and to avoid any shortcomings.

