Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the outset, I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Mr. Andrew Gilmour for their briefings.

I will divide my statement into two parts: first, on
the general situation in the Sudan, and secondly, the
impact of that situation on Darfur and on the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID).

We are shocked by the recent developments in the
Sudan. Since 3 June, the international community has
witnessed deliberate attacks against civilians carrying
out peaceful protests. Belgium strongly condemns that
violence, which led to the deaths of more than 100
people and caused a great number of injured, not to
mention cases of sexual violence.

The Transitional Military Council is responsible
for the protection of civilians and the security of all
Sudanese. The members of that Council must uphold
the individual rights of the Sudanese people, including
the right to freedom of assembly and expression, and
release political detainees.

That unacceptable violence threatens the entire
political process for a civil transition. Belgium welcomes
the strong decision that the African Union made on
6 June and calls on all members of this Council to
respect the African Union's ownership of the response
to that crisis. Like the African Union, Belgium calls
for the immediate resumption of negotiations, without
preconditions, among all Sudanese stakeholders
with a view to establishing a transitional authority
under civilian direction, in strict compliance with the
decisions of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union. We also support the Council's request
for an investigation into the deadly events of 3 June.
We support the efforts of the Secretary-General's
Envoy, the African Union Special Envoy and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development to help
resolve the current crisis.

In short, a peaceful and orderly transition with
the objective of transferring political power to a
civil, democratic and representative power is the only
sustainable way out of the current crisis and pattern of
violence before it becomes uncontrollable.

The situation in Darfur cannot be isolated from
the situation of the rest of the Sudan. There is ample
evidence ofthat. First, the political process has been at a
standstill since last January. Secondly, ongoing human
rights violations are being committed by the Rapid
Support Forces in Darfur, including sexual violence.
Thirdly, it is difficult for the courts to operate in the
absence of clarity in Khartoum. Lastly, a cumbersome
system of approvals and authorizations hinders the
delivery of humanitarian aid.

We are especially concerned by the Transitional
Military Council's decree indicating that all UNAMID
bases should be handed over only to the Rapid Support

Forces - the same Forces responsible for the violence
in Khartoum and which, according to some reports,
have set fire to some 62 villages in Jebel Marra since
October 2018. How can we even imagine handing
over UNAMID sites to the same people who created
the situation for which UNAMID was deployed in
2007? It is crucial for those sites to be handed over
only to civilian end-users, as required by the June 13
communique of the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union.

Darfur remains a fragile region, where the root
causes of the conflict, including access to land and the
future of the displaced, have not been fully addressed.
The Security Council will need to continue to monitor
the situation closely and assess how the situation in
the rest of the country is affecting the UNAMID exit
process, particularly in the light of the mandate review
scheduled for this month. The current situation requires
us to be cautious about the timing of UNAMID's
withdrawal, taking into account the situation on the
ground. Exit benchmarks should be streamlined and
clarified to guide the withdrawal.

Belgium calls on all the members of the Security
Council to set aside their differences and reach a
consensual vision and strategy for Darfur. The Council
must take its time to consider all the options. That is why
we must envisage a technical renewal of the mandate
for several months so that we can better understand
the implications of the developments on the ground
and give the region some time to get closer towards a
solution. The last thing that we want is for Darfur to
slide back into conflict after UNAMID exits.

