Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I should
like at the outset to thank Secretary-General Antonio
Guterres for his briefing. China appreciates the positive
efforts made by the United Nations and the Secretary-
General to alleviate the humanitarian situation in the
Syrian regions affected. China sympathizes with the
suffering of the Syrian people and has consistently been
working hard to help them. Last month we channelled
assistance through the International Committee of the
Red Cross, sending water, food, medical services and
shelter to internally displaced persons in Syria.

We are extremely concerned at the fact that the
people of Syria are suffering from the conflict. No act
of violence against innocent civilians can be tolerated.
This situation must end.

On 24 February, the members of the Security
Council, leaving aside their differences, unanimously
adopted resolution 2401 (2018). This upheld the unity
of the Council and provided a rare opportunity for a
ceasefire, halting the violence and easing the suffering
of the Syrian people. After the resolution was adopted,
we saw that United Nations humanitarian relief convoys
had overcome difficulties of all kinds and entered
eastern Ghouta, delivering much-needed assistance to
the people there.

With Russia announcing the implementation of
the temporary ceasefire, a humanitarian corridor
was opened for the Syrian people. We saw that some
civilians, including children, had already entered the
safe area through the humanitarian corridor and received
relief and assistance. It has also come to our attention
that the parties to the conflict continue to attack each
other and that owing to the shelling the humanitarian
corridor has not been able to serve its full purpose. We
urge all parties concerned to make joint efforts, exert
their influence and ensure that resolution 2401 (2018)
is effectively and earnestly implemented. All members
of the Security Council should maintain their unity and
jointly stay on track to find a political solution to the
Syrian issue, support the early resumption of the Geneva
peace talks and urge all parties in Syria to achieve a
solution acceptable to all as soon as possible, through a
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, in order
to ease the suffering of the Syrian people. China will
continue to make unremitting efforts to that end.

