Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Mr. President, let me
begin by expressing my delegation's appreciation to
you and the members of the Council for convening this
open debate on such an important issue. We also wish

to thank Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-
Taranco for his briefing. My delegation associates
itself with the statement delivered earlier by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement, and with the statement to be delivered later
by the representative of Syria on behalf of the
Organization of the Islamic Conference.

It has now been one year since the Israeli military
incursion into the Gaza Strip. My delegation reiterates
its endorsement of the report of the United Nations
Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (A/HRC/ 12/48). In this regard, Indonesia looks forward to the
follow-up to the adoption on 5 November 2009 of
General Assembly resolution 64/10. There is no doubt
that Israel's excessive and disproportionate use of force
and its policy of collective punishment are crimes
against everything we stand for: the values of humanity
and respect for the sanctity of the Charter. They are
clear violations of international law and international
humanitarian law. These are such sad and depressing
circumstances when we, communities of democracies,
communities of nations, are forced to act as bystanders.
The list of the suffering of the Palestinian people
caused by Israeli action is long and continues to grow
by the day, the week and the year.

The irony of this issue is that the Council has
abundant patience in taking its time to solve this very
important question. Yet, when it comes to some other
issues, it lacks patience and endurance. It acts
decisively and with vigour, and we highly commend
such "impatient" acts of the Council. We certainly wish
that this impatience could be imposed on the Palestine
issue.

While recognizing the multifaceted nature of the
Middle East conflict, let me highlight two issues.

First, the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip
has continued to deteriorate since the end of the Israeli
military incursion. The situation is pathetic because it
is man-made. For years, Palestinians have deliberately
been denied the true recovery and economic growth to
fulfil their potential. The humanitarian suffering caused
by the illegal blockade and the closure of the Gaza
crossings by the Israeli authorities are well chronicled
and are unacceptable. Indonesia therefore joins other
countries and the Secretary-General in calling on Israel
to end its policy of mayhem and to fully respect
international law.
Secondly, Israel's settlement policies and
practices, which are aimed at altering the demographic
composition, physical character and status of the
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, are
nothing but a blatant violation of international law. As
the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories
continues and as Israeli settlers keep encroaching further
into the territories, Palestinians watch with horror as
their land claims disintegrate before their eyes, thus
making a viable Palestinian State very difficult.

Israel must stop all settlement construction,
expansion and planning in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, and dismantle the
settlements built therein, in compliance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. The settlement
issue is the greatest obstacle to the peace process.

The conflict in the Middle East has indeed
continued for far too long. The illegal Israeli
occupation since 1967 has made the region a theatre of
tension and violence. For many years, Indonesia has
joined the international community in drawing attention
to the consequences of Israel's continued illegal activity
in the occupied Arab territories. We thus support the
current surge in diplomacy, aimed at relaunching
negotiations and jump-starting a comprehensive peace
process, including the ongoing efforts of the United
States.

We also recognize the role of the Quartet in
promoting solutions to the conflict in the Middle East.
Not least, we have consistently recognized the
contribution of countries in the region and of the
League of Arab States to Middle East peace efforts,
including through the Arab Peace Initiative.

Unfortunately, the Security Council's own record
on the issue has been less than sterling. The Security
Council must, and indeed can, exert a positive
influence on the Middle East peace process.

A truly comprehensive and lasting peace in the
Middle East also requires a solution on the Israel-
Lebanon and Israel-Syria tracks. My delegation
therefore wishes to once again express its deep concern
about Israel's ongoing land and air violations of
Lebanon's sovereignty, in violation of resolution 1701
(2006). We call on Israel to withdraw fully from the
remaining Lebanese occupied land. We wish to make a
similar call for Israel's withdrawal from the occupied
Syrian Golan, in implementation of resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973).
Finally, we wish to reaffirm our full support for a
two-State solution that envisions the creation of an
independent, democratic and viable Palestinian State
living side by side in peace and security with its
neighbours. We fervently hope that 2010 will be the
year when the international community fulfils its
obligation to the Palestinian people and a year of
remarkable progress and transformation in the history
of the Middle East.

