Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I wish
to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman for his
briefing. I also listened attentively to the statements
made by the observer of Palestine and the representative
of Israel.

The Palestinian issue lies at the core of the Middle
East question. The only way out lies in resolving the
dispute through dialogue and negotiation. China has
always maintained that on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road map for
peace, as well as through peace talks between Palestine
and Israel, an independent State of Palestine must be
established with complete sovereignty based on the pre-
1967 border, with East Jerusalem as its capital, whereby
the two States, Palestine and Israel, can live side by side
in peace and security.

At present, the resumption of direct talks between
Palestine and Israel represents a rare opportunity for
the Middle East peace process. It is our hope that
Palestine and Israel will seize that opportunity, seek
common ground, avoid any action or polemics that
might undermine the prospect of peace talks, and try
to achieve substantive progress as soon as possible.
The immediate priority is to take effective measures to
halt all settlement activities and to stop acts of violence
targeting innocent civilians in an effort to preserve the
climate for peace talks. The international community
needs to scale up its support for Palestine in order to
facilitate its economic development and to enhance
the confidence of the Palestinian people in the peace
process.

At present, the humanitarian situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Gaza,
remains grave. The relevant United Nations resolutions
need to be effectively implemented, and it is our hope
that Israel will fully lift the Gaza blockade so as to
alleviate the humanitarian difficulties in Gaza.

We welcomed the ministerial meeting of the Quartet
in September on the margins of the General Assembly.
China supports the Security Council's strengthened
role in facilitating the international community's
unanimous support of the peace process in the Middle
East.

China firmly supports the Palestinian people in
their just cause to restore their legitimate sovereignty
and has continued its unique, active support of the
peace process. China stands ready to continue to work
with the international community in contributing
positively towards a comprehensive and just settlement
of the Palestinian issue and the achievement of lasting
peace in the Middle East.

A political solution is the only way out of the
Syrian conflict and such a solution must be promoted in
parallel with the elimination of chemical weapons. At
present, inspection and elimination of Syria's chemical
arsenal is progressing positively and appropriately.
China welcomes the Secretary-General's appointment
of Ms. Sigrid Kaag as Special Coordinator of the
Joint Mission of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons and the United Nations and
notes that Ms. Kaag is already working in Syria. It
is China's hope that the Joint Mission will strengthen
communications with the interested parties, including
the Syrian Government, to ensure continued progress
in the inspection and elimination of chemical weapons
according to schedule. China considers highly
important the elimination of chemical weapons in Syria
and is ready to take part in relevant efforts by providing
expertise and financial assistance.

The Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2118 (2013) explicitly calling for
implementation of the Geneva Communique
(S/20l2/523, annex) and the convening of the
proposed "Geneva II" conference aimed at providing
an opportunity for a political solution of the Syrian
conflict. The international community must seize the
opportunity with a view to forging a consensus in
order to vigorously advance the political process and
facilitate an early convening of Geneva II aimed at a
positive outcome. China calls on the Syrian parties
to achieve, for the greater good of their country and
people, a ceasefire and an end to the violence, without
delay, as well as an end to the crisis through dialogue
and the rebuilding oftheir homeland as soon as possible.

China supports the good offices of Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and Joint Special Representative
Brahimi and stands ready to participate in Geneva II
and work with the parties to seek a comprehensive, just
and appropriate solution to the question of Syria.

