At the outset, I would like to extend my congratulations to Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, on her presidency of the Security Council during the month of November. I also extend my sincere thanks to Mr. Vassily Nebenzia, Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, for his management of the Council's meetings last month. I also extend my gratitude to Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, Special Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAM]), for her briefing. Since the previous meeting on the situation in Iraq in August (see S/2020/845), there have been no significant changes in terms of the huge and complex challenges that Iraq is facing. Those challenges are interconnected in nature across various fields, including economic, security, health and social - however, our willingness to deal with them is greater. The Government is expeditiously working at the maximum level, as promised, to meet the people's expectations and demands by preserving peace and security, providing services, countering the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, fighting terrorism and achieving political and economic reforms. The economic situation remains a concern for the Iraqi Government, due to drops and fluctuations in oil prices on the one hand and large expenditures borne by Iraq in the fight against terrorism on the other. In that regard, as part of its efforts to face the economic and fiscal crisis, the Government has submitted a draft bill on economic reform to the House of Representatives, which will reduce dependence on oil revenues and enhance investment. The situation related to the COVID-19 pandemic is critical and could lead to the collapse of the health system. Despite all the measures taken by the competent authorities, the number of people infected with the disease is continently high, reaching rates of 3,000 to 4,000 per day. In that connection, Iraq expresses its sincere gratitude to the World Health Organization and friendly States for their generous health aid to support Iraq in countering the pandemic. One of the important commitments that the Government has made is to meet demonstrators' demands. Measures have been taken to fill in the trust gap with the people, especially the youth, by making their voices heard and honouring the constitutional rights of peaceful protests and freedom of expression of the people. The Government promised to protect the demonstrators from any violations of human rights. In that regard, the competent authorities made great efforts to prevent violent groups from targeting the demonstrators and to minimize the number of incidents to the lowest level possible. Furthermore, the Government registers the families of the victims to receive the benefits stipulated by the martyr's law, which provides financial compensation and all the necessary medical treatment to wounded demonstrators. Countering corruption is at the core of the reform process. In that regard, the Government has shown great keenness to restore full control over border checkpoints so as to prevent and deter any illegal actions. Meanwhile, vigorous legal attempts have been made to counter corruption and hold those who are involved in corruption accountable. I am delighted to highlight one of the most important accomplishments, that is, the adoption of the new electoral law, which should pave the way for the electoral process to hold an early election on 6 June 2021, as declared by the Prime Minister of Iraq, Mr. Mustafa Al-Kadhimi. The adoption of the new law is the result of tireless efficient consultation between the Government and the legislative authority. It is unquestionable that the Government came about in response to a political crisis, but it aspires to be a Government that accommodates solutions to urgent problems. In that regard, certain steps should be met in advance. First, the sovereignty of the State must be preserved and honoured. Secondly, it is vital to strengthen the rule of law and regain the State's control over all armed forces. Thirdly, foreign Powers must be prevented from turning our country into a base for their political and strategic agendas. Iraq's sovereignty and independence are crucial to the stability and security of the region. Iraq strives to maintain strong relations with countries, especially its neighbouring countries, in accordance with the principles of common interests and non-interference in internal affairs. The Government pledges to enforce the State's authority by controlling the possession of arms, restricting them to Government and military institutions and enforcing the rule of law. To that end, the Government is engaged in a process of achieving security reform that promotes performance in the field, respects human rights and ensures professionalism, as well as countering the militarization of society by preventing any form of non-State intervention. The Government also seeks to prevent outlaw groups from targeting demonstrators and civilians in general and to counter any prohibited illegal acts, such as attacks targeting the diplomatic missions accredited in Iraq. In that regard, the security institutions arrested a number of suspects and is holding them accountable to fair legal procedures. The Government has therefore managed to take control of the situation since mid-October. The Government is working tirelessly to create a proper environment for dialogue with the local Government of the Kurdistan region of Iraq regarding the upcoming fiscal budget, the control of border crossing points and the management of the region's oil resources. The central Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government reached two important agreements. The first was a revenue-sharing agreement, with monthly transfers from Baghdad to Erbil to cover civil servants' salaries in exchange for access to customs revenues from borders under the control of the Kurdistan Regional Government. The agreement covers salary payments for August, September and October. The second agreement, reached on the status of northern Iraq's Sinjar district in Ninawa, paves the way for reconstruction in the northern part of the country. The deal ends the authority of intruding groups and paves the way for the reconstruction of the city and the full return of its people in coordination with the Kurdistan Regional Government. The deal is the outcome of months of serious work and discussions between the Kurdistan Regional Government and the federal Government. Both sides agreed that Sinjar would be jointly governed in terms of administration, security and services. The agreement is an unprecedented practice for the implementation of article 140 of the Constitution. Fighting and countering terrorism are at the core of my country's security strategy. My Government believes that terrorism still poses an imminent threat and represents an obstacle to the reconstruction of liberated cities, the return of displaced citizens and access to humanitarian assistance. For instance, on 8 November Baghdad witnessed a terrorist attack on a military post, which led to the death of five civilians and six military personnel. In that regard, Iraq reiterates its commitment to continuing its cooperation with the international community on countering terrorism and facilitating the access of humanitarian assistance. Iraq also welcomes all efforts undertaken to date to repatriate the family members of foreign terrorist fighters and urges other countries to receive their non-convicted citizens. There remains an urgent need for concerted efforts to rehabilitate and reintegrate victims of terrorism, especially in the liberated areas. We acknowledge the efforts of the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism through the programme of repatriation from Iraq and Syria. Iraq affirms its strong commitment to establishing friendly relations and cooperation with its neighbours and the international community. At the same time, my country expects the same spirit of cooperation and mutual respect from others. Unfortunately, Turkey irresponsibly insists on conducting military operations on Iraq's territory without prior consultation with the Government of Iraq. The operations have led to casualties among civilians and military personnel, including recently the death of five civilians and one person wounded. The Iraqi Government stresses that the Turkish violations of its territory are seen as irresponsible measures that do not take into account the promotion and development of a peaceful situation in international relations and are in breach of the Charter of the United Nations and in disregard for good-neighbourly relations. Furthermore, the Turkish Government has not taken any steps to inform or brief the Security Council on its unilateral measures over Iraqi territory. At this point, the Iraqi Government affirms its right to confront any attack that threatens the security of Iraq. In this perilous security situation, my country filed a complaint with the Security Council, documenting and requesting urgent steps to prevent future violations. Concerning the relations with Kuwait, cooperation is the major focus of those relations, as Iraq respects its obligations, including searching for the remains of missing Kuwaitis and continuing to cover compensation instalments on time. As a sign of commitment, Iraq handed over two lots of human remains - those of 21 missing persons on 16 September and of 48 missing persons on 8 August 2019. Meanwhile, Iraq calls on the Tripartite Commission and the State of Kuwait to accelerate the process of announcing the results of DNA tests of the remains. The ongoing and painstaking search efforts to find a new set of Kuwaiti archives that were supposed to be delivered by the Iraqi Ministry of Foreign Affairs in April continue but, due to the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic, the delivery has been postponed. Concerning compensation, a payment of $230 million was made on 28 October. The current situation has put Iraq in an extremely difficult position that no Government could survive alone without international cooperation and solidarity. Accordingly, we aspire to secure the Security Council's support in helping the new Government to achieve its priorities in the following ways. First is by condemning violations of the sovereignty of the Republic of Iraq by any Member State and preventing such acts in the future. Secondly, one of the most important messages that the Iraqi Government is trying to deliver to all is that Iraq will not be a staging ground for conflict or a base point for any other country's strategy towards any of the neighbouring countries, as Iraq aims to be an active player on the path of building peace, achieving stability and improving security opportunities. Thirdly is by assisting the Government in addressing the main challenges, especially with regard to COVID-19 and the economic and financial crises. Fourthly is by continuing to actively cooperate with Iraq in the war against terrorism, in which Iraq remains on the front line. Fifthly is by continuing international humanitarian support to Iraq for the reconstruction of the areas liberated from the Islamic State of Iraq and the Sham and by facilitating the return of internally displaced people to their areas. Sixthly is by continuing the vital role of the United Nations in the preparation of the upcoming early election by providing technical and logistical support to ensure integrity and credibility. Iraq commends the support provided by the international community and reiterates that helping Iraq to preserve its national sovereignty will be a cornerstone for the success of the Government. The Iraqi Government has been mindful of strengthening its relationships with the neighbouring countries in the region by building bridges of cooperation with them all. Furthermore, the Iraqi Government has engaged in a cooperative and strategic dialogue with many countries since August. As a result, many official visits from and to Iraq took place recently. For instance, a high-level delegation, led by the Prime Minister, visited the United States of America for the second session of a strategic dialogue, as well as Germany, France and the United Kingdom. The visits sought to strengthen dialogue with allies, including discussions of future cooperation in various fields, such as economic, security, cultural and health. Iraq's policy of regional engagement also included the participation of the Prime Minister in the Iraq-Jordan-Egypt tripartite summit, hosted in Amman on 25 August, for the inspiration of a better and prosperous future of the region. Another sign of Iraq's positive regional engagement is the recent virtual meeting between the Prime Minister of Iraq and the Saudi Crown Prince on 10 November to review the outcome of the fourth session of the Iraqi-Saudi coordination council, which includes eight committees and took place on 8 November to discuss the prospects of bilateral relations and to foster the implementation of bilateral agreements and memorandums of understanding. Both sides agreed to develop a plan to accelerate the opening of the Iraqi-Saudi Arar border crossing and to enhance cooperation in several fields, most importantly energy and counter-terrorism. I extend my appreciation to the Secretary-General for his supportive stances towards Iraq, and we hope that the international community will continue to help its people to achieve a stable and prosperous Iraq. I especially thank the Head of UNAMI and her team in Baghdad and New York for their tireless efforts.
