Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): The peace
process in Angola is at a critical stage. The deteriorating
political and security situation in Angola calls for creative
and constructive measures to bring about lasting peace. The
United States welcomed the Secretary-General's decision to
send a Special Envoy to Angola, and we are encouraged by
the Special Envoy Brahimi's success in getting the Angolan
parties to resume their dialogue and in the tentative forward
movement in the peace process during and after his visit.
We urge the parties to cooperate fully with the Secretary-
General's new Special Representative to Angola, Mr. Diallo,
to build on this momentum.

Today, the United States will vote in favour of the
draft resolution to extend the mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) until 15 September.
We look forward to an in-depth review of the future United
Nations presence in Angola when the Secretary-General
presents his recommendations to the Council at the end of
the month.

While the international community continues to
demonstrate its commitment to assist the Angolan peace
process, the responsibility for peace rests with Angolans
themselves. We urge the Government of Angola and
UNITA to respect fully and unconditionally the obligations
they undertook when they signed the Lusaka Protocol.
UNITA must demilitarize completely and cooperate in the
immediate and unconditional extension of State
administration throughout the national territory. The
Government of Angola must respect and protect the rights
of all Angolan citizens, as well as UNITA's legitimate role
as a political party.

Indiscriminate violence, propaganda, forced
conscription and the laying of new mines all undermine the
peace process and spur even more violence. These
activities must stop. The United States condemns in the
strongest terms the perpetrators of the July massacre in
Lunda Norte province. We are deeply concerned at recent
reports of a similar loss of life in the province of
Malange.

MONUA must be permitted full and immediate
access so that it can undertake its mandated verification
activities. We also call upon the Government of Angola
and UNITA to guarantee unconditionally the safety and
freedom of movement of all United Nations and
international personnel so that they can safely continue
their vital work.

