Ms. Sison (United States of America): I thank the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East, Mr. Mladenov,
for briefing the Council today, and him and his Office
for their tireless efforts to keep the Council informed
while working with all sides.

Let me begin by reiterating in the strongest
possible terms the United States condemnation of the
horrific vehicular attack on 8 January by a terrorist in
Jerusalem. We extend our deepest condolences to the
families of the four Israeli soldiers who were killed,
including United States citizen Erez Orbach, and we
hope for a full and fast recovery of those injured. The
United States and the Security Council both issued
statements condemning the attack. There is absolutely
no justification for such brutal and senseless attacks.
Moreover, we cannot allow attacks like these to deter
achieving lasting and durable peace in the Middle East.
Resolution 2334 (2016) very clearly addresses the need
to prevent acts of terror and to condemn them, observe
calm, exercise restraint and refrain from incitement and
inflammatory rhetoric.

As we all know, the viability of a two-State solution

is increasingly at risk. We have called for both sides to
take significant steps on the ground to reverse current
negative trends, and to send a clear message that they are
prepared to fundamentally change the equation without
waiting for the other side to act. We have repeatedly
and emphatically stressed to the Palestinians that all
incitements to violence must stop and that all acts of
terror must be condemned. Our position regarding
settlement activity has also been clear. Meanwhile, we
have strongly opposed unilateral efforts to deligitimize
Israel in international forums.
Unfortunately, trends continue to move in the
wrong direction. We must all work together to reverse
those trends. As reaffirmed by the participants at the
French ministerial-level Middle East Peace Conference
over the weekend, the international community stands
ready to help the parties realize a two-State solution.
The ministerial's communique reflected the principles
outlined by Secretary Kerry. We ask the parties to
restate their commitment to the goal of two States
and take urgent steps to reverse trends on the ground
that threaten it. Nobody can make decisions on final
status issues for Israel or the Palestinians; rather, they
must come together to negotiate this themselves in
meaningful direct negotiations. It is up to Israel's and
Palestinians to make the difficult choices for peace, and
if they are ready, we can all help. Our commitment to
peace in the Middle East has never wavered and it never
will.

Let me move now to Syria. Since 2012, the
Council, through numerous resolutions, has called
for investigations into chemical weapons use for a
nationwide ceasefire and political process to end the
war, for sustained humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
in need and for steps to be taken to halt the unceasing
hell the Syrian people have been living through since
the conflict started. Yet here we are in 2017, just a
month after the United Nations alerted the world to
credible and continuing reports of terrible atrocities
in Syria, including summary executions, intense
bombardment of areas still populated with civilians
and dire humanitarian conditions. Given the grave
situations Syrians continue to find themselves in, we
support all genuine efforts to de-escalate the Violence
in Syria and pave the way for renewed intra-Syria talks.

To that end, we support recent Russian and Turkish
efforts to bring about a true ceasefire that is respected
by all parties. We expect those efforts to lead to the
resumption of United Nations-led talks between the
regime and the opposition, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015), as well as the Geneva principles of 30 June
2012. As we have long said, the parameters for those
talks must include a viable nationwide ceasefire, the
delivery of humanitarian assistance for all who need it
and a Syrian-owned and -led political process that can

bring about a more representative, peaceful and united
Syria.

While the current ceasefire has somewhat reduced
violence, attacks continue and thousands of Syrians
remain under siege. For months, no United Nations
assistance has been delivered to those trapped by the
regime, Iran and Hizbullah in towns outside Damascus,
despite the presence of United Nations warehouses just
a few kilometres away. I remind the Council that those
cynical siege tactics and attacks on civilians are a real
threat to international peace and security, since they
drive the radical extremism that the perpetrators claim
they are trying to fight. We cannot remain silent while
those atrocities serve as a recruitment tool for terrorists.

In Lebanon, we welcome the formation of a
cabinet and encourage the new Lebanese Government
and President Michel Aoun to seize this opportunity
to respond to the needs of the Lebanese people
and to address the pressing security, economic and
humanitarian challenges facing the country. The
United States reaffirms its strong commitment to
Lebanon's security, stability and sovereignty, and we
look to all parties in Lebanon to uphold its international
obligations, including those contained in resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006). We will continue to
support Lebanon's State institutions, including the
Lebanese Armed Forces and internal security forces,
which defend Lebanon's borders and contain Violent
spillover effects form the Syrian conflict.

Finally, turning to Iraq, in Mosul, the Iraqi security
forces - supported by the international counter-Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant coalition - are making
strides against Da'esh, having liberated almost half of
the city, with the rest soon to follow. The humanitarian
situation, however, remains dire for the millions of
internally displaced and other civilians impacted by
the conflict. The United States has partnered with
the Iraqis, the United Nations and others to fund and
coordinate the delivery of life-saving assistance. We
also note the Government of Iraq's close attention to
preventing and minimizing civilian harm in the course
of ongoing combat operations. Yet, the eventual defeat
of Da'esh will not mark the finish line. Post liberation,
Iraqis from all sects, ethnicities and creeds will need
to commit to the challenging, often frustrating and
compromise-driven process of political reconciliation.
Meaningful reconciliation will be essential if Iraq is to
avoid a future resurgence of extremism and violence.

