Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
substantive briefing on the situation regarding a Middle
East settlement.

The Palestinian issue remains at the epicentre of
instability in the Middle East and North Africa. The
Russian Federation has consistently advocated for
a fair settlement of it on the basis of the well-known
international legal framework that includes the relevant
Security Council resolutions, the Madrid principles
and the Arab Peace Initiative, which presuppose
the concept of a two-State solution and envision a
negotiated settlement to all final-status issues in the
Palestinian territories.

We have been compelled to conclude that the task
of relaunching the Palestinian-Israeli political dialogue
has lately become significantly harder, not only because
of settlement construction and the unending provocative
rhetoric and violence on both sides but also because
of a number of other factors that have undermined
every achievement of the Middle East peace process in
recent times. Instead of seeing progress with a viable
plan for resolving the Palestinian-Israeli situation,
we have been witness to some notorious decisions
concerning Jerusalem. The Palestinians - indeed, the
Arabs in general - have greeted those measures with
total rejection. Palestinian representatives have made
statements declaring their loss of trust in the role of
the United States as a mediator, proposing suspending
their recognition of Israel and withdrawing from the
Oslo accords, including the Paris Protocol on economic
relations. Such emotional reactions emphasize how
delicate the question of Jerusalem is within the
framework of a Middle East settlement. Unfortunately,
that was followed by damaging decisions to cut
financial aid to Palestine, including contributions to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. We cannot countenance a
situation in which the Palestinians find themselves in
a position where they will effectively have nothing left
to lose. It would fuel radicalism and could cause the
situation in the Palestinian territories and the entire
region to erupt.

In our view, the solution to this situation lies in
resuming a direct Palestinian-Israeli dialogue on all
contentious issues, including the status of Jerusalem,
as soon as possible. Considering the extraordinary
significance of the holy city for followers of the three
monotheistic religions, we call on all sides to exercise
restraint and refrain from any initiatives that could
have dangerous and unpredictable repercussions. Free
access for all believers to Jerusalem's holy sites must
be protected. It will be essential to arrive at equitable,
long-term agreements that correspond to previous
decisions of the international community and reflect
the interests of both sides. Implementation of the
recommendations in the 2016 report of the Middle East
Quartet (S/2016/595, annex) would establish a good
foundation for achieving that objective. In the context
of measures aimed at creating the right conditions for a
resumption of the peace process, we would like to point
to the gradual return of the legitimate Government of
Palestine to the Gaza Strip that began in October 2017,
with Egypt's assistance. We hope that all the Palestinian
parties will demonstrate the political will necessary to
overcome any issues that may arise and will see the
efforts to restore genuine national unity through to the
end. Meanwhile, the international community must
lend its support to the process.

As a sponsor of the peace process and an active
participant in the Quartet, the Russian Federation will
continue to contribute to breaking the impasse in the
Middle East peace process, including through contacts
with involved States of the region. Our proposal to
President Abbas and Prime Minister Netanyahu, who
have been visiting us separately on a regular basis, to
convene a summit in Moscow is still on the table. The
situation we have now can lead to only one conclusion,
which is that the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, like other
urgent current issues, can be resolved only through a
collective effort. There continues to be no alternative to
the Quartet as a mediation mechanism for this issue, in
concert with key States of the region.

Unfortunately, other serious conflicts continue in
the Middle East, although we should not allow them to
overshadow the issue ofa Palestinian-Israeli settlement.
The Russian Federation is of the view that inter- and
intra-State disputes should be resolved through direct
political dialogue. We have been making active efforts
to stabilize the situation in the region and put an end to
hostilities, while at the same time combating terrorist
groups, providing humanitarian assistance to those
in need, helping to improve socioeconomic situations
and promoting political settlements of crises in the
Middle East.

Thanks to the decisive role played by the Russian air
force, Government forces have cleared Syrian territory
of fighters belonging to the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). We have succeeded in preserving
Syria as a sovereign State, creating the conditions for
the return of refugees and internally displaced persons
and for launching efforts for a political settlement to
the Syrian crisis in earnest, under the auspices of the
United Nations. That specific effort will be further
supported by the Syrian national dialogue to be held
in Sochi from 29 to 30 January, which we hope will
bring a new impetus to the Geneva process. After the
Sochi meeting, within the Geneva format and with
the consent of the Syrian parties, agreements should
be drawn up on constitutional reform and elections,
under United Nations supervision, as outlined in
resolution 2254 (2015) and affirmed in the Da Nang
statement of 11 November 2017 by the Presidents of the
Russian Federation and the United States and the Sochi
declaration of 22 November 2017 by the leaders of Iran,
Russia and Turkey.

The liberation of Iraq from ISIL was a pivotal
moment, enabling the country to focus on national
reconciliation and on rebuilding the infrastructure
destroyed in the war against ISIL. We hope that
Iraq can resolve its issues and that relations between
Baghdad and Erbil will be restored so as to stabilize the
national political situation and enable Iraq to develop as
a sovereign and territorially intact State.

The situation in Libya remains complicated,
although there have been glimmers recently leading
to hopes that the impasse in the political settlement
process to date can finally be overcome.

We continue to be gravely concerned about the
situation in Yemen. The country's economy is virtually
paralysed, major parts of its civilian infrastructure
have been destroyed and the people are living with
hunger and large-scale epidemics. We welcome the
humanitarian efforts undertaken by the United Nations
and Member States, including Saudi Arabia, the United
Arab Emirates and others. The Russian Federation is
also helping to aid the people of Yemen. One thing is
obvious, however, which is that the situation cannot
be improved until the peace process is resumed. The
international community should also do everything
possible to maintain stability in Lebanon.

It will be crucial to ensure that steps to improve
the situation in the Persian Gulf are taken as soon as
possible. The mutual recriminations and accusations
should give way to the launch of a regional process
establishing confidence-building measures, while the
potential in that regard ofresolution 598 (1987), adopted
as long ago as 1987, is still untapped.

We would like to underscore that the current
situation in the Middle East and North Africa reflects
the importance of concerted international cooperation
and the adoption of a united agenda. We must strive to
unite our efforts to combat terrorism and consolidate
our approaches to resolving the serious crises in the
region. In that context, we believe that the initiative
of Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Russia's Minister for Foreign
Affairs, to hold a comprehensive review in the Security
Council of the situation in the Middle East remains
relevant. In that regard, I agree with Mrs. Haley. Like
her, we are ready to discuss the situation as a whole.
Russia is prepared to participate in such efforts with
all interested partners. We maintain friendly and
equitable relations with every State in the Middle East
without exception, relations that are not marred by
negative instances of interference in internal affairs.
Incidentally, just for the record, it is not only in the
Middle East that we refrain from interfering in others'
internal affairs, and we advise others to do the same.

