Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): The actions of the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea are violations of
international law. Such actions are also contrary to the
existing global norm against nuclear testing, stipulated
in the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
global non-proliferation norms.

The Security Council has responded to the actions
of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea in
numerous resolutions. Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted
in September, toughened the targeted sanctions against
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which
constitute the most rigorous sanctions regime ever
imposed on the country. Today, in response to the North
Korean launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
on 28 November, which Sweden strongly condemns,
the Council has strengthened those measures further.
Resolution 2397 (2017), which we have just adopted,
reaffirms that the world does not accept the nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and that the
Council continues to stand united in its resolve to
address the urgent threat to international peace and
security.

In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, including through full cooperation
with the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, further work to reduce tensions
and to advance the prospects for a comprehensive
settlement needs to be undertaken. Sanctions alone
will not resolve the situation. Today, the Council has
reiterated its commitment to a peaceful, diplomatic and
political resolution. Creative efforts that pave the way
for such a solution must be urgently pursued. Sweden is
contributing to those efforts.

We welcome Under-Secretary-General Feltman's
recent Visit to the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, as well as the Secretary-General's readiness to
provide his good offices to that end. Furthermore, it
is of the utmost importance that none of the measures
adopted in today's resolution or in previous resolutions
should prevent or impede the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors to reach
those in need.

The Council has the responsibility to uphold
international peace and security. For that reason, the
situation on the Korean peninsula has rightly occupied
our time for much of this year. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has carried out numerous
provocations, and the Council has been unified in its
response by imposing unprecedented sanctions.

As we have reiterated at every meeting, there is
no military solution to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. As we approach the end of the year, we have
seen, for example with Mr. Feltman's visit, the faint
glimmer of an opportunity for diplomacy and dialogue.
In 2018, we must grasp it. In the words of the Secretary-
General, we need to spread and to deepen the spirit of
hope and possibility. We need to ensure that, in the
search for a comprehensive settlement, every avenue
for peace is explored and exhausted. For the sake of
the North Korean people and for the world, we cannot
afford to fail.

