On behalf of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), I am pleased to report on the progress made since our last joint briefing in May 2019 (see S/PV.8528). I am grateful to the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), His Excellency Mr. Tarek Ladeb, Ambassador of Tunisia, for leading the joint briefing process this year on behalf of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL/Da'esh), Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities; the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), concerning counter-terrorism; and the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004). The 1540 Committee mandate is the prevention of the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, their means of delivery and related materials to and by non-State actors, particularly for terrorist purposes. While this mandate differs from those of the other committees, there are important areas of complementarity. Furthermore, from the perspective of our Committee, in resolution 2325 (2016) the Security Council reiterates the need to enhance cooperation among the three Committees. The devastating and potentially catastrophic consequences that the use of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons could have remain a matter of serious concern. Furthermore, the fact that non-State groups and individuals with extreme views are ready to use violence in various parts of the world also remains a serious concern. Resolution 1540 (2004) was adopted by the Security Council precisely to prevent the proliferation of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery to and by non-State actors, including terrorists. All States must make every effort to prevent such proliferation. The resolution obliges States to adopt and enforce measures to prohibit non-State actors from manufacturing, acquiring, possessing, transporting, transferring or using nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and their means of delivery. Measures are also required, among others, to account for and secure such items and to ensure physical protection measures, border controls, law enforcement efforts, export and transhipment controls and controls on providing related funds and services. Under resolution 1977 (2011), the Security Council decided that the Committee would conduct a comprehensive review on the status of the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) prior to the renewal of its mandate, which is due to expire on 25 April 2021. I reported to the Council in my letter of 27 August that, owing to delays caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the Committee had decided that activities scheduled this year related to the comprehensive review would be postponed until 2021, with the exception of the process of revising the Committee matrices and activities that can be undertaken in an online format. Despite the pandemic, the Committee continues to undertake activities this year to promote the full and effective implementation of the resolution and to assist States, upon request, in strengthening national capacity. They include engagement with Member States as well as international and regional organizations the mandates of which are related to resolution 1540 (2004). The Committee will continue to enhance information-sharing, coordination on visits to countries, technical assistance and other issues of relevance to the Committee and the 1267 Committee and the CTC, as appropriate, and will jointly brief the Security Council with these two Committees accordingly once a year. In conclusion, I would like to underline that a cooperative approach and dialogue with Member States continues to inform the 1540 Committee's activities.
