Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): Let me begin by
associating myself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and with the statement to be delivered by
Azerbaijan on behalf of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC).

My delegation endorses the statement delivered
by the representative of Qatar on behalf of the Group
of Arab States and by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine. My delegation would like to expand on one
point touched on in those statements, namely the
establishment and deployment of a United Nations
observer or peacekeeping force to the occupied
Palestinian territory.

The establishment and deployment of a United
Nations force to the occupied Palestinian territory is a
proposal that has been before the Council for almost
four decades. My delegation believes that, under the
present circumstances of heightened tension, only the
forcible separation of the two sides would be able to
provide the necessary peace and security that would be
conducive to the resumption of negotiations aimed at a
political settlement.
Malaysia, along with other countries, has long
urged the Security Council to establish a strong
interposing international protection mechanism which
would have the immediate effect of defusing the
explosive situation on the ground and instilling
confidence in the two sides. My delegation therefore
urges once again that a robust international protection
force be deployed without further delay. We cannot
afford to let the violence spiral out of control or allow
this conflict to remain unresolved indefinitely.

The Security Council is well aware of the details
of the United Nations force proposal, which had also
been recommended by the Secretary-General.
Unfortunately, the repeated calls made in the past for
the Council to consider that proposal have been met
with resistance. Consequently, thousands of
defenceless Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, have been, and will continue to be, killed or
wounded and their property and infrastructure
destroyed as a result of the relentless acts of aggression
and the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel, the occupying Power, in a business-as-usual
fashion.

In retaliating against the occupation and
aggression, acts by Palestinian militants have
wrongfully led to Israeli civilian casualties and to the
destruction of their property. If such acts are
considered legitimate under those circumstances, then I
am afraid that we have returned to the long-gone dark
ages of our ancestors, and that Council members,
oblivious to their responsibilities under the Charter, are
sitting here in this Chamber seemingly endorsing those
war crimes and crimes against humanity.
06-60930

My delegation continues to recognize the
important role of the diplomatic Quartet. The road map
and the two-State solution envisaged therein, among
others, have provided real hope for peace. Given the
current situation on the ground and the steadily
deteriorating overall situation in the region, it appears
that the three-year-old road map has been deliberately
asphyxiated by a Power mightier than the Quartet. It
also appears that the road map is nothing more than a
piece of paper, just like the Council resolutions on the
Palestinian question - excellent in substance but poor
in implementation.

My delegation appeals once again to the Council
to shoulder its Charter-mandated responsibility for the
sake of both the Palestinians and the Israelis, for the
sake of peace and security in the region and the world
at large, and for humanity. While serious efforts to
resuscitate the Middle East peace process are being
made, establishing and deploying a United Nations
force without further delay to the occupied Palestinian
territories is an option that the Council should
seriously consider.

My delegation hopes that the draft resolution that
will be presented in due course by the delegation of
Qatar on behalf of the OIC and the League of Arab
States will serve as a basis in that regard.

