Ms. Ba'ipo-Temon (Central African Republic) (spoke in French): Madam President, before I update
the Council on the situation in my country, the Central
African Republic, I would like to congratulate you on
your presidency and thank you for having convened
today's meeting, which comes at a particularly
important time for the Central African Republic.

Let me also take this opportunity to pay tribute to
the memory of all of those who lost their lives in the
Central African crisis and to express my sympathy in
connection with the victims ofa deadly conflict that has
spared no one, from Central Africans to those who have
come to their rescue in the name of peace 4 children,
grandchildren, women, men, pensioners, young people,
soldiers, animists, Muslims and Christians. I would
also like to sincerely thank previous speakers for their
excellent and comprehensive briefings.

Our combined efforts in the Central African
Republic have led to the basis for peace. A peace
agreement between the Central African authorities
and the 14 armed groups - the Political Agreement
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic - was signed on 6 February in Bangui.
The Agreement, the outcome of the dialogue held in
Khartoum on the initiative of the African Union,
supported by the United Nations, came into being
following a long commonjourney in the name ofpeace.
This is yet another opportunity for me to sincerely
thank all of the architects of the Agreement: Mr. Sma'il
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security; Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations; Mr. Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Central African Republic; all
of our bilateral and multilateral partners; and President
Omer Al-Bashir, who showed genuine generosity and
provided a warm welcome as the leader of the host
country talks.

I must also thank the entire panel of facilitators
appointed by the Heads of State of neighbouring
countries or by regional bodies for their involvement
in the negotiations, in addition to the Heads of State of
the subregion, for their commitment to the process of
restoring and maintaining peace in the Central African
Republic. Nor can I fail to thank the President of the
Republic and Head of State, Mr. Faustin Archange
Touadera, for his firm determination to use dialogue
as the only solution to the crisis in the Central African
Republic, and his Government for working towards
that goal.

The Political Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in the Central African Republic, signed
on 6 February, is symbolic, even historic, because the
leaders of the 14 armed groups attended the talks in
Khartoum and the Agreement was signed in Bangui, on
the territory of the Central African Republic. A major
step towards peace and national reconciliation has been
taken. However, it remains tentative and will depend on
the implementation by all parties of their commitments.
Only if the Agreement is fulfilled, through the
implementation of the mechanisms stipulated therein,
will peace and social cohesion be restored. It is
important to remember that considerable efforts have
been made, with the sustained support of our partners.

The Government, with the support of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic, the European
Union and all our partners, has made progress in
extending State authority throughout the country
through, for example, the redeployment of prefects
and sub-prefects with a view to beginning the
decentralization process; the implementation of national
security and defence sector reform; the training ofpolice
officers and gendarmes, 500 of whom are currently
operational; and through the launching by the President
of the disarmament, demobilization, reintegration
and repatriation programme in the north-western part
of the country. These efforts, which have been made
with current forms of support, must continue and be
strengthened and ramped up and, above all, updated
in order to adapt them to the current situation, with
a view to restoring State authority. That achievement
will enable us to confirm the historic character of the
peace agreement.

The authorities of the Central African Republic
have already taken measures for the implementation
of the Agreement, in particular by issuing a decree
to establish an inclusive commission tasked with
conducting work related to transitional justice pending
the establishment of the truth, justice, reparations and
reconciliation commission. Other measures are also
under way, including the creation of the steering and
follow-up committees vital to ensuring the proper
implementation of the Agreement and a timetable for
the resumption of joint commissions with the countries
of the subregion. Furthermore, the Government is
committed to continuing its dialogue with the armed
groups in order to preserve the momentum that led to
the signing of the Agreement. The first visit was made
last week, on Friday, 15 February, when the Minister of
Humanitarian Action and National Reconciliation went
to Kaga Bandoro to discuss the issue of the treatment
of displaced persons.

I would like to point out here that the entire process
is part and parcel of continental and international
partnerships, which reflect our commitment to major
issues of common interest such as peace, security
and governance. Combating insecurity is an ongoing
challenge - indeed, our ongoing challenge - and
requires greater effectiveness and a better harmonizing
of our efforts. It is therefore important that our
commitmentsbe consistentwiththevalues andprinciples
that we promote - equality, equity, human rights, social
justice, sovereignty, democracy and humanitarian law,
to name but a few. Our partnerships must be mutual,
strong and responsible, without discrimination of any
kind. Our efforts must be comprehensive and meet
all expectations and challenges, on the understanding
that the goal of the Central African Republic is the
restoration of the rule of law. Achieving that ultimate
objective will open the way to a new era for Central
Africa, in which the Central African Republic will
learn to bind its wounds and accept its history, despite
the many painful events that have marked it, in order
to leave it further behind in the name of stability and
national harmony.

The Central African Republic has taken note of the
time frame issued by the Security Council in resolution
2454 (2019), which renewed the sanctions regime and
provided for the establishment by the end of April of
a road map that would pave the way, through agreed
measures, to a relaxation of the arms embargo. While
welcoming this opening of the Security Council, I
recall that the sanctions regime, in particular with
respect to the arms embargo and the Kimberley
Process, must neither limit nor constrain the efforts
and momentum undertaken by the Central African
Republic in its quest for lasting peace, the restoration
of State authority throughout the entire territory, and
economic development. Like any State, the Central
African State is mandated and duty-bound to protect its
population and its territory and ensure the social well-
being of its population.

I cannot conclude without paying special tribute to
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, whose role in the search
for peace in my country has been very important and
undeniable. The Special Representative of the Secretary-
General leaves us after a successfully completing ajob
that lasted more than three years. He was one of the
architects of peace agreement, and the Central African
Republic will remain indebted to him. I wish him every

success in all his future endeavours, while hoping that
he will continue to have a thought for a country he
cherished so dearly in fulfilling his mandate.

In conclusion, the Central African Republic
welcomes the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, and wishes
him every success in his mission.

