Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa has had
the honour and privilege to serve as the Chair of the
Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa for the past two years. The Group
was created pursuant to statement S/PRST/2002/2 by
the President of the Security Council, in which the
Council recognized the need for adequate measures to
prevent and resolve conflicts in Africa. Consequently,
the Working Group has over the past two years
considered thematic issues that directly concern the
work of the Council in identifying proposals, which
may be useful to the Council's work in Africa. As such,
my statement will focus on the work that has been done
since we assumed the role of Chair of the Working
Group in 2011.

On 31 March 2011, the Working Group held
a meeting that examined ways of enhancing the
Group's effectiveness. The meeting looked at how the
Working Group could improve its monitoring of the
implementation of the recommendations contained in
the presidential statement and how fast the Council
could actualize and concretize their recommendations,
as well the frequency of their reporting to the Security
Council. Several recommendations on the working
methods of the Working Group emanated from this
meeting, the most notable being that the Council could
task the Working Group with tracking and monitoring
the implementation of the Council's resolutions and
other outcomes concerning peacebuilding, conflict
prevention and resolution mediation in Africa and with
submitting recommendations to the Council.

On 3 May 2011, the Working Group held an
interactive dialogue between the members of the
Working Group and the permanent representatives of
the African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council
members based in New York. That discussion focused
on cooperation between the two Councils and was in
preparation for the annual discussions between the
Councils, which were held in Addis Ababa later in May.

The Working Group also held a seminar on
early warning tools and indicators to assess the
risk of election-related violence in Africa. The
meeting reviewed the early warning tools available
for identifying and preventing election-based and
election-related violence and how those tools could
be used by the international community before,
during and after elections. On 28 September 2011, the
Working Group held another seminar that focused on
the root causes of conflict on Africa and looked at new
and emerging challenges to peace and security. The
meeting, inter alia, discussed the Secretary-General's
report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(see S/2011/476) as well as the World Bank report on
conflict, security and development in 2011.

The Working Group also held a seminar on recent
lessons learned in African conflict prevention and
resolution, coordinating responses and supporting
local capacities. The meeting discussed how the thrust
of preventive work could shift from reactive external
interventions, with a limited and superficial impact,
to internally driven initiatives on developing local
and national prevention capacities. On preventative
diplomacy, the discussions focused on success stories,
particularly the important role played by the United
Nations, the AU and other regional organizations.

On 8 June, the Working Group held a meeting on
enhancing African Union-United Nations cooperation.
The seminar discussed practical ways in which
the commitments made by the Security Council in
resolution 2033 (2012) could be implemented and how
the AU and the United Nations could further cooperate
in the prevention of conflict in Africa.

The Working Group also held a meeting on the
promotion of and respect for the rule of law and justice
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts in Africa.
That meeting discussed the relationship between the
rule of law and conflict prevention, particularly in
the context of the Security Council. Furthermore, the
discussions allowed for an exchange of views on the
application of the rule of law. Practical insights were
made on the challenges regarding implementation of
the rule oflaw in Africa and how it applies to the efforts
of the international community to resolve conflict, with
a focus on Security Council efforts.

Unfortunately, due to Hurricane Sandy, we
cancelled the meeting entitled "The promotion of
the African Union Charter on democracy, elections
and governance", which was scheduled to take place
on 30 October. Likewise, we were unable to hold the
meeting on reflecting on conflicts in Africa, which
aimed to look at understanding the causes and drivers
towards promoting and providing sustainable solutions
to African conflicts.

During South Africa's tenure as Chair of the Working
Group, we have placed significant emphasis on making
the meetings open to non-members of the Security
Council and civil society organizations, especially
those active on the ground. We have encouraged open
and frank discussions in order to cultivate ideas that
would positively contribute to enhancing the work of
the Security Council, especially since its agenda is
particularly focused on African issues. We would like
to recommend that the Working Group continues to
have more open meetings of that nature.

During our tenure, we utilized diverse expertise
from the academia, the Secretariat and other
practitioners. That has greatly enriched discussions
by providing different expertise and experiences. We
therefore encourage the continuation of that practice.
Furthermore, we would propose that topics are
continually revisited in order to examine in depth the
challenges that continue to persist in Africa and to try
and find mitigating mechanisms through continuous
dialogue.

In addition, it will be recalled that, in
resolution 2033 (2012), the Council decided to follow
up on the communiques of the annual consultative
meetings of the two Councils, including through its
Ad hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention and
Resolution in Africa. The Working Group should
continue with that important mandate, entrusted to it
by the Security Council.

Moving forward, the various meetings identified
very useful recommendations that could enhance the
work of the Security Council. Furthermore, we would
like to propose that the Council holds an interactive
discussion based on the recommendations to consider
those that could be incorporated into the work of the
Security Council.

I would like to express my personal gratitude and
that of the South African delegation to the members
of the Working Group for their collaboration and the
support extended to me in discharging of the Group's
mandate. My appreciation also goes to the Organization
and all individuals who greatly enriched the discussions
of the Working Group.

Finally, I would like to thank the Secretariat for
assisting us in fulfilling our mandate, in particular James
Sutterlin, Marylyn Alfred and, previously, Oseloka
Obaze, for their dedicated support to my delegation. I
wish my successor all the best in continuing with their
work done by the Working Group.

