Mr. Djangone-Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): As this is my first statement to the Council
this month, I would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for June, and to thank you
for having convened this meeting to consider once
again the burning issue of the protection of civilians in
armed conflict.

We are grateful to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts over the past six years to keep the
attention of Council members and the peoples of the
world focused on this issue. The tragedy of armed
conflict today, the increase in the number of such
conflicts and the growing number of areas affected by
conflict all make this a priority concern of the Council.

I would also like to thank the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Jan Egeland, for
his very clear introductory statement and for all the
work that his Office is doing.

Unwilling victims and pawns of armed conflict,
civilians, all civilians - refugees and the repatriated,
children, boys and girls, women and men, young and
not so young - are entitled to our protection: the
protection of our States, our peoples and the
subregional, regional and international organizations.
In other words, we - States and peoples - have an
imperative and absolute duty, in solidarity and without
regard to our national interests, to protect civilians
during the conflicts that are ravaging our countries, our
regions, our world. That is an obligation that is
primarily humanitarian in nature but that also involves
prevention. Action must be taken promptly when the
failure of preventive measures has been demonstrated
by the outbreak of conflict and its accompanying woes
for civilians.

This duty to protect, however, can be carried out
only with absolute and scrupulous respect for the
Charter and relevant international rules: international
humanitarian law, human rights law, the rights of
peoples, international agreements on cooperation and
defence among States and so forth.

In December 2004 (see S/PV.5100), the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs presented
to the Council the outline of a strengthened mechanism
for the monitoring and follow-up of reports, as
recommended by the Secretary-General. In doing so,
he highlighted some continuing gaps in the
implementation of the 10-point plan of action that
formed the basis of resolutions 1265 (1999) and 1296
(2000). At that time, he invited members of the
Council to consider two major issues: regional
approaches to protection and the relationship between
protection and peace processes.

Pending the likely adoption of the proposals
made by the Secretary-General in his report contained
in document A/59/2005 relating to strengthening the
United Nations system in the area of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, those gaps will continue to
exist. Those two issues - the regional approach to
protection and the relationship between protection and
peace processes - have not yet been studied or acted
upon, and no corrective action has been taken,
although they were considered by the Council during
the first half of this year.

The case of Cote d'Ivoire is a sad illustration of
the continuing weakness of the international system to
protect civilians in armed conflict. The recent carnage
in Duekoue, in western Cote d'Ivoire, demonstrates
how urgent it is that the Secretary-General's proposals
to be considered and acted upon.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire, which is acting
on its duty to protect, has undertaken humanitarian
action and has sought to provide greater safety, to the
extent that its resources allow. It has also carried out
investigations to identify the suspected perpetrators of
the events so as to bring them before the competent
courts.

The Government of Cote d'Ivoire is grateful to
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire for
having increased the number of troops in the affected
area, and it hopes that, with the new national
arrangements that the President of the Republic
announced in his address to the nation on Thursday,
17 June, there will be greater complementarity and
cooperation commensurate with the challenges.

Here, I would like to pay a well-deserved tribute
to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Pierre Schori, whose professionalism and fairness
in seeking to achieve the speedy return of peace and
stability to the country is appreciated by all Ivorians.

For victims living in the hell of conflict, and for
all the people of Cote d'Ivoire, the best way to protect
human lives, in particular civilians, involves the
immediate implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process and the
holding of elections in accordance with the timetable
set out in the Constitution. In this context, in
accordance with the terms of the various agreements
concluded, the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process must absolutely begin on 27 June
2005. The Council's position on this basic issue will
provide decisive assistance for the mediation of the
African Union, which is currently under way, and will
be a real contribution to a lasting settlement to the
conflict. Those who prosper in time of war are clearly
not interested the return of peace. The international
community must not let the country become hostage to
such people.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict
remains the primary responsibility of our States - we
all agree about that. However, as the Secretary-General
notes in his report, "In larger freedom", "In an era of
global interdependence, the glue of common interest, if
properly perceived, should bind all States together in
this cause, as should the impulses of our common
humanity" (A/59/2005, para. 2).

It is such solidarity - generous, caring and
effective - that my delegation advocates so that
prompt and timely protection can be provided for
civilians in armed conflict.

