Mr. Zouev: I would like to thank the Security
Council for convening this briefing on the role of
United Nations policing in peacekeeping operations.
I am especially pleased to be joined by our Police
Commissioners working in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, Haiti and South Sudan.

This year, we celebrate 70 years of United Nations
peacekeeping, and this annual event is an opportunity
to reaffirm the vital role that the United Nations
police play in linking the United Nations work, from
prevention to peacekeeping to peacebuilding. Today we
will hear several examples of how United Nations police
officers perform their mandated tasks while advancing
the Secretary-General's vision of a transformed United
Nations police that is people-centred, mission-oriented,
modern, agile, mobile and flexible, specialized and
definitely rights-based.
(spoke in French)

Central to that effort is gender-responsive
policing. As Ms. Unaisi Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa, Police
Commissioner of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS), will tell us in a few moments, a more
reactive approach to gender parity in policing makes us
more efficient at what we do because it helps us to reach
the whole population - men, women, boys and girls.
Recruiting more women police officers can support
our efforts in that regard. In addition, women police
officers can help to mentor and inspire future women
police leaders, increase access to justice for women and
children at risk, and improve information-gathering
and analysis by building bridges to vulnerable groups.
If we are to reach our full potential, we must bring more
women police officers into the fold.

In line with the Secretary-General's system-wide
strategy on gender parity, Security Council resolutions
on women and peace and security and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations gender-parity strategy,
the United Nations police have stepped up efforts to
increase the participation of women police officers.
More specifically, the Police Division has developed
an action plan that sets out specific targets for female
representation in contracted and seconded posts in field
missions and at Headquarters by December 2028. The
efforts of the Police Division are already bearing fruit.
The number of female heads of police components in
United Nations peacekeeping operations has reached
40 per cent. Increases in the number of female personnel
at all levels of professional posts have also been noted.

Unfortunately, despite those gains, women continue
to be underrepresented in senior-level posts with the
United Nations police. To address that situation, the
Police Division has organized female senior police
officer command development and training courses.
These courses have made it possible to identify over
140 female officers eligible for the aforementioned
posts. That initiative is part of the Police Division's
ongoing work to establish a roster of women and men
police candidates for senior posts.

Police components in field missions are expected
to develop and implement their own gender-parity
strategies. Shortly, Commissioner Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa
will share more details with the Council about
UNMISS and the efforts of her team and the Mission to
make progress on the issue of gender parity within the
framework of her protection of civilians mandate.
(spoke in Spanish)

It is also important for us to recruit officials with
the ability to connect with the local communities by
using their language. The ability to communicate
effectively remains a crucial aspect of our work. That
includes being able to communicate our mission and
the intentions behind our actions. I appreciate the
commitment of Member States to multilingualism,
and I ask that they ensure that we always have police
officials who are genuinely centred on people and the
communities where they serve, including when it comes
to how we are able to communicate.

(spoke in English)

Secondly, we will hear how United Nations police
components are increasingly called upon to assist
their host-State counterparts in addressing serious and
organized crime. The growing risks posed by such
crime have been recognized at the highest levels of
the Organization, as evidenced by various resolutions
of the Council and reports of the Secretary-General.
It is no exaggeration to say that it strikes at the very
heart of the United Nations core business. Often
characterized by porous borders, scarce socioeconomic
opportunities, weak State authority and prevailing
corruption, countries in conflict or emerging from
conflict are particularly vulnerable to organized crime.
By compromising the integrity of public officials
and institutions through corruption, intimidation
and violence, organized criminal groups erode the
State's long-term capacity to provide for the public
good. That hurts national dialogue and reconciliation,
entrenches positions of power and endangers the entire
peacebuilding process.

Historically, organized crime has been a matter
for the police, while the military responded to
violent conflict. The rise of asymmetric threats and
non-State actors has blurred the lines between the
two. For example, in West Africa and the Sahel, routes
for the illegal trafficking and smuggling of people,
weapons and drugs go through areas controlled by
terrorist groups, with smugglers and traffickers paying
for the right of passage. In Nigeria, Boko Haram has
been involved in the trafficking of drugs, people
and natural resources. This new normal - where
networks are looser and alliances of convenience
are forged - requires a holistic response rooted in a
coherence of practice and approach.

Our police components in the Central African
Republic, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Mali, among others, assist their host-State counterparts
in setting up criminal intelligence systems and utilize
modern technology to prevent and investigate serious
and organized crime. They also help to improve host-
State police interactions with the public through
community-oriented policing initiatives that have
proved successful in Liberia, Abyei and other mission
settings, thereby contributing to situational awareness
and early warning.

Commissioner Abdounasir will share more details
about the support of the police component of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to the Congolese
authorities in this area.

(spoke in Russian)

As we demand more from our police officers,
we must for our part do more to create the necessary
conditions to ensure their safe, smooth work, to the extent
possible in these challenging environments. The report
authored by former United Nations Force Commander,
Lieutenant General Carlos Alberto dos Santos
Cruz, entitled Improving security of United Nations
peacekeepers, laid bare some of our shortcomings in
this area, and we are committed to correcting them. As
one example, the Police Division has been taking steps
to standardize the assessment and evaluation of formed
police units to improve operational readiness and to
ensure the proper performance of their tasks.

Lastly today, we will look at strengthening the rule
of law through police reform. I would like to quote
the research conducted by Chuck Call and Michael
Barnett of 1999, as published in Peacebuilding and
Police Reform:

"[T]he transition from civil war to civil society is
inextricably linked to the development of civilian...
police forces that... uphold the rule of law and
help to maintain order with the minimum" - I
emphasize "minimum" - "amount of force".

We have seen many positive examples of this transition,
for instance in Bosnia and Herzegovina, El Salvador,
Sierra Leone and other countries.
Almost exactly one year ago, our peacekeeping
operation in Haiti transitioned to a rule-of-law mission.
The United Nations police - as the largest component,
with almost 1,300 uniformed personnel - is the
lynchpin in our effort to improve Haiti's rule of law
institutions and promote human rights in Haiait. In
this way we are closing the circle. The United Nations
police has helped to design and train a new police force
in Haiti, while the mandate of the very first United
Nations operation included from the outset the task of
launching police development. We are all interested in
hearing from Commissioner Therriault from the United
Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti about how
police reform efforts are helping to strengthen the rule
of law in the country.

(spoke in English)

The Action for Peacekeeping initiative launched by
our Secretary-General aims to refocus peacekeeping
on realistic expectations, make peacekeeping
missions stronger and safer, and mobilize greater
support for political solutions and for well-structured,
well-equipped and well-trained forces. It is an
acknowledgement that politics and peacekeeping are
intertwined. United Nations police already know that
there can be no such distinction, not when organized
crime groups can infiltrate and influence the highest
levels of Government and not when they remain some
of the greatest spoilers of peace.

WerecentlysharedwithourMemberStatestheAction
for Peacekeeping Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which is
an affirmation of collective responsibility among the
Secretariat, partner organizations and Member States in
their various capacities as peacekeeping host countries,
Security Council members, troop, police and financial
contributors and donors. As ofS October, 150 Member
States had endorsed the Declaration. The breadth of
this high-level political support is a strong endorsement
of the Department as we move forward. This gathering
of our heads of police components will provide critical
impetus to the realization of the ideals behind Action
for Peacekeeping in the field.

As part of the Action for Peacekeeping
consultations, we heard Member States loud and clear.
They would like to see peacekeeping forge greater unity
of purpose and work together across the United Nations
system to ensure greater coherence. United Nations
policing has helped to lead the way in this regard, as it

has been a founding member of the Global Focal Point
for Police, Justice and Corrections, an arrangement that
has helped us to break down silos and work towards
greater horizontal cooperation among all pillars of the
United Nations.

In conclusion, this event presents us with an
opportunity to take stock. Over the past year, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support have completed eight
independent strategic reviews of different peacekeeping
operations. The reviews have proved impactful in
supporting the increased efficiency and effectiveness
of operations by both the streamlining of functions and
the realignment of resource allocation.

The reviews will help us to strengthen the
recommendations of the Secretary-General ahead of
the deliberations of the Security Council on mandate
renewals. This is absolutely essential if the United
Nations police are to fulfil their role in not only keeping
the peace, but also creating the space for political
dialogue and preventive diplomacy. It is my hope that
today's discussion will help us to further mobilize
international support for a United Nations police
service that is built for purpose and built for the future.

