The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his time, his leadership and his service on this issue.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.

Thirty years ago, my predecessor, Daniel Patrick
Moynihan, made the case that human rights have a
special place in foreign policy. It had been just two
years since the General Assembly had adopted its
outragous resolution 3379 (XXX), equating Zionism
with racism. Moynihan thought that tolerance and
compassion could use a win at the United Nations and,
as usual, he was right.

The first argument he offered for paying greater
attention to this subject was that human rights are
inalienable rights. When we embrace human rights,
we embrace the values that are held, among others,
by all the world's major religions. Indeed, one of the
purposes of the United Nations is, according to the
Charter, "respect for human rights and for fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or relgion". Ambassador Moynihan did not
stop with arguing that protecting human rights is the
right thing to do. He also argued that it is the smart
thing to do - and it is.

Despite his advice in the 1970s, the Council has
never held a meeting focused exclusively on human
rights. Today, we will do that. We have held meetings
devoted to specific situations in specific countries,
but we have never dedicated a meeting to the broader
question of how human rights violations and abuses
can lead to a breakdown in peace and security. The
traditional View has been that the Security Council is
for maintaining international peace and security, not
for human rights.

I am here today to assert that the protection of
human rights is often deeply intertwined with peace
and security. The two things often cannot be separated.
In case after case, human rights violations and abuses
are not merely the incidental by-products of conflict,
but the trigger of conflict. When a State begins to
systematically violate human rights, it is a sign; it is
a red flag; it is a blaring siren - one of the clearest
possible indicators that instability and violence may
follow and spill across borders. It is no surprise that the
world's most brutal regimes are also the most ruthless
violators of human rights.

Let us consider North Korea. Systematic human
rights violations help underwrite the country's nuclear
and ballistic missile programmes. The Government
forces many of its citizens, including political
prisoners, to work in life-threatening conditions in
coal mines and other dangerous industries to finance
the regime's military. Because they do, the Security
Council must devote considerable efforts to addressing
North Korea's increasing threats to international peace.

Turning to Syria, in 2011, a group of boys between
the ages of 12 and 15 years spray-painted the following
message on the wall of their school: "The people want
the fall of the regime." For that, the Syrian regime
arrested them. Those children were brutally beaten,
had their fingernails ripped out by grown men in
Government prisons and were tortured before being
returned to their parents. The outrage spawned more
protests and more crackdowns, and the cycle repeated
until the situation turned into a full-fledged war. It was
not just any war, but one that has caused hundreds of
thousands of deaths and millions of refugees.

What began with assorted human rights violations
and abuses that the Council has been reluctant to
address has become a security issue that we are forced
to address repeatedly. It is a prime example of why we
should take human rights violations and abuses more
serious from their beginning.

In other cases, Governments use violence and
human rights violations to stifle dissent. We have
seen numerous instances in which the Burundian
Government services have used torture to crackdown
on protesters. That has forced hundreds of thousands
of people to flee to neighbouring countries and caused
massive regional disruption. It is little wonder that the
Government has pushed back on the United Nations
and the African Union's work in Burundi.

We continue to watch Burma, where the security
forces have allegedly conducted episodic acts of
Violence and repression against the ethnic Rohingya
people, who already face widespread ethnic and
religious discrimination from Governmental authorities
and popular social movements, despite the human
rights gains achieved throughout the country as a
result of Burma's ongoing democratic transformation.
Such treatment drives desperate people to flee to
neighbouring countries at best, or to radicalization
at worst.

Such allegations demand real and independent
investigations as soon as possible. That is why we
supported the recent establishment of an international
fact-finding mission to look into these allegations.
Frankly, there is hardly an issue on our agenda today
that does not involve concerns about human rights, and
future threats will continue to challenge us. That kind
of violence is not inevitable, but if the Council fails
to take human rights violations and abuses seriously,
they can escalate into real threats to international peace
and security. The Security Council cannot continue to
be silent when it sees widespread violations of human
rights. Why would we tell ourselves that we will only
deal with questions of peace and security without
addressing the factors that bring about the threats in
the first place?

We should be ready to engage early and often in the
statements that we make and in the measures that we
impose. It is clear that the connection between human
rights and security is a topic worthy of the Council's
serious consideration. To be fair, over the years, the
Security Council has addressed human rights issues
in various ways. The Security Council has mandated
many peacekeeping and political missions to monitor
and report on human rights violations and abuses.
Several Security Council-established sanctions regimes
include Syria's human rights violations or abuses as a
criterion for adding individuals to travel-ban or assets-
freeze lists. These are tangible and real impacts that
show what the Council can achieve for human rights
when we set our minds to it, but there is so much more
that we can do.

The next international crisis could very well
come from places in which human rights are widely
disregarded. Perhaps, it will be North Korea, Iran or
Cuba. We do not know where the next revolt against
basic violations of humanity will come, but we know
from history that they will come. When they do, the
Security Council will be called upon to react. We are
much better off acting on the front-end and standing
for human rights before the absence of human rights
forces us to react. It is past time for the Council to fulfil
the mandate that it was given 72 years ago. It is past
time that we dedicated ourselves to promoting peace,
security and human rights.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I now give the floor to the other members of
the Council.

