Mr. Akbaruddin (India): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing today's debate on the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). I also
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Nicholas Haysom for his briefing, which I understand
is perhaps his last in his present capacity. We wish him
luck in his future endeavours.

We express our appreciation for the important
statement made by Ambassador Mahmoud Saikal of
Afghanistan. We offer our sincere condolences over
the loss of lives and property in the bomb attack on
20 June in Kabul, in which some 20 people - not only
brave Afghans, but also Nepalese and Indians - lost
their lives.

While there has been no dearth of effort on the part
ofthe Government and people ofAfghanistan, as well as
the international community, we note that the security
situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated. Since the
beginning of the year, the Taliban have continued
attacks at an unprecedented rate, and there is ongoing
violence by other armed groups. As per the Secretary-
General's report (S/2016/532), armed clashes increased
this year as compared with the same period in 2015.
This situation has put renewed focus on the need for
enhanced engagement and action by the international
community. The Security Council needs to look into
the deteriorating security situation and the means to
contain it, as it could pose serious threats to the gains
made by the people of Afghanistan in the past 15 years.

Groups and individuals that perpetrate violence
against the people and the Government of Afghanistan
cannot have safe havens and should not be allowed
to exercise control and wield influence over any
part of Afghanistan's territory. In our view, that is
critical for lasting peace in the country. The effective
implementation of the Security Council sanctions
regime, including that established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015),
concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals groups
undertakings and entities, should also be carried out
consistently and with perseverance for it to serve as a
strong deterrent to the listed entities and individuals.
Also, it is sheer folly that the leader of a proscribed
entity is not yet designated as a terrorist individual. As
pointed out by the Representative of New Zealand, we
need to address that matter forthwith.

Afghanistan has our full support in strengthening its
defence capabilities to preserve its unity and territorial
integrity, as that is the most important antidote to the
worsening security situation in the country. On 4 June,
the Prime Minister of India, Mr. Narendra Modi,
and the President of Afghanistan, Mr. Ashraf Ghani,
inaugurated the Afghanistan-India Friendship Dam. As
Prime Minister Modi mentioned then, "India's capacity
may be limited, but our commitment to Afghanistan is
without limits."

On 23 May, India, Afghanistan and Iran also signed
the Chahbahar trade and transit agreement, which we
hope will provide a new path to prosperity and reliable
access to Afghanistan.

We are strongly committed to supporting
Afghanistan in various plurilateral and multilateral
forums. India looks forward to hosting the Heart
of Asia Ministerial Conference in December. We
welcome the cooperation of participating countries
as well as supporting countries and organizations for
the Ministerial Conference and related events in the
political, security, economic, connectivity and cultural
spheres, to be organized in the run-up to the Conference.

We believe that the path to reconciliation in
Afghanistan should be through an Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned process that respects the red lines drawn
by the people of Afghanistan and the international
community, especially the ones regarding giving up
violence and abiding by the Constitution ofAfghanistan.
The ideas and philosophy of understanding and
reconciliation have deep and ancient roots there. I am
reminded of a famous son of the Balkh region - the
Sufi poet Rumi - who as far back as in the thirteenth
century said, "I always thought that I was me - but no,
I was you, and never knew it".

We applaud the role of UNAMA in providing
assistance in the various sectors of Afghanistan's
transformation decade.

I conclude by recalling the words of Prime
Minister Modi when he said that for many others their
commitment may have a sunset clause, but India's
relationship with Afghanistan was timeless. We would
like to reiterate our strong commitment and faith in
the will of the brave people and the Government of
Afghanistan to have a peaceful, prosperous, united,
inclusive and democratic nation.

