Mr. Negroponte (United States): The United
States shares the grave concern of all of us about the
situation in Israel, the West Bank and Gaza. We grieve
to see the extent of suffering and civilian casualties on
both sides, particularly the many innocent children.

Secretary of State Powell, in his Louisville
speech on 19 November, laid out a vision of a region
where Israelis and Arabs live together in peace,
security and dignity, where two States, Israel and
Palestine, live side by side within secure and
recognized borders. That vision remains valid, and my
Government is committed to doing all it can to make
this vision a reality.

No one is working harder than we are to end the
terror, violence and suffering that has afflicted the
Israeli and Palestinian people for far too long. We are
engaged with the parties on the ground, and we will
remain engaged. We are committed to helping the
parties end the violence and move towards
implementation of the Mitchell Committee
recommendations. We encourage others to support
diplomatic efforts in the region to this end. Our focus
should be on working with the parties on the ground to
help them stop the terror and violence and on
establishing a ceasefire.

The question before us today is whether the draft
resolution under consideration here in the Security
Council can make a meaningful contribution to
improving the situation in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, the draft resolution before us fails to
address the dynamic at work in the region. Instead, its
purpose is to isolate politically one of the parties to the
conflict through an attempt to throw the weight of the
Council behind the other party.

One of the fundamental flaws of this draft
resolution is that it never mentions the recent acts of
terrorism against Israelis or those responsible for them.
The dynamic at work between the Israelis and the
Palestinians is abundantly clear: terrorist organizations
such as Hamas and the Palestinian Islamic Jihad are
deliberately - and brutally - seeking to sabotage any
potential there may be for Israelis and Palestinians to
conclude a negotiated peace. Hamas, Islamic Jihad and
other terrorists simply do not want to see a negotiated
peace.

It is President Arafat's responsibility, as leader of
the Palestinian Authority, to take a strategic stand now
against terrorism. There can be no coexistence with
terrorist organizations or acquiescence in their
activities. The Palestinian Authority, using all
necessary means and with absolutely no further delay,
must arrest those responsible for planning and carrying
out terrorist attacks and destroy the formal and
informal structures that perpetuate terrorism.

Israel, for its part, must focus very carefully on
the repercussions of any actions it takes. Neither party
should lose sight of the need to resume progress
towards a lasting end to the violence and resumption of
a dialogue. Both must consider the consequences of
their actions and make decisions that facilitate such
progress. There will be a tomorrow and a day after
tomorrow, and both sides must find a way to move
forward together.

We believe that the Security Council should not
take an action that will turn the parties away from the
efforts needed to improve an already extremely tense
situation. It is with regret that the United States has
decided to make use of its veto to block this draft
resolution.

