Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): The
United States welcomes High Representative Ashton
back to the Security Council. We thank Baroness
Ashton for her briefing today and the European Union
(EU) for its close and deep cooperation with the
Security Council, which encompasses conflict
prevention, crisis management, peacekeeping, post-
conflict peacebuilding and long-term capacity-
building.

The European Union has become an important
partner for the Council in addressing matters of peace
and security. Together, we are applying more effective
solutions to the increasingly complex problems we
face. This morning, I would like to highlight a few
areas of our effective cooperation.

First, I would like to thank the European Union
for its critical role in preventing and resolving conflict
in the EU neighbourhood, utilizing both civilian and
military operations on the ground. One example is
Operation Althea in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
the United States strongly supports. We welcome the
EU's intention to strengthen its civilian presence there
to better promote reforms needed for Bosnian
European integration.

In Kosovo, the United States is a contribute to the
EU's Rule of Law Mission and supports the High
Representative's initiative to facilitate dialogue
between Serbia and Kosovo to resolve practical issues,
improve lives and help realize both countries'
European perspectives. We likewise support the
ongoing efforts of the EU, the United Nations and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
as chairs of the Geneva process for Georgia, including
their respective roles in facilitating the Incident
11
Prevention and Response Mechanism, which is
tackling ongoing difficult security and humanitarian
issues on the ground.

Beyond Europe, we welcome the role played by
the EU as a member of the Middle East Quartet. The
United States is continuing to consult with both the
Israelis and Palestinians, and is working with the
Quartet and our partners in the region to achieve a
framework agreement on all the core issues, ultimately
resulting in a negotiated peace agreement.

Further, we commend the EU's support of United
Nations efforts in the Horn of Africa, where the EU is
deploying naval forces through Operation Atalanta to
combat piracy, and in Haiti and the Sudan. The United
States welcomes the Government of the Sudan's
announcement that it accepts the Southern Sudan
referendum results, and looks forward to continuing
our work with the EU and the broader international
community to ensure that the two States live alongside
each other in peace.

We also note the EU's support of a peaceful
resolution to the political crisis in C6te d'Ivoire and the
financial pressure it is putting on former President
Gbagbo and his supporters to step aside in favour of
democratically elected President Ouattara. Many
challenges lie ahead, but we must maintain the unity of
the international community's response as we address
these challenges in Cote d'Ivoire and elsewhere.

Secondly, we would like to point out the EU's
support for training and capacity-building in
coordination with the United Nations and international
partners. Such efforts can serve as a multiplier for the
peacekeeping and peacebuilding activities undertaken
by regional organizations. We appreciate the EU's
initiative to share experience, through the EU African
Peace Facility, to build the African Union's capacity
for peace operations, as well as the training the EU is
providing for Somali Government forces.

Within Afghanistan, the EU, like the United
States, works closely with the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We
commend the EU's police training mission that has
been operating in Afghanistan since 2007, in
coordination with the NATO training mission and
UNAMA. Especially important is its support for the
construction of Afghan National Police staff colleges in
Bamyan and Kabul in 2011. The EU's civilian
assistance and the efforts of the numerous individual
12

EU member States with personnel on the ground in
Afghanistan in provincial reconstruction teams
contribute to Afghanistan's long-term security.

Finally, I want to strongly applaud the European
Union's commitment to the protection of women in
conflict situations and the promotion of their
participation in peacebuilding. The recent joint Africa-
EU Strategy Action Plan underscores both
organizations' commitment to this important issue.

The United States expresses its appreciation to
the European Union for its commitment to
international peace and security, and looks forward to
further discussions between the United Nations and the
EU on how to deepen cooperation and coordination.

