Mr. Jinga (Romania): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this timely debate following the presentation
of Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism, and less than a week after the Geneva
conference on the same topic.

Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered
on behalf of the European Union (EU). I would like to
underline that my country is an active contributor to the
EU's counterterrorism policies. I will now make a few
remarks in my national capacity.

More than half of the Security Council resolutions
adopted over the past year focused on this topic. And
yet, terrorists still continue to spread fear in many parts
of the world. Terrorism is a constant and diffuse threat
to humankind. Recent terrorist attacks, which have

killed hundreds of people in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan,
Libya, Lebanon, Mali, Burkina Faso, C6te d'Ivoire,
Belgium, Turkey, Pakistan and other parts of the world,
remind us that no country or region is immune from
their impact.

Since the start of the war and violence in Syria,
Iraq and Libya, we have been confronted with the
phenomenon of foreign fighters. They also pose a
serious threat to security when they return to their
home countries. The effect is multiplied by an
aggressive social media campaign for equipment and
logistical connections. Even though some countries
have integrated measures into their counter-terrorist
responses to monitor the spread ofviolent extremism via
the Internet, preventing use of the Internet for terrorist
purpose remains a major challenge for most States.

Counter-terrorism must be part of our response.
Network analysis, cutting financing, deradicalization
and special- operations strikes are all necessary. But
terrorism cannot be tackled by security or military
measures alone. Speaking last Friday in Geneva and
here this morning, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
reiterated the need to focus more on the root causes
of terrorism, saying that when one has to counter
terrorism, it is too late, and that the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and other radical groups are now
spreading like a cancer around the world. Therefore, in
fighting terrorism both a long-term vision and a short-
term response unnecessary.

We need a broader integrated strategy that considers
the full range of activities including humanitarian
assistance. Plans of action to fight terrorism have to
improve measures to counter ISIL propaganda on
the Internet, the trafficking of illegal firearms and
the financing of terrorism and violent extremism,
including, for instance, controlling the online virtual
currency trade platforms, and the effective cooperation
among financial intelligence units. Positive engagement
of young people, better education, teaching respect
for human rights, diversity and gender equality,
employment facilitation to counter poverty and social
marginalization all have to be part of our strategy.

Fighting ISIL must also include targeting its
affiliates, which are franchises and supporters in a
larger space than the area controlled by Da'esh itself,
because they enable ISIL to expand its reach. If the
international community wants to defeat ISIL than it
has to work against the group as a whole, notjust against
the most visible part. Equally important, terrorism and
violent extremism should not be associated with any
religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group. We
must not allow terrorists to exploit the refugee situation
and manipulate and polarize public opinion against
migrants who are themselves fleeing from territories
occupied by terrorists in order to save their lives.
Last but not least, the legal definition of terrorist acts
continues to remain a major matter of concern, affecting
international cooperation in hunting down perpetrators
and bring them to justice.

Taking inspiration from Montesquieu, we should
put the rule of law first because the rule of law is
the foundation of all elements of society. The United
Nations is uniquely positioned to advance this effort. It
provides the necessary forum for building a universal
coalition and ensures global legitimacy for the long-
term response to terrorism. United Nations conventions
already provide a legal framework for many of the steps
that must be taken to eradicate terrorism. The review of
the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
this June will be another step forward. Romania firmly
supports this process.

