Mr. Moubarak (Lebanon): My delegation would like,
at the outset, to express its regrets and sympathy to the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
command for the casualties suffered by the members of the
Fijian battalion through the premeditated and clearly
deliberate shelling of their headquarters today by the Israeli
army.

We regret sincerely that the Council did not meet
immediately on Sunday, 14 April, on our request to put an
end to the Israeli aggression against Lebanon. We deplore
also that the Council did not act swiftly to put an end to the
Israeli aggression and that it took many days to take action
on the Arab draft resolution. We deplore the fact that the
Arab draft resolution was not adopted. That draft
resolution represents the firm and constant position of
Lebanon and the Arab world in particular, by calling upon
Israel immediately to cease its military action against
Lebanese territorial integrity, to withdraw forthwith its
forces from all Lebanese territory and to fully implement
all relevant Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 425 (1978).

The draft resolution also condemns strongly the Israeli
aggression against Lebanon, which has taken a high toll in
civilian casualties and has led to the displacement of
hundreds of thousands of civilians and the massive
destruction of Lebanon's infrastructure. Further, it requests
the Secretary-General to launch a massive plan of action to
assist the Government of Lebanon to overcome the
hardships resulting from the Israeli aggression, in order to
allow the Lebanese Government to sustain its reconstruction
efforts; and it considers that Lebanon is entitled to
appropriate redress for the destruction it has suffered, while
holding Israel responsible for adequate compensation for
such destruction.

We would like here to condemn the premeditated
massacre perpetrated by Israel against displaced civilians
sheltered in the Fijian headquarters, resulting in the
deliberate massacre of 110 civilians, with 150 wounded. All
of us have seen the savagery of Israel against the men,
women and children of my country. This amounts to
barbarity; it is in the best tradition of the distorted logic
of Israel. We knew that such an electoral campaign of the
Israeli Government in Lebanon would end in such
bloodshed.

We would like to express our deep appreciation to
the delegations of Indonesia, Guinea-Bissau and China,
which backed the Arab draft resolution presented by the
Egyptian delegation. This draft resolution embodies two
very basic principles: the solidarity of the Arab world in
respect of Lebanon and its constant position in favour of
finding a solution to the endemic cycle of violence in my
country, which is due in particular to Israel's
non-implementation of resolution 425 (1978) of the
Security Council.

In this regard, I would like to recall that 24 hours
ago the Council of the League of Arab States, at the level
of Ministers for Foreign Affairs, adopted unanimously the
same text at the end of its special meeting, which took
place in Cairo.

We would also like to express our gratitude to the
President of the Security Council. We would like to thank
you, Ambassador Somavia, for the friendly and
responsible role you have been playing during all the
proceedings of the Council. My Government and my
delegation are very much aware of the positive role you
have played, and I would like to thank you very sincerely
for convening the Council in response to the Lebanese
complaint.

We would also like to express our gratitude to those
friendly delegations which have cooperated constantly
with us in trying to bring about the success of the Arab
draft resolution.

Finally, allow me to express my deep appreciation
and gratitude to the Arab Group, which has played a most
important, constant and helpful role in fully backing the
Lebanese position in the Council.

We would like to reaffirm again that the only way
to end the violence in Lebanon is through the full
implementation of resolution 425 (1978). It is up to the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities. This is our
constant position, and we believe that the Security
Council will act accordingly by implementing that
resolution and putting an end to the Israeli occupation of

 

Lebanon, which is the cause of the violence taking place
today in Lebanon.

