At the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your country's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month. We are confident, Sir, that you will steer the work of the Council successfully. I would also like to thank Germany for choosing today's topic of discussion and for the preparation of the concept paper for this important meeting (S/2020/571). The world is living in unprecedented times as a result of the outbreak of coronavirus disease (COVID-19). The pandemic poses a transboundary threat, has had an impact on all aspects of our lives - health, economic, social and political - has led to the death of half a million people and has infected 10 million more all over the world. The pandemic is, as described by the Secretary-General, the biggest challenge facing the world since the Second World War. It is also a living example of the close links between pandemics and security. That requires all of us to join efforts to confront epidemics and global health crises and to limit their harsh impact, through cooperation and coordination via the international multilateral system and regional and international organizations. A global crisis such as this requires global solutions. We all witnessed the Secretary-General's historic appeal on 23 March 2020 for a global ceasefire in areas with armed conflict in order to focus together on the real battle in our lives - addressing COVID-19. We have seen some other initiatives aimed at mobilizing international efforts to reduce the spread of the virus and its effects on societies and people, especially the most vulnerable, such as women, children, people with special needs and displaced persons. But there is still more that can be done in that regard. The world needs more serious and decisive stances. In that regard, we welcome the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2532 (2020), on this global health crisis, which we believe constitutes a threat to international peace and security. We note that the Council previously held clear positions on other health crises, such as Ebola and HIV/AIDS. I would like to pay tribute to the efforts of Tunisia and France in the past few months to adopt a Council resolution on COVID-19. The effects of the pandemic are expected to touch on many of the issues discussed at the United Nations in general, and in the Security Council in particular. On the humanitarian front, we are witnessing that the humanitarian situation has started to deteriorate in a number of conflict-stricken areas and areas that suffer from fragile health systems as a result of years of war and destruction. Likewise, the spread of the virus will have economic and social effects that may reverse the development gains some countries have achieved, which may exacerbate the root causes of armed conflicts, such as unemployment, poverty, inequality and competition for natural resources. Furthermore, there is no doubt that the pandemic might have repercussions at the political level related to the ability of countries and Governments to respond effectively and efficiently to limit its spread and provide the necessary medical care to those in need. In addition, we see that the pandemic has complicated the way forward for political processes in some conflict areas. Faced with those impacts of COVID-19, we urgently need collective and joint action and to unite efforts and visions in order to overcome this deadly disease by utilizing all the tools we have at our disposal and mobilizing the energy of experts, scientists and specialists to find a vaccine and ensure its equitable distribution, especially in developing countries. We also need to work to build the health capabilities of vulnerable countries and societies; provide medical and preventive supplies and equipment to enable health systems around the world to confront the pandemic; ensure continued delivery of humanitarian aid, in the light of the pandemic's spread, to those in need in areas of conflict and natural disasters; and strengthen conflict prevention measures. It is difficult to achieve those goals without a comprehensive and effective system of multilateralism that contributes to coordinating the efforts of the entire United Nations system, regional organizations, international financial institutions and other multilateral entities in order to overcome the most difficult common challenge facing our world today. Since the outbreak of the pandemic, the State of Kuwait has been a part of the international efforts to confront COVID-19. It has expressed its full support for the appeal of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire on more than one occasion and has participated in various regional and international meetings on combating the pandemic. To date, the State of Kuwait has provided $100 million to support global efforts to combat the virus. I renew the commitment of the State of Kuwait to support all international efforts aimed at preserving human life, protecting people's health and overcoming COVID-19. I must take this opportunity to thank and appreciate all health professionals around the world and front-line responders for their noble and courageous efforts to confront COVID-19. In conclusion, we ask Allah, the Almighty, to rid all of humankind of this pandemic and to preserve our homelands.
