Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
thanks the Secretary-General for his quarterly report
(S/2017/189) on the situation in Afghanistan. I also
thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto, for his clear and
enlightening briefing.

Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered on behalf of the European Union.

First and foremost, on behalf of my country, I would
like to strongly condemn the reprehensible attack on
the military hospital in Kabul. Targeting a hospital
is a particularly vile, cowardly and barbaric act. Our
condolences and sympathy go to the families of the
victims and to the people of Afghanistan. Belgium,
along with the international community, will continue
to support Afghanistan in the fight against such acts
of terror.

Regrettably, the report of the Secretary-General
also reminds us that civilians continue to pay a very
high price in the conflict. The increase in the number
of children killed or injured is particularly unbearable.
We support the Secretary-General's call for an end to
attacks on civilians and to ensure that impunity does
not triumph and that schools, hospitals, teachers and
health workers are no longer targeted.

Paradoxically, despite those serious security
problems, peace in Afghanistan is not a pipe dream.
First, the current military impasse demonstrates that
a military solution to the conflict simply does not
exist. Secondly, the Afghan population, as a whole,
exhausted by so many years of war, longs for stability
and development. Finally, the restoration of peace will
benefit both Afghans and their neighbours. I would like
to mention four points that seem key to giving peace
every chance to be restored.

First, it is important for the National Unity
Government to continue to make every effort to gain the
trust of the Afghan people through the implementation
of policies aimed at ensuring the security of the
population, eradicating corruption and impunity,
promoting human rights - in particular those of
women - and addressing shortcomings in the area of
justice and good governance.

Secondly, it is important that the process of
reconciliation and reconciliation encompass all
components of Afghan society, including those that are
currently opposed to the National Unity Government.
Failing that, peace will remain elusive. In other words,
we must ensure that the process is taken in hand and
run by Afghans themselves. Women also have a crucial
role to play in achieving lasting peace. They must be
fully involved in the peace and reconciliation process.
Thirdly, the role of regional partners in the success
of the peace and reconciliation process must be
emphasized. In that regard, Belgium calls on all regional
actors to use their influence to promote the resumption
of peace talks and an end to the fighting, while leaving
Afghans to take charge of their own destiny and
complete the process of peace and reconciliation on
their own.

Finally, economic development is another
priority, as it will make the country less dependent on
international aid, on the one hand, and illegal trade, on
the other. The ongoing conflict profoundly affects the
opportunities for growth; resources allotted to war are
not used for development purposes.

However, deep economic reforms are also needed
to create an environment conducive to the return of
investment and the reappropriation of their future by
the Afghans. The commitments made by the Afghan
authorities at the Brussels conference with respect to
their reform programme show that they are determined
to do so. We encourage them to move forward in order
to create the conditions to give the younger generations
of Afghans, who are increasingly educated and harbour
legitimate aspirations, the prospect of a better future in
their own country.

Allow me to conclude by welcoming the action
of United Nations personnel in Afghanistan. They
do outstanding work under particularly difficult
conditions. The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) illustrates the international
community's resolve to partner with the Afghans.
With the renewal of the UNAMA mandate in the near
future, the United Nations will once again reiterate its
commitment to Afghanistan and its people.

