Mr. Kolby (Norway): I would also like to pay
tribute to the ministers for their participation in this
important meeting of the Council.

Norway welcomes the addendum report of the
Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. I thank
Ambassador Kassem for his most commendable efforts
in this regard and for his presentation this morning.

It is with deep regret that we note that the
systematic exploitation of natural resources in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo continues unabated.
Unfortunately, a large number of States and non-State
actors continue to be involved in such activity.
Moreover, the parties' apparent toleration of controlled
military confrontation is worrisome.

To the extent that a main motive for the
continuation of the conflict is the exploitation of
resources, as indicated by the Panel, there is indeed
reason to question whether the parties to the conflict
are negotiating in good faith. Against this background,
the prospects for reaching peace in the foreseeable
future may equally be questioned. Norway urges the
parties to the conflict to prove that this is not the case
and to demonstrate that tangible results in the peace
process can be reached without delay.

We share the view that a political resolution to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including through real progress in the inter-Congolese
dialogue and the establishment of effective governing

S/l'VA437

 

structures, would help stop the exploitation of natural
resources. Thus, the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other parties must, as a
matter of priority, participate actively and
constructively in the inter-Congolese dialogue.

At the institutional level, we see the need for a
plan of action for building proper State institutions in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. More than
anything else, the addendum report clearly highlights
the fact that various regimes in the Congo, since even
before the country's independence, have neglected vital
State institutions and functions. Furthermore,
politicians have abused these institutions because of
personal ambition and other reasons. Therefore, we
would like to stress that the building of State
institutions can be done only from a comprehensive
and long-term perspective.

Taking duly into account any progress made
under the inter-Congolese dialogue, this issue could be
discussed at a proposed conference on peace and
development in the Great Lakes region, which could be
very helpful under the appropriate circumstances.

Norway is most supportive of the regional
approach that the United Nations and other
organizations have taken to the conflict. We are
looking forward to receiving the multi-country
programme for the demobilization and reintegration of
ex-combatants in the Great Lakes region that the World
Bank is currently developing. We are also looking
forward to the establishment of a complementary
regional multi-donor trust fund for financing
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration efforts
in the region. Norway clearly sees the need for such a
programme. We believe that the problems must have
regional solutions, and thus we find this regional
approach very appropriate.

We note that the Panel of Experts suggests that
international financial institutions and donors evaluate
their assistance to examine whether it contributes to the
continuation of the conflict. This might be a very
important exercise to ensure that international financial
institutions and donors contribute effectively to the
intended purposes, including to helping limit and put
an end to the conflict in the Great lakes region. We
further agree that all countries should review their
national legislation and, if necessary, adopt new
legislation to investigate and prosecute illicit
trafficking in high-value products that fuel conflict.

Once again, the Panel has reported that various
countries have not been forthcoming in providing
information to the Panel. We deplore this and urge all
countries to cooperate constructively with the Panel
and with other United Nations bodies or agencies when
invited to do so. We support an extension of the
mandate of the Panel in order to keep a close eye on
the issue, including those parties that have not been
very forthcoming, with a view to helping bring an end
to the plundering of resources in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and advance the peace process.

In conclusion, the Security Council should take
into account the views expressed at this open meeting
before adopting the presidential statement. My
delegation will be ready to participate in further work
on the draft this afternoon, as proposed by you, Sir.

