The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of C6te
d'Ivoire and on behalf of the three African countries
that are members of the Security Council.

The delegations of Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea and
C6te d'Ivoire welcome the adoption of resolution 2448
(2018), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) for an
additional year. The three African members of the
Council voted in favour of the text, which represents
the clear support of the international community to
the peace efforts of the people of the Central African
Republic. We regret, however, that the one-month
postponement of the adoption of the resolution did not
allow us to smooth out the difficulties and create the
spirit of compromise needed to reach consensus on the
text, which would have fully ensured the legitimacy of
MINUSCA's presence in the Central African Republic.

In any event, the three African Council members
wish to stress that our decisions must be guided solely
by the best interests of the Central African Republic
and its people, who have suffered too much from the
persistent crisis in their country. We are convinced that
the renewal of MINUSCA's robust mandate will enable
the Mission to carry out its priority tasks of protecting
civilians, supporting the political peace process and
supporting the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
Central Africans in need.

Through the new resolution, the Council also
reaffirms its support for the African Initiative for
Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic. It reinforces MINUSCA's role in leading the
Initiative with a View to fostering direct and inclusive
dialogue among the various actors. The Council also
supports the participation of the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General in the Initiative's panel of
facilitators, thereby demonstrating his interest in the
political process, which is undoubtedly the appropriate
framework for finding a lasting solution to the crisis in
the Central African Republic.

In addition, the three African Council members
welcome the strengthening of MINUSCA's support
to the Central African authorities in the context of
the extension of State authority, the deployment of
security forces and the preservation of the country's
territorial integrity. There is no doubt that this support
is an essential tool in addressing the ongoing political,
security and humanitarian challenges to the Central
African Republic.
Finally, Ethiopia, Equatorial Guinea and Cote
d'Ivoire express their support for the Government of
the Central African Republic and encourage it and all
stakeholders to collaborate with the United Nations
system, including MINUSCA, in their efforts to resolve
the crisis with a View to restoring peace and lasting
stability to this brotherly country.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Central
African Republic.

