Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are closely following the developments
in the political and overall situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In our View, what is most important now
is to ensure stability in the country and in each of its
entities. Today, this is the most important prerequisite
for making progress in the peace process. The
foundation for stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
still the Peace Accords, and their potential is far from
exhausted.

The realities of today are such that any erosion of
the Dayton structures will inevitably lead to a
strengthening of centrifugal tendencies. We believe that
the international community must continue to strive to
ensure full and non-selective implementation of the
Dayton Accords. Despite difficulties in normalizing the
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina - Mr. Petritsch
and Mr. Klein both spoke about this - the
international structures cannot and must not take the
place of legally elected organs of authority in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the two entities.

The bringing into force of important laws through
a decision of the High Representative is possibly
necessary, but it is not the best possible way of
encouraging State-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
A solid foundation for statehood in Bosnia and
Herzegovina can be built only through the patient
search by the people of the country themselves for
mutually acceptable solutions. To that end, the
representatives of both entities must demonstrate
greater willingness to cooperate. They must make
compromises, and they must find within themselves the
strength to rise above narrow ethnic interests for the
benefit of achieving Bosnia-wide interests.

We believe that priority at this stage should be
given to establishing the normal functioning of State
structures and organs of authority at all levels and to
continuing work on the legislation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and establishing a single economic area.
Progress here would make possible real movement
towards achieving the main goal of the international
community in that country: the establishment of
conditions so that the political forces of the country can
independently secure stability, democracy and
economic, social and cultural development, and so that
they can become integrated into the European
structures.

We believe that it is only by developing and
strengthening comprehensive cooperation between
Bosnia and Herzegovina and countries in South-East
Europe, and, primarily, by establishing good-
neighbourly relations with Croatia and Yugoslavia, that
one can achieve stability over the long term in the
country and in the region as a whole.

Against that backdrop, we attach great
importance to the agreement on the establishment of
the Inter-State Council for Cooperation, achieved
during a visit by the presidency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to Belgrade in May of this year. Such
steps to establish mechanisms for solving specific
problems that have accumulated in the relations
between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia would establish the basis for a
system of good-neighbourly ties, which is so essential
to the entire Balkan region.

We also believe that a swift ratification of the
Agreement on Special Parallel Relations between the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika
Srpska, which is linked to the Dayton Agreement,
would give new momentum to broadening and
deepening bilateral ties between Yugoslavia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and would help to stabilize the
situation in the region.

We are also worried about the security situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We would like to stress
once again that we are against attempts to establish a
single army because this runs counter to the Peace
Accords and to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in which issues relating to defence are
left to the discretion of the entities. Attempts to ram
this process through would be counterproductive and
could disrupt the rather fragile balance of political
stability, which, in the last few years, has begun to
emerge in the relationship between the Serbs on the
one hand, and the Bosniacs and Croats on the other.

We were pleased to hear what Mr. Petritsch said
about the attempt to step up the rate of return of
refugees and displaced persons. However, the rate at
which this is happening is still inadequate. Over a
million people have not returned home to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Efforts by the international community
must be geared towards further help for the leadership
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the entities in
establishing guarantees for the security of returnees
and in solving matters relating to where they can go,
particularly in the Republika Srpska.

In order to properly redress the situation relating
to a Bosnian settlement, it is necessary to have real
structural changes in the way the international
community is operating in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that the plan proposed by the High
Representative for restructuring the international
civilian presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina could be
used as a starting point for further discussion on this
matter within the context of the Peace Implementation
Council.

The main goal of such a restructuring must be to
enhance effectiveness, to do away with any lack of
harmonization or any duplication in the work of the
international bodies in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
move away from the practice of micromanaging the
Bosnian authorities at all levels and to reduce
expenditures and the number of staff.

One of the priorities in this whole process is, we
believe, defining the criteria for the implementation of
the mandates of the international missions in Bosnia
and Herzegovina clearly defining the stages for the
transfer of responsibility for the situation in the country
from them to the Bosnians themselves.

Russia, for its part, will continue to provide every
possible assistance to the establishment of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a single, multi-ethnic State consisting
of two equal and full-fledged entities, the Republika
Srpska and the Bosnian Federation. We will continue to
make a constructive contribution to resolving issues
still pending on the agenda for a Bosnian settlement.

