Mr. O'Brien: The cruel conflict in Syria continues
to tear families apart, inflicts brutal suffering on the
innocent and leaves them pleading for protection and
justice. I readily acknowledge that there have been
reports of a significant drop in violence in some areas
of the country. However, such steps forward continue
to be counter-weighed by the reality of a conflict that
continues to devastate the civilian population.

On 16 May, 30 children and women were gravely
injured in a heinous attack by the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) on besieged neighbourhoods
in Deir ez-Zor as they were lining up for water. In
addition, more than 100 civilians, many of them women
and children, have fallen victim, in recent weeks. to
the escalating counter-ISIL airstrikes, particularly in
the north-eastern governorates of Raqqah and Deir
ez-Zor. Millions more are in the line of fire, facing
crushing poverty and alarming physical danger. Tens
of thousands of children have been killed, and for those
who have survived until today, the outlook remains
bleak. Children have been forcibly detained, tortured,
subjected to sexual violence, forcibly recruited and
in some cases executed. Close to 7 million children
in Syria live in poverty. Nearly 1.75 million children
remain out of school and another 1.35 million are at risk
of dropping out. Approximately 7,400 schools - one
in three across the country - have been damaged,
destroyed or otherwise made inaccessible. Morover,
even if the schools were intact, many would be unable
to open, with almost a quarter of the country's teaching
personnel no longer at their posts.

Outside of Syria, hundreds of thousands of Syrian
children are left to face an uncertain and traumatic future
on their own. They have become stateless, abandoned
by the world but for the generosity of neighbouring
Lebanon, Jordan, Iraq and Turkey, as well as Egypt.
How are those children meant to function as adults?
What future do those children have, given that they
will often grow up to be illiterate, orphaned, starved,
traumatized and maimed? What future does a country
have when its next generation is a lost generation? For
those suffering children, what is at stake is not politics;
it is their lives and their futures. It is their innocent
voices and their suffering that need advocating.

Astana produced a promising step. It produced a
memorandum between the three guarantors - Iran,
Russia and Turkey-on the creation of four de-escalation
areas. It is a memorandum that stipulates, in no uncertain
terms, that fighting must significantly decrease and
unhindered humanitarian access must be enabled to
those four areas. The areas essentially encompass all
of the besieged locations except for those in Damascus
and Deir ez-Zor. With that said, too many agreements
that could have saved lives and reduced suffering have
failed in the past.

Therefore, let me be clear. The agreement simply
must succeed. We owe it to the 2.6 million people
that we estimate to be in the four de-escalation areas.
The United Nations stand ready to sit with all parties
involved to make it a workable agreement - one that
will make a tangible difference to civilians on the
ground, one that facilitates the delivery of life-saving
assistance based on the needs assessments of the
United Nations without constant interference, reduced
beneficiary numbers, the removal of medical and other
essential items out of spite, bureaucratic restrictions
and procedural and physical roadblocks.
We also must not lose sight of the fact that all
over Syria, millions of people, in locations inside and
outside the four de-escalation areas, continue to suffer
because they lack the most basic elements needed to
sustain their lives. We must not stand silent while
violence flares up elsewhere in the country and parties
continue to use starvation, fear tactics and the denial of
food, water, medical supplies and other forms of aid as
methods of war.

As this Council knows, in recent months, restricted
access and increased attacks resulted in a number of
so-called 'evacuation' agreements in the communities
of Al-Tal, Daraya, Al-Adamiya, Khan al-Shih, Wadi
Barada, eastern Aleppo, Madaya, Zabadani, Foah and
Kefraya. In that past few weeks, thousands more have
been moved from the besieged Barza and Al-Kabun
neighbourhoods of Damascus and the besieged
Al-Waer neighbourhood in the city of Homs to Idlib and
Jarabulus in rural Aleppo.

The evacuations have followed years of intense
airstrikes, shelling and sniping. The tactics are all
too obvious - make life intolerable and make death
likely; push people to choose between starvation and
death or fleeing on green buses to locations that are
just as unsafe. There needs to be accountability for
such actions. Starve and surrender tactics represent a
monstrous form of cruelty to impose upon a civilian
population. We have seen it happen numerous times
already - as I said, in Homs, Moadamiya, Al-Waer, and
elsewhere. In fact, Darayya and Zabadani are already
devoid of their civilian population. That may very well
be the fate of hundreds of thousands more people still
trapped in besieged locations across the country.

Evacuations are, however, only the beginning of
a new set of challenges for both those who are forced
to leave their homes and host communities. Travelling
mostly to Idlib and northern rural Aleppo, those
displaced now find themselves in an increasingly
precarious environment. The capacity in those areas to
support additional displacement is reaching its limit.
In Idlib alone, there are over 900,000 displaced people,
which places significant strain on local communities
and resources. While the situation has quieted since
the memorandum on de-escalation was signed, any
increase in fighting - attacks by the Government of
Syria, or fighting among groups inside of Idlib, for
instance - would be catastrophic for those already
stressed communities.

In fact, in many corners of the country, the
protection space is shrinking, humanitarian conditions
are worsening and the level of despair is rising.
That is not due to insecurity or poor infrastructure,
but rather due to increasingly strict limitations by
local authorities, non-State armed groups, as well
as terrorist organizations, along with the actions of
some neighbouring countries. I call on members of
the Council to use their influence to see that those
actors respect humanitarian principles and allow
the unfettered delivery of aid. We are also greatly
concerned at cross-border restrictions and regulatory
impediments imposed on the non-governmental
organization community operating in northern Syria
and are troubled by increasing reports indicating
that internally displaced persons fleeing al-Raqqah
Governorate are being kept for prolonged periods in
screening camps and subjected to restrictions on their
movement by the self-proclaimed democratic self-
administration in north-eastern Syria.

We need to see a step-change in access to the
increasingly dire situation in north-eastern Syria.
Rather than restrictions, we need an opening of space
in order to respond. With approximately 100,000 people
displaced due to fighting around Raqqah since April,
access is needed now through every possible modality.
We need to see restrictions eased for those operating
in the area. We need to see increased cross-border and
cross-line access for humanitarian assistance into the
area, including land access from Aleppo. I call on all
those with influence over the parties involved to act
now. Further delays or restrictions will only result in
the continued suffering and death of civilians.

For cross-line inter-agency convoys, administrative
delays on the part of the Syrian Government in the
approval of facilitation letters and convoy plans
continue to hamper our efforts. Every month, thousands
of facilitation letters are readily signed for convoys
headed to Government-controlled areas. Yet, in cross-
line areas, we have only been able to secure facilitation
letters for seven convoys under the April-May access
plan, which has allowed us to reach 266,750 people in
need. That is out of 1 million people that we requested
under the bi-monthly plan. As a result, we are essentially
down to one cross-line convoy per week to reach
those who are most in need, with only one besieged
location f namely Duma in eastern Ghouta * reached
by road during the April-May period.

Compared to 2016, when we deployed 50 cross-
line convoys through May, today we stand at 18
crossline convoys in 2017. In addition, the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent also delivered three cross-line convoys without
the United Nations, which reached 136,500 people in
hard-to-reach areas during that period. Moreover, the
removal of life-saving medicines and medical supplies
such as surgical kits, midwifery kits, and emergency
kits has continued unabated, with nearly 100,000
medical supplies refused or removed from convoys
since the beginning of 2017.

In addition, and as everyone here
knows - and as the Secretary-General highlighted in
last week's open debate on the protection of civilians
(see S/PV.7951) a attacks on hospitals and other health
facilities have become commonplace in Syria. About 20
have occurred every month between January and April
this year, making for an average of one attack every
36 hours and turning Syrian hospitals into death traps.
Such attacks and restrictions are not only violations
of international law and Security Council resolutions,
they are deliberate and cowardly acts aimed at the sick,
injured and infirm, at unborn children and pregnant
women, and at the elderly and young children - those
who are least able to protect themselves and most in
need of care and assistance.

The denial and delay of access, particularly for
people in besieged areas, is a political calculation
and a military tactic. This much is clear in Syria.
We may speak about the practical elements of
delay and denial - facilitation letters, inspections,
checkpoints - but these are simply the manifestation
of a mindset and approach by the Government of
Syria that uses civilian suffering as a tactic of war.
We have seen that when the political will exists, the
humanitarian imperative to deliver, based on assessed
need, is possible. Facilitation letters are signed, items
are not removed by inspectors and checkpoints allow
safe passage.

So I call on the Council to take all necessary steps
to see that the will to ensure that humanitarian-aid
deliveries are in their rightful position - which is
outside any military or political calculations - and
that they are restored, totally impartially. The delivery
of aid is not a request, it is a demand. It is the law,
and denying, refusing or frustrating it is and must be
a red line that is not to be crossed. Denial and delays
of assistance contravene Security Council resolutions
and international humanitarian law. They must end. I
urge the Council to act to ensure that its resolutions are
implemented. Any prevarication will result in further
deaths and more suffering for civilians. Humanitarian
relief cannot be viewed as an optional element to be
occasionally provided. It must go where it is needed and
when it is needed, not where it is allowed and when it
is convenient.

As I have said numerous times before, we remain
committed and ready to deliver aid through all possible
modalities for people in desperate need, whoever and
wherever they are. However, the bottom line is that
the real extent of progress cannot be measured by ad
hoc deliveries to besieged communities once or twice,
or every so often. The bottom line is that we have
been wasting too much of our time literally begging
for facilitation letters; too much time arguing at
roadblocks, pleading for trucks to be allowed to pass
without a sniper taking a shot and for medical items not
be removed.

I do not come here today to seek favours. Calling
for humanitarian actors to be allowed sustained access
to all people in need throughout Syria is not a favour.
Calling for an end to the removal of medical items from
convoys is not a favour. Calling for all parties to the
conflict to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure
is not a favour. Seeking to prevent children from being
buried under piles of rubble in their basements and
schools is not a favour. Medicine for the sick and food
for the starving are not favours. These are the common
precepts, the bedrock, of our shared humanity, and
the foundations of international humanitarian law,
and they must represent an unflinching call to all
people's fundamental decency. I call on all those with
influence on the parties to reinforce that message and
to take action.

In conclusion, I would like to send my very best
wishes to everyone observing the holy month of
Ramadan. For Muslims in Syria, the region and across
the world, it is a time for charity, contemplation and
community and a time for peace and forgiveness. Let
us all sincerely hope for an end to violence for this
period and beyond. Let us all sincerely work to achieve
the objectives of the Astana memorandum, so that the
attacks and bureaucratic impositions can come to an
end once and for all, and so that the United Nations
and its humanitarian partners can sustainably reach the
hundreds of thousands of civilians trapped behind the
current front lines.

