Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her briefing.

The current situation in the Middle East is
unstable. Uncertainties have visibly increased. As
for the hotspot issues in the region, the international
community must remain committed to a political
solution, promote dialogue and negotiation, undertake
a constructive approach to manage the situation and
take into account the legitimate rights and interests of
the parties concerned.

The issue ofPalestine lies at the heart ofthe situation
in the Middle East. It is at the root of all issues related
to the Middle East region. Upholding the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people is the joint
responsibility of the international community.

At present, the Middle East peace process is
deadlocked, while inflammatory words and actions
are escalating. The construction of settlements and
the demolition of Palestinian structures continues, and
the humanitarian crisis in Gaza is deepening. China is
deeply worried about these trends. I therefore wish to
stress the following points.

First, resolution 2334 (2016) should be effectively
implemented. The recent clash in the village of Sur
Baher in Jerusalem has drawn heightened international
attention. The relevant parties should immediately halt
the demolition of Palestinian houses and the destruction
of Palestinian property, cease all settlement activities
in the occupied territories and take measures to
prevent violence against civilians. All legal actions and
unilateral initiatives aimed at legalizing settlements
must end immediately, and concrete steps must be taken
to eliminate their practical effects on the ground so as
to avoid weakening the prospect of a two-State solution.

Secondly, we must champion multilateralism
and uphold fairness and justice by promoting a
comprehensive, just and durable solution. The two-
State solution is the only viable way to resolve the issues
between Palestine and Israel. The Arab Peace Initiative,
the principle of land for peace and the relevant Council
resolutions offer fundamental parameters for resolving
the conflict and should underpin the international
community's efforts to promote a prompt resumption
of negotiations between the two parties with a view to
establishing, ultimately, a fully sovereign Palestinian
State, based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. Any new initiative should respect these
basic international guidelines, and all countries that
have major influence in the Middle East region should
play a constructive role in bringing about the necessary
conditions for the resumption of talks.

Thirdly, close attention must be paid to improving
the economic and humanitarian situation in Palestine.
China once again expresses its concern about the
withholding of the tax revenue collected on behalf
of Palestine and calls upon the parties concerned to
honour their obligations under the relevant international
treaties, including the Protocol on Economic Relations
between the Government of the State of Israel and the
Palestine Liberation Organization, fully implement the
relevant Council resolutions and swiftly and completely
lift the Gaza blockade. The international community
should continue to enhance its support of the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, with a view to improving
the humanitarian conditions of Palestinian refugees.
China has already announced that it will increase its
annual contribution to the Agency to $1 million this
year. We will also provide support to the Palestinian
people through bilateral channels, including assistance
projects for the Palestinian refugees in the countries of
the region.

