Mr. Mahiga (United Republic of Tanzania): I
thank the Chairpersons of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1373 (2001), the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for their respective comprehensive briefings on
the work of the three Committees in the global fight
against international terrorism and the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. I congratulate
Ambassador Burian of Slovakia on his assumption of
the chairmanship of the 1540 Committee.

My delegation is gratified by the increasing
coordination of operations, given the interrelated and
complementary nature of the work of the three
Committees. The Analytical Support and Sanctions
Monitoring Team, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and the experts who
support the work of the 1540 Committee share
information and have a common approach to the
reporting obligations of States. The CTED and the
Monitoring Team coordinate some of their visits to
Member States, which minimizes costs in time and
resources. We also encourage the reported initiative of
the 1373 Committee to follow up on the
implementation of resolution 1624 (2005), adopted at
the Security Council summit last September.

We commend the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) for devising a comprehensive technical
assistance implementation plan. The plan will improve
the capacity of Member States with respect to the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). The current
activities undertaken by the Committee to enhance
dialogue and cooperation with Member States are
producing positive results. In that regard, I am glad to
report that the CTED delegation led by Mr. Ruperez
just last week finished a visit to my country. The
delegation was accompanied by delegations from
relevant international organizations such as Interpol,
the International Civil Aviation Organization and the
International Maritime Organization. The CTED had
useful discussions on future cooperation, including
enhancing reporting obligations with respect to other
Committees and exchanges of information on
international terrorism.

There is an urgent need to improve the quality of
the 1267 Committee's consolidated list. In his
statement, its Chairman made reference to the
Committee's intention to consider additional
improvements to the identification of and information
on individuals currently on the list, which I very much
welcome. Of equal importance in the Chairman's
statement was the acknowledgement that scores of
pending issues exist on the Committee's agenda. The
Committee should expedite the modalities for
reviewing pending issues, including cases related to
listing and delisting. We commend the Chairman for
undertaking visits to Japan and Indonesia. Visits to
Member States increase the Committee's awareness of
problems that States grapple with in the
implementation of the sanctions regime.

My delegation attaches great importance to the
coordination role played by the 1540 Committee in
denying non-State actors the acquisition of weapons of
mass destruction or related materials. So far, the
Committee has done laudable work in examining all
national reports that have been submitted. The
Committee's target of finishing the examination of
information additional to the first reports by 31 March
2006 is highly commendable. Timely consideration of
Member States' first reports enables the Committee to
determine which States need assistance in this highly
technical area. In that context, the Committee should
strive to increase States' awareness of the availability
of bilateral and international assistance in facilitating
the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

