Mr. Onanga Ndiaye (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Like previous speakers, I would like, on behalf of my
delegation, to reiterate to you, Mr. President, our
warmest congratulations and our wishes for your
presidency's every success during this very busy month
of September. We would also like to express our thanks
and gratitude to the delegation of India for its work last
month.

My delegation wishes to reaffirm its attachment
to the international non-proliferation regime, whose
cornerstone is the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. On 23 June, our delegation
welcomed the consideration by members of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) of the recommendations contained in the report
of the Panel of Experts, which we would like to see
implemented in their entirety. Similarly, we have
expressed our profound concern at Iran's repeated
violations of resolutions of the Security Council and at
its continued uranium enrichment activities. In this
context, our delegation reiterated its call on the Iranian
authorities to meet the demands of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and to return to the
negotiating table with the E3+3.

Today, I wish to thank Ambassador Nestor Osorio
for introducing the nineteenth 90-day report of the
1737 Committee and to congratulate the Panel of
Experts on its work. We also welcome the adoption by
the Council on 9 June, under the Gabonese presidency,
of resolution 1984 (2011), which renewed the mandate
of the Panel of Experts for a further year. We remain
committed to the implementation of all resolutions of
the Council.

Our delegation exhorts the Committee to
accelerate the publication of the experts' reports on its
website. We also welcome the negotiations under way
in that Committee with a view to finalizing its
programme of work and the assistance that the Panel of
Experts continues to provide in the implementation of
the resolutions of the Council relating to the Islamic
Republic of Iran.

Gabon remains of the view that Iran must meet its
obligations by cooperating fully with the IAEA in
order to build international confidence in the
exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear programme.
My delegation deplores the alleged violations of
sanctions against Iran referred to by the Chair of the
Committee. We view it as urgent that all necessary
clarification be provided to both the Committee and the
Panel of Experts.

Finally, my delegation expresses its appreciation
of the work carried out by the 1737 Committee, for
which it reaffirms its full support, and encourages it to
make every effort to ensure that the recommendations
of the Panel of Experts are fully implemented.

