Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): As this is my first
intervention before the Security Council this year, I
would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency. I would like also to extend my warm
congratulations to the representatives of the new
members of the Council, namely Angola, Chile,
Germany, Pakistan and Spain.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The acceding States - Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia - the countries
of Central and Eastern Europe associated with the
European Union - Bulgaria and Romania - as well
as the European Free Trade Association country of the
European Economic Area Iceland align themselves
with this statement.

It is a cruel fact that armed conflicts affect a large
number of children in many parts of the world. Many
of them are uprooted from their homes, maimed or
killed. Others are orphaned, abused or exploited. Girls
are especially at risk of being subjected to sexual
violence during violent conflicts, including rape and
enslavement. Children are recruited, trained and forced
to kill. Malnutrition among children increases rapidly
because of falling food production and displacement.
Infant and child mortality rates rise dramatically.
Access to schooling is seriously restricted.

This means that the lives of generations of
children growing up in conflict-affected areas are
hampered in a multitude of ways that hinder their
physical, social and emotional growth. We risk losing
generations due to conflict. This is not only a human
tragedy of immense proportions; it is also a tragedy for
the countries concerned. Those children are needed to
ensure the continued development of their countries.
We must face this challenge and ensure that we act as
swiftly as possible.

The European Union was satisfied that Security
Council resolution 1379 (2001) clearly reflected the
Secretary-General's concise report on children and
armed conflict (5/2001/852). The resolution is a
valuable example of Council engagement in enhancing
the rights of the child.

The European Union calls on all parties to armed
conflicts to respect international law relating to the
rights and protection of children. Only by concerted
international efforts can we ensure improved protection
of the rights of the child. We also call on Member
States to put an end to impunity for war crimes and
other serious crimes perpetrated against children.

Last February, the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict entered into
force. The Optional Protocol constitutes a remarkable
step forward in the international community's efforts to
put an end to the recruitment of children into armed
conflict. The European Union urges States that have
not yet done so to ratify and implement the Optional
Protocol.

Another important step was the inclusion of a
provision in the Statute of the International Criminal
Court classifying the enlistment of children as a war
crime. That covers both the conscription and enlistment
of children under the age of 15 years into any kind of
armed force or group and making them participate
actively in hostilities. We urge all States that have not
yet done so to consider ratifying and fully
implementing the Statute.

At the General Assembly special session on
children, children told us that they wanted us to
implement the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
They are impatient, and for good reason: an enormous
gap exists between the good intentions of international
treaties and the real-life conditions of poverty, neglect
and involvement in armed conflict. Millions of children
worldwide are exploited. In spite of progress in some
areas, much remains to be done.

The European Union will seek in all appropriate
forums to reinforce international action against
recruiting and using children in armed conflict. We will
focus on early warning of violations of children's
rights, but we will also look at improving monitoring
and rehabilitation activities of the United Nations at the
regional, bilateral and local levels. Furthermore, we
will insist on special protection for girls in armed
conflict and on more effective measures to fight
impunity.

The European Union wishes to express its support
for the work of the Office of the Special Representative
for Children and Armed Conflict. The Office has done
impressive work in raising worldwide awareness and
mobilizing official and public support for the
protection of children affected by armed conflict.

We also recognize the importance of the work
carried out by the United Nations Children's Fund, the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. It is also worth
mentioning the United Nations Development Fund for
Women and its report entitled "Women, War and
Peace". It is essential that the endeavours of those
organizations receive adequate support from Member
States - although it still remains the responsibility of
Member States to implement all obligations flowing
from international treaties and instruments.

When discussing last year's resolution, the
European Union welcomed the important tasks set out
for the agencies, funds and programmes of the United
Nations. We believe that the funds and programmes, as
part of their assistance programmes, can contribute
significantly to promoting the rights and the protection
of children, as well as to ensuring the rehabilitation of
children affected by armed conflict.

The needs of children in conflict situations are
many. At the same time, we should recognize the
unimaginable resources that children and young people
possess even in the most difficult of circumstances.
Apart from being victims, they also have the potential
to contribute to reconciliation and conflict resolution.

The European Union wants to welcome the
efforts of the Secretary-General, and of the Council
itself, to integrate the protection of children into the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping and peace-
building operations. Including child protection staff in
peacekeeping and peace-building operations is a
promising new element. We would welcome a
comprehensive assessment of the scope and
effectiveness of the response of the United Nations,
including recommendations for strengthening,
mainstreaming and sustaining activities related to
protecting children in armed conflict.

The promotion of peace is the overriding
responsibility of all countries, as well as of the
Council. But as long as armed conflicts are a reality,
we have a duty to promote the protection, as well as to
defend the rights, of their most vulnerable victims: the
children. The United Nations system as a whole has a
strong role to play in this regard, and we owe it to the
children of the world to mobilize its full potential.

