The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Iraq,
Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Turkey, requesting to be invited to participate in the
debate on the item on the Council's agenda under rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council.

The Council is also called upon to decide on the
invitation to Mr. Carl Bildt, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Balkans, and on the request,
transmitted by the Permanent Representative of
Portugal, representing the Presidency of the Council of
the European Union, to authorize Mr. Javier Solana,
Secretary-General of that Council and High
Representative for the European Union Common
Foreign and Security Policy, to participate in the
meeting under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure of the Security Council, document
S/2000/615.

Finally, I have received a letter from
Mr. Jovanovie in which he requests to be invited to
participate in the debate on the agenda item. No
reference is made to either rule 37 or rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Council in this
request.

Prior consultations with the members of the
Council have not made it possible to reach an
understanding on how to respond to these requests. I
therefore propose that the Council decide successively,
first on the requests for participation under rule 37 of
the provisional rules of procedure, next on those
referring to rule 39 and, finally, on Mr. Jovanovie's
request, which refers to neither rule 37 nor rule 39.

I shall thus proceed in three stages. During the
first stage, I shall ask if there are any objections to
giving a favourable response to the requests referring
to rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure-
namely, those submitted by the representatives of
Albania, Austria, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Bulgaria, Greece, Japan, Norway, Pakistan, Portugal,
Slovenia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
and Turkey.

During the second stage, I shall ask if there are
any objections to inviting Mr. Carl Bildt and Mr. Javier
Solana to participate in the debate on the agenda item
under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of
the Council.

During the third stage, I shall ask if there are any
objections to giving a positive response to
Mr. Jovanovie's request, which refers to neither rule 37
nor rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council.

If there is an objection to any of the requests to
be invited to participate, I shall submit the request to a
vote of the members ofthe Council.

May I take it that the Council agrees to proceed in
this manner?

