Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, allow
me to express our gratitude to you, Sir, for convening
and presiding over this important meeting. We are also
grateful to Deputy Secretary-General Jan Eliasson
for his comprehensive briefing and presentation of
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2013/326). I
should also like to welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister of Somalia, Her Excellency
Ms. Fowsiyo Yusuf Haji Adan, to today's meeting.

As the Secretary-General notes in his report,
Somalia is on the right path towards achieving stability
that could, in turn, create conditions for tangible
peace dividends for all Somalis. We welcome the
progress made on the political and security fronts in
Somalia, and reiterate our strong support for the Somali
authorities in their efforts to overcome the obstacles
to achieving reconciliation and to build and secure a
united, democratic and prosperous nation.

The international conference convened in London
7 May agreed on the need for the sustained engagement
of the international community to support the long-term
State-building efforts of the Federal Government of
Somalia. We are confident that the Brussels conference
will be another important milestone in providing
results-oriented support for the peace and development
process in Somalia.

The Council's approval of the Secretary-General's
vision for the new, full-fledged United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) represents a
renewed commitment on the part of the United Nations
to assisting the Federal Government in creating a
political and strategic environment conducive to
peacebuilding in Somalia. We believe that the six-pillar
policies defined by the President of Somalia constitute
a solid basis for a comprehensive and multidimensional
strategy that will further contribute to political
and national reconciliation, the swift and effective
implementation of security-sector reforms, economic
recovery and development. We note the strong political
will of the Federal Government to rebuild Somalia's
war-torn society and to push forward the peacebuilding
and State-building process.
We also share the Federal Government's view
that security is the essential prerequisite for further
progress in all other spheres. It is crucial to continue
to make all necessary efforts in order to effectively
address the threats and challenges posed by terrorist
and armed opposition groups, in particular Al-Shabaab,
including by supporting and implementing measures
against those internal and external actors who attempt
to undermine the country's peace process. There
is thus an urgent need for enhanced support to the
Somali National Security Forces and the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), particularly through
the allocation of additional investments and resources.
Such support is indispensable for sustaining security
gains and creating conditions for further peacebuilding.

Azerbaijan stresses the importance of the
consistent, strong commitment of the Security Council
and the broader international community to the
sovereignty, territorial integrity, political independence
and unity of Somalia. In that context, we take positive
note of the recent dialogue between the Federal
Government and Somaliland in Ankara as a significant
step towards peace and stability in Somalia. At the
same time, we share the concern expressed over the
situation in Kismaayo at the twenty-second summit of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, held
in Addis Ababa. Additional efforts are also needed in
combating piracy, armed robbery and hostage-taking
off the coast of Somalia.

It is important to ensure that national commitments
are matched with the strong support and assistance
of the international community. Full respect for the
relevant international law is a necessary precondition
for the effectiveness of the anti-piracy response and
international cooperation.

In conclusion, let me pay tribute to the United
Nations, the African Union, AMISOM. and the troop-
contributing countries for their continuing commitment
to bringing peace and stability to the country. I
should like also to commend the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, the League of Arab States, the
European Union and individual Member States for
their contribution to achieving peace and national
reconciliation in Somalia and mobilizing assistance to
meet the urgent needs of the peoples affected by the
humanitarian crisis.

