Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to congratulate you, Madam
President, on Nigeria's assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and to commend
the delegation of Mexico for its outstanding efforts
during its presidency of the Council last month.

I also wish to express our gratitude to the Council
for convening this meeting on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, in particular at such a
critical time of unprecedented violations of the rights
of the Palestinian people in general, and in particular
those in the Gaza Strip. Those violations stem from
Israel's barbaric aggression, which includes the
ongoing blockade of Gaza, preventing the arrival of
humanitarian assistance for civilians and attacks on
ships and international peace activists transporting that
aid.
Before I continue with my statement, I would like
to thank Under-Secretary-General Sir John Holmes of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
for his efforts to implement international humanitarian
law at a time when serious crises hampered that goal in
various regions of the world.

The awakening of the human conscience in
sympathy for civilian suffering resulted in legal
developments that led to the establishment of the
United Nations and various international instruments
aimed at stopping and preventing war, ending foreign
occupation and promoting the use of law to resolve
international disputes and address the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. First among those was the
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, followed by a number
of Security Council resolutions.

Despite those developments, we continue to see
situations on the ground that uphold double
standards - often in defence of the violation of
international humanitarian law instead of protecting it.
In fact, the gap between the letter of the law and its
application on the ground is increasingly widening.

We are concerned by the fact that some
statements by representatives of Member States in
connection with deliberations on the protection of
civilians in conflict situations at times display a
selective understanding of the issue that is contrary to
the provisions of international humanitarian law. We
are also concerned by the fact that some seek to
transform the suffering of civilians in certain areas of
armed conflict merely into a contentious academic
debate. That does not help to alleviate the suffering of
civilians.

I would like here to raise some of the same
questions that many other Member States have asked.
Are not the 12,000 prisoners held in Israeli jails
civilians? Are not the Syrian inhabitants of the
occupied Golan Heights civilians? Are not the more
than 500 killed and injured as a result of Israeli mines
planted in the occupied Golan Heights civilians? Do
they not deserve protection? Are not those who daily
face the most severe violations of their rights in the
occupied Arab territories civilians? Are not the
children, women and older persons who are deprived of
more than 7,000 basic commodities, including
chocolate, mayonnaise and other necessities, civilians?
And not the people of occupied Jerusalem, whom the
Israeli occupying authorities are daily expelling from
their houses and their occupied city, civilians?

Were not the Lebanese who were killed by Israeli
forces while seeking protection in United Nations

facilities in Qana in 1996 civilians? Were those
civilians launching rockets against Israel as they
sought refuge in the United Nations compound? Or
were United Nations forces in Qana and Gaza using
those civilians as human shields? The same questions
could be asked with regard to Palestinian civilians who
were killed by attacking Israeli forces in Gaza during
the aggression of 2008 and 2009 as they sought shelter
in the schools of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) in the Gaza Strip.

The Security Council adopted resolution 1894
(2009) on the occasion of the tenth anniversary of the
Council's consideration of the issue of the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, and two years after the
Israeli aggression against the Gaza Strip and its civilian
population. Since the adoption of that resolution, with
which the Council has systematically dealt with on a
daily basis, the Israeli aggression against the rights of
civilians in Gaza has continued.

Those violations are in evidence in the blockade
and in the hunger and injustice that prevail there. To
date, the United Nations as a whole, including the
Council, has failed to ensure the entry of basic
materials necessary to rebuild UNRWA schools
destroyed by Israel, in spite of the fact that resolution
1894 (2009) urged the parties to take all necessary
measures to respect the rights of civilians, protect them
and provide for their basic needs.

In addition to continuing to refuse to comply with
that and previous resolutions, Israel is also continuing
its aggressive policies against Palestinian civilians.
Those include the blockade, the closing of crossing
points, detentions, denial of the freedom of movement,
refusing to allow students to receive medical treatment
and obstacles to the flow of international assistance,
not to mention the deplorable conditions of civilians in
the West Bank and the Golan Heights.

Israel's actions have even affected humanitarian
activists of various nationalities from the freedom
flotilla, who attempted to provide assistance to the
people of Gaza. Israel confronted the flotilla with acts
of aggression that led to the death of nine civilians,
who were only guilty of trying to provide medical and
humanitarian assistance to people subjected to a
blockade. All the requests, resolutions and international
calls have failed to alleviate their suffering.

We do not know how much longer we can turn a
blind eye to Israel's inhuman actions, which constitute
a unique case of systematic wholesale violation of
every principle, norm and law enshrined in
international agreements. The United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict, headed by
Justice Richard Goldstone, has in its two reports
provided compelling evidence of Israel's violation of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
international humanitarian law during its aggression on
Gaza. As described by Justice Goldstone himself, those
violations could be considered as war crimes and
crimes against humanity.

We wonder about the Council's response to all
the facts contained in an international report accepted
by the Human Rights Council and the relevant United
Nations agencies, as well as about its response to the
hundreds of reports and conclusions by other
international fact-finding commissions and Special
Rapporteurs, such as Richard Falk, Jean Ziegler and
John Dugard, among others.

The same war crimes committed by Israel against
Palestinians have also been committed against the
Syrian people of the occupied Golan Heights. They are
therefore dual crimes, and the Council should deal with
them appropriately. We say they are dual because, as
we all know, Israel annexed the occupied Syrian Golan
Heights and Jerusalem despite the existence of two
Council resolutions condemning that annexation and
requesting Israel to abolish all legislation imposed on
the two occupied territories.

Israel is continuing its oppression of the civilian
Syrian population of the occupied Syrian Golan,
detaining them in prisons without any legal grounds
and in violation of all legal and moral principles. In
essence, they have been placed under house arrest. For
example, house arrest was imposed for years against
Fahd Shokir, a two-year-old child, under the pretext
that he had been born outside Israeli territory while his
parents were studying in Syria.

In order to give credibility to this debate, Syria
calls upon the Council to compel Israel to allow
without delay the resumption of visits by Syrian
citizens to residents of the occupied Syrian Golan
through the Quneitra crossing. We have addressed
messages in that regard to the Secretary-General, the
President of the Security Council, the President of the
General Assembly and the relevant international

Governmental and non-governmental organizations.
We hope that they will translate into deeds the
statements that we have heard during this and other
meetings. Will the Security Council move from debate
and declarations to committing itself to the
implementation of its promises and resolutions? That is
the question with which I wish to conclude my
statement.

