Mr. Blanchard (Canada): Canada welcomes the
opportunity to discuss Venezuela in the Council. Given
the severity ofthe worsening crisis and its grave impacts
on the people of Venezuela and on the security and
stability of the region, our discussion today is timely.

Together with democratic countries around the
world, including most countries of the Americas and
the Organization of American States, we have firmly
rejected Nicolas Maduro Moros's illegitimate claim to
power. The presidential elections in May 2018 were not
free and fair; in fact, they were fraudulent and for that
reason the Maduro regime has no authority to govern
Venezuela. Canada stands by the democratically elected
National Assembly and Venezuela's constitutional order.

Canada reiterates its full support to Juan Guaido',
President of the National Assembly, as the interim
President of Venezuela. We support his commitment to
lead Venezuela to free and fair presidential elections,
to invite the international community to support his
efforts and to respect Venezuela's Constitution and
democratic institutions.

Canada watched this week as thousands of
Venezuelans took to the streets in a powerful and
peaceful demonstration of their commitment to
democracy. We have faith that a durable solution to
the crisis in Venezuela will be achieved through the
leadership and courage of the Venezuelan people.

(spoke in French)
While the international community forms a common
front to denounce Nicolas Maduro's dictatorship, we
must not lose sight of the critical circumstances in
which millions of Venezuelans find themselves. They
are suffering from horrific human rights abuses and as
a result of the economic and political crisis, are unable
to meet their most basic needs, such as obtaining food
and access to health services and medicines. The urgent
nature of the humanitarian situation should leave no
one indifferent.

If Nicolas Maduro is turning a deaf ear to the calls
of the Lima Group and the international community,
perhaps he will listen to the more than 3 million
Venezuelans who have fled their homeland in search
of a better life, and who in many cases have fled in
order to survive. This exodus is already the largest in
the modern history of the region.

Many transit to or reside in neighbouring countries,
which have shown extraordinary generosity towards
our Venezuelan brothers and sisters. Canada expresses
its solidarity, gratitude and support for each of the
countries that have been forced to host hundreds - in
some cases hundreds of thousands * of Venezuelans.
If the situation persists, it is estimated that there will
be 5.3 million refugees and migrants from Venezuela
by the end of this year. This situation poses a serious
threat to the stability and security of the region.

(spoke in English)

How can there be any doubt that the movement of
more than 3 million refugees so far - with the potential
ofthat number soon becoming 5.3 million - constitutes
a threat to regional security? In the face of this
catastrophe, we as the international community must
stand in solidarity with the democratically elected
National Assembly, with Interim President Juan
Guaido, and with the Venezuelan people in pursuit of
a peaceful resolution to the current crisis. It is with
this goal in mind that Canada has taken such concrete
action as to impose targeted sanctions on 70 regime
officials and, along with Argentina, Chile, Colombia,
Paraguay and Peru, referred the situation in Venezuela
to the International Criminal Court.

Canada is also pleased to host the next meeting of
the Lima Group in Ottawa. Canada stands proudly with
Venezuelans. We commend their courage and reiterate
our own unwavering commitment to the universal
principles of democracy, rule of law and human rights.

