Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are deeply disturbed by the present
momentum of affairs in the Middle East peace process,
or, rather, the lack of it. Trust between Palestinians and
Israelis is close to zero. Israel's settlement activities are
reaching alarming levels. Acts by Jewish extremists
in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem, are
also intensifying. The desecration of both Christian
and Islamic religious sites is unacceptable, especially
under conditions where interreligious and intercultural
relations in the region are already tense.

There are periodic rumblings around the Gaza
Strip. We condemn the shelling of Israeli territory,
which threatens the lives of the civilian population,
as well as the actions from the Israeli side that injure
peaceful Palestinians. Both sides must show restraint
and respect the ceasefire. In such a fragile situation,
when simply maintaining the status quo cannot prevent
the eruption of new crises, the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiations must be resumed.

In that regard and in close cooperation with the
League of Arab States, the Quartet must step up its
efforts. We believe it would be a mistake not to convene
a ministerial meeting of that group on the sidelines of
the general political discussion at the sixty-seventh
session of the General Assembly. Another important
aspect is the restoration of Palestinian unity. Without
concluding that process, based on the platform of the
Palestinian Liberation Organization, arriving at a full
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, let alone putting it into
practice, is impossible.

Our support for Palestine and its participation in
the work of international organizations is well known.
We therwfore believe that initiatives to gain broad
international recognition of Palestinian statehood,
including in the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the specialized United Nations bodies,
dhould be seen as complementing the efforts to achieve
a negotiated solution to the conflict with Israel, rather
than serving as an alternative. They should absolutely
not be used by the Israeli side to turn the screws on
the occupied territories or put any other pressure on the
Palestinian Authority, and that call also applies to the
other actors in the area of Israel and Palestine.

Alongside its political and diplomatic work, Russia
will continue its efforts to provide the Palestinians with
donor assistance. In the past few years Palestinians
have received Russian humanitarian financial support
for education and health amounting to three tranches
of $10 million each. We are continuing our tradition
of financial assistance to the Palestinians in education,
whereby Palestinian students receive 150 Government
stipends annually. More than 500 students are currently
studying in Russia. This year, we plan to open a middle
school for Palestinians in Bethlehem. In addition,
Russia is providing food aid to Palestine through
the World Food Programme and in 2013 will make a
one-time voluntary contribution of $2 million to the
budget of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

It has become a tradition during meetings on
Middle Eastern issues to discuss the situation in
and around Syria. We cannot but be perturbed by
the unending bloodshed in that country. Among the
armed opposition, the impact of those forces using
the bloodiest means - acts of terror and attacks on
peaceful citizens - grows ever louder and more
frequent. The most recent examples are the terrorist acts
in Aleppo on 3 October, in the suburbs of Damascus on
9 October, and the massacre of the civilian population
in the villages of Al-Heydariya and Al-Hassaniya,
near Horns. Support for the fighters from abroad is
not only continuing but, based on everything we have
heard, seems to be growing. Illegal shipments of arms
have been sent, and the world media are increasingly
talking about the presence, in the opposition's ranks, of
mercenaries, trainers and jihadists linked to Al-Qaida
and other international terrorist networks.

Russia's approach to dealing with Syria is
unchanged. Violence, whatever its origins, must cease.
The Action Group's Geneva communique remains
current and necessary. We call on all clear-thinking
parties to work together on the basis of consensus in
order to arrive at a settlement without delay. The Syrian
authorities have publicly voiced their support for the
Geneva agreements and have appointed a negotiator.
We await similar steps from the opposition. We expect
that they will follow after the upcoming meeting in
Doha. In that regard, our hopes lie with the mediation
capabilities of Mr. Brahimi and his team, as well
as the sincere, constructive involvement of regional
and international actors in the quest for a rapid and
unconditional end to the bloodshed in Syria. That is our
shared and primary task.

