Mr. Kickert (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
you, Sir, and the Malaysian presidency for organizing
today's debate. We also thank the Secretary-General for
briefing the Council and for the prominence he attributes
to protecting children in armed conflict. He has our full
support in his efforts to ensure the accuracy of United
Nations reporting on grave violations committed
against children. We attach great importance to the
independence and integrity of his Office and regret any
interventions that may have been aimed at editing the
content of his annual report.

Despite all setbacks and grim cases ofabuse we have
been reminded of today, the work of the United Nations
on children and armed conflict has made substantial
progress since Graca Machel's report (see A/51/306) 20
years ago. This is also thanks to the leadership, energy
and perseverance of the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General. Let me take the opportunity to
thank Ms. Zerrougui for her admirable work.

"One has to do good in order for it to exist in the
world", the nineteenth century Austrian author Marie
von Ebner-Eschenbach wrote. As every child subjected
to violence is potentially traumatized and thus may be a
source of future violence, naturally our work for a more
peaceful world has to start with our children. The issue
of children and armed conflict has therefore always
been a priority for Austria. As per the president's
concept note (S/2016/662, annex) we want to highlight
some recent activities of Austria in that respect.

In the area of reducing the impact of violent
extremism on children, we engage in a multitude
of prevention projects, inter alia, awareness-raising
workshops for teachers and students on religious
and political radicalization, jihadism, antisemitism,
islamophobia and prevention strategies, but also on
peace education and tolerance towards religious and
ethnic diversity. Mothers' schools empower Austrian
mothers with an immigration or refugee background
to work against potential radicalization of their
children by engaging in constructive communication
and thoughtful authority in their families. In assisting
children displaced by armed conflict, especially those
seeking refuge, Austria is engaging in early language
support groups to promote faster language-based
integration resulting in positive long-term effects.

Austria is also keen to support the United Nations
system in its efforts to address the plight of children
affected by armed conflict. I will provide just two
examples. We supported the Special Representative in
hosting talks at the Austrian Study Centre for Peace
and Conflict Resolution in May 2015, bringing together
three major rebel groups in the Darfur conflict. The
three non-State actors agreed on the need to exert
more efforts to protect children and to adhere to
existing international standards. We will continue
our assistance to the Special Representative in that
respect to advance the given commitments further.
The third international conference on Children and
War: Past and Present was recently held in Salzburg,
co-organized by the Universities of Salzburg and
Wolverhampton in association with the Office of the
Special Representative, bringing together scholars,
practitioners, representatives of governmental and
nongovernmental institutions and the media.

We also welcome the United Nations commitment
to improve training of peacekeeping and humanitarian
personnel to deal comprehensively with situations
involving children. We have been cooperating with the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations in developing
training materials on child protection for military
peacekeepers and in hosting train-the-trainer courses
for troop-contributing countries. Austria will continue
to offer her expertise and national infrastructure for
that purpose.

In conclusion I wish to renew Austria's commitment
to actively pursuing the protection of children in armed
conflicts with all partners, for the good of our children
and the good of our planet. Let us always keep Ebner-
Eschenbach's words in our mind: "One has to do good
in order for it to exist in the world". What could be more
rewarding than doing good for our children.

