Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zarif for his briefing. I listened attentively to the
statements by Foreign Minister Jeremie and
Mr. Hoxhaj.

For the last few days, the situation in northern
Kosovo has remained tense. China is greatly
concerned, as northern Kosovo is home to ethnic
minorities. All parties should fully recognize the
sensitivity and complexity that characterize the
situation on the ground, address their differences with
prudence and through dialogue and negotiation, and
refrain from any action that may further aggravate
tensions.

China once again calls upon the parties concerned
to take measures to ease the tension in northern
Kosovo and prevent the further escalation of violence.
We hope that the European Union Rule of Law Mission
and the International Security Force in Kosovo will
play a constructive role in maintaining stability in the
situation in northern Kosovo, as mandated by the
resolutions of the Security Council.

The situation in Kosovo bears on the peace and
stability of the Balkan region and even of the entire
European region. The sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Serbia should be respected. Resolution
1244 (1999) is an important legal basis for the
settlement of the question of Kosovo, which should be
achieved within the framework of that resolution and
by the parties themselves through dialogue,
consultation, negotiation and other peaceful means.

China has taken note of the resumption of talks
between Serbia and Kosovo and hopes that the two
parties will continue to settle their differences through
negotiation. Against that background, we deplore the
tension that has re-emerged in northern Kosovo.

China is deeply concerned about the illicit
trafficking in human organs. Any action that violates
the norms of international law, and international
humanitarian law in particular, is not to be condoned.
Serbia's concern about the matter is justified. We
support the United Nations carrying out investigations
into the relevant cases.

China appreciates the activities being carried out
by the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the leadership of Special
Representative Zarif and supports the Mission's
continuing to play a positive role in maintaining peace
and stability in Kosovo and the entire region of the
Balkans.

