I thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his detailed briefing. Belgium aligns itself with the statement submitted on behalf of the European Union and its member States (annex 29). My first point concerns the Israeli settlement policy, which is illegal under international law. This month, the Higher Planning Council of the Israeli Civil Administration met for the first time since February. The Council announced a significant expansion of more than 5,000 housing units in settlements in the West Bank, including more than 1,600 units in areas in and around Jerusalem. We are particularly concerned about those developments, which compromise the viability and territorial contiguity of a future Palestinian State, with Jerusalem as the future capital of both Israel and Palestine. We urge the Israeli Government to reverse those decisions and put an end to its settlement policy, including in East Jerusalem and sensitive areas such as Har Homa, Givat Hamatos and Area E-1. Despite the current coronavirus disease pandemic and its significant humanitarian impact on already fragile communities, we note a worrisome increase in demolitions and confiscations, including of humanitarian structures financed by Belgium and the European Union. We are very closely following the situation of the school in Ras Al-Tin and the villages of Umm Al-Kheir and Khirbet Al-Majaz, whose populations are threatened with eviction and the demolition of their property. The forced displacement of those populations would constitute a clear violation of Israel's humanitarian obligations as an occupying Power. We are deeply concerned about the increased tension and violence between Israeli settlers and Palestinians resulting from that settlement policy. We condemn any use of violence. We call for combating impunity for the perpetrators of such violence, including through effective prosecution. At this time of the year, the annual olive picking campaign is taking place - a key economic activity for Palestinians. We call on Israel to assume its responsibilities and ensure that the harvest takes place without incident and that workers have safe and unhindered access to the olive groves. These developments demonstrate that, despite the suspension of plans to formalize the annexation of parts of the occupied Palestinian territory, the de facto annexation continues unabated. That undermines the confidence that the parties need more than ever to resume a credible dialogue. My second point, therefore, concerns the need to restore that confidence. That implies, first of all, that all parties put an end to unilateral acts. But that also implies restoring cooperation, in line with existing agreements and in full respect of international law. We share the concern expressed by the Special Coordinator regarding the budgetary situation of the Palestinian Authority, as well as the impact on the Palestinian population of the suspension of civil and security coordination with Israel. We therefore call on the Palestinian Authority to resume fiscal, civil and security coordination with Israel. In the context of a resumption of dialogue, it is all the more important that all Palestinian factions invest, with a sense of compromise, in the reunification of Gaza and the West Bank under a single legitimate and democratic authority. We strongly encourage the holding of democratic elections in the West Bank, including in East Jerusalem and Gaza. My third point is that Belgium, like its European partners, remains committed to a negotiated and viable two-State solution based on agreed parameters and international law. That means an independent, democratic, contiguous, sovereign and viable Palestinian State living in peace alongside Israel. We encourage all international and multilateral efforts to resume dialogue provided they are fully consistent with international law and the agreed parameters and take into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties. In that regard, we underline the role of the Middle East Quartet and the Secretary-General. We welcome the announcements - by the Governments of the United States, Israel and the Sudan - of the normalization of relations between Israel and the Sudan. We hope that those developments will create a new regional dynamic that will contribute to the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State solution. I would like to express Belgium's support for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in the occupied Palestinian territory. We are deeply concerned about the non-renewal of visas for the Office's international staff. We very much hope that this situation will soon be resolved, given the indispensable role that the Office plays on the ground. Finally, I wish to support the appeal made by the Special Rapporteur on the administrative detention of Mr. Al-Akhras. Administrative detention must remain an exceptional measure that is applied for a limited period of time and must take into consideration various guarantees, such as the right to mount a defence and the right to a fair trial within a reasonable time frame.
