Mr. Cohen (United States): I would like to thank
today's briefers and welcome the Ministers who are
joining us for this open debate.

The United States extends its appreciation to
Kuwait for chairing the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Issues over the
past year. Under Ambassador Alotaibi's leadership,
the Informal Working Group has engaged in a number
of collaborative discussions that address the Security
Council's work and effectiveness.

We are pleased to participate in this annual debate
on the working methods of the Security Council. It
provides an opportunity to reflect on the successes and
challenges over the previous year.

On the specific matter of the note by the President
(S/2017/507, annex), known as note 507, and Security
Council procedure, the United States would like to
once again recognize the leadership of Japan and
Ambassador Bessho in chairing the negotiations of
the Informal Working Group on that document two
years ago. We are pleased that the Informal Working
Group has adopted a number of innovative and useful
provisions to improve the work of the Council.
While we believe that today's discussion and our
tasks in the coming months should focus primarily
on the implementation of revised note 507, the United
States is open to changes that would improve the
Council's work and will continue to actively engage in
the process to further improve its working methods. We
will continue to assess new proposals to improve the
Council's working methods through several lenses. We
will ask whether a new idea is practical and realistic
and whether it enhances efficiency. We will also ask
whether the idea is designed to retain flexibility and
avoid rigidity.

Informal Security Council consultations can serve
as important forums for the exchange of views, but
speakers at such consultations too often read from
prepared remarks. Several recent Council presidents
have encouraged greater interactivity during informal
consultations and we commend those efforts. We
believe strongly that informal consultations should
remain just that - informal. We have seen innovation
and cooperation between consecutive presidencies,
most recently in those of France and Germany. Closer
collaboration among the presidents for the previous,
current and following months enhances the continuity
and leadership of the Council and makes us stronger as
a whole.

We take very seriously the fact that the Charter
gives the Council the role of maintaining international
peace and security on behalfofthe entire United Nations
membership. While the Council remains the master ofits
own procedure, we recognize that our procedural work,
as well as our substantive work, are both ultimately for
the benefit of the wider international community.

We thank Kuwait for chairing today's open debate
and look forward to continuing our work in the Informal
Working Group.

