Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): Let
me start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
and Special Envoy Haysom for their excellent briefings.

There are three issues that I will raise today that are
ofkey concern for the Kingdom ofthe Netherlands: first,
the progress on the implementation of the benchmarks,
and I was glad that the Under-Secretary-General was
so specific about those; secondly, the importance of
stability in the region; and thirdly, accountability and
the rule of law.

First, the Kingdom of the Netherlands is
disappointed by the lack of progress on border
demarcation. The majority of the measures set out in
resolution 2412 (2018) have not been implemented.
We welcome the clearances for patrols. Those are
important to facilitating the full freedom of movement
for the United Nations Interim Security Force for
Abyei (UNISFA) and the Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism (JBVMM). But we are still
waiting for a number of important steps, and those
include the meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism that are supposed to breathe new life into
efforts to find a sustainable solution for the Abyei region.
The announcement that the Mechanism will convene
later this week is encouraging, but we reiterate the need
to see concrete progress on the implementation of the
benchmarks from resolution 2412 (2018). The Kingdom
of the Netherlands expresses appreciation for the recent
efforts of the region towards peace in South Sudan,
and we are hopeful that this will be a fundamental step
towards peace in the region. It thereby has the potential
to improve the enabling environment for the J BVMM.

Secondly, I want to emphasize that stability in the
region remains our primary objective. The letter of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/778) underlines once again
the essential role of UNISFA in guaranteeing stability
in the Abyei and border areas. The Security Council has
a long-standing commitment to peace and security in
that region, and it continues to play a role in preventing
violence from escalating further. We therefore support
the recommendations of the Secretary-General. In
particular, we believe that it is important to create a
political space as the next step forward. Adding a
civilian component to the mission would contribute to
that objective.

Thirdly and finally, I would like to stress the
importance of the rule of law and accountability for a
stable future in Abyei. We support the recommendation
of the Secretary-General that the peace/development
nexus should be enhanced; in particular, justice and
accountability mechanisms need to be strengthened.
We see an important role for the United Nations
country teams to play in that respect. Criminality is
rising in the Abyei region in the absence of domestic
security forces. It is Vital to build the rule-of-law
capacity in local communities. We therefore support the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to increase
the police component of the mission; in particular,
deploying female officers could serve a crucial role. We
encourage the Secretary-General to increase his efforts
to do so.
In conclusion, recent developments show a mixed
picture. On the one hand, there is disappointment over
the progress on the benchmarks, and on the other,
there have been encouraging developments towards
peace in the region. The Abyei border conflict remains
unresolved. In the coming weeks, the Council will
decide on the way forward for the mission. In doing
so, we should all work towards long-term stability in
the region.

