Mr. Al-Ammar (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for holding
this important meeting on the dangerous developments
in the Middle East and North Africa, from the Arab/
Israeli conflict to the bloody conflicts in Syria, Yemen,
Libya and Iraq, as well as the substantial material
damage and humanitarian consequences in the region.
This represents a great challenge for the international
community.

The Arab/Israeli conflict has always been a
major threat to the region and the entire world and
has consequences for the crises in the region. The
violations by the Israeli occupying forces of Muslim and
Christian holy sites causing a change in the legal status
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque are a violation of international
customary laws. For that reason, we call on the Security
Council to assume its responsibility and take all
necessary steps to protect the Palestinian people and
their holy sites and to reach a long-lasting settlement that
would end the occupation of the Palestinian territory
and lead to the creation of a Palestinian State, on the
basis of the 1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital
and on the basis ofa two-State solution. Otherwise this
will remain a source of instability and the worst excuse
to justify extremism and terrorism in the region.

The crisis in Syria, with all its implications and
current and future consequences, could lead to a real
disaster in the region and in the world. The Syrian
crisis, with all the crimes committed by the regime,
as well as the great material damage inflicted on
the people - involving millions of displaced and
thousands killed - has led to the displacement of
2.8 million Syrians. We have afforded them a legal
status, granting them freedom of movement. We have
allowed the children to attend schools and even to
register at our universities. Since 2011, the States of
the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) have provided
assistance totalling more than $4.3 billion. All those
efforts have been made so that we can stand beside our
fraternal people of Syria.

We underscore the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Syria. We are also committed to the
political solution of the Syrian crisis in line with the
Geneva communique of30 June (S/2012/522, annex), so
that the Syrian people can live in dignity. The Security
Council should also fulfil its responsibility towards
the Syrian people so that we can end this humanitarian
cr1s1s.

In Yemen, the best way to ensure stability and stop
the country from sliding into terrorism is to support the
legitimate authority, based on the GCC initiative and its
mechanisms. We need the implementation of resolution
2216 (2015).

The conflicts in our area provide fertile ground for
terrorism. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant/
Daes is now the major threat for us all. Therefore, we
should reach a political solution to the crises that are
affecting our region. That is the best way to give hope
to people.

