Mr. Pleuger (Germany): First of all, I would like
to join other delegations in congratulating you, Mr.
President, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. I would also like to express my appreciation
for the able and efficient way Ambassador Munir
Akram conducted our business last month. Next, I
would like to thank Special Representative Klein and
Chairman Bryant for their briefings. Those briefings
have given us confidence that recent developments
both on the political side and with regard to the overall
security situation are encouraging.

Let me make three short remarks. First, we of
course welcome that the United Nations Mission in
Liberia (UNMIL) has now been able to deploy
throughout the country, and that has contributed, in our
view, to a significant improvement in the still-fragile
security situation. With the progress that has been
made, it seems to us that UNMIL could become a
model for the new type of multidimensional
peacekeeping missions the Council has been aiming at.
In that respect, UNMIL's increased use of quick-impact
projects is of particular interest to us. Quick-impact
projects appear to be a useful tool. We would like to
see that option further explored, not only by UNMIL,
but also for its potential for other United Nations
peacekeeping missions.

Secondly, the successful first phase of DDR, with

the disarmament of militias, was a crucial step towards
further stabilization in Liberia. The next step must now
be the swift integration of the former combatants. In
this respect, I would like to draw attention to the
situation of former female combatants, of whom more
than 2,600 have already been disarmed, according to
the Secretary-General's report. We hope that a situation
similar to what we have witnessed in the DDR
programme in Sierra Leone can be avoided. Council
members will recall that, in Sierra Leone, a significant
number of female ex-combatants ended up being
completely excluded from the reintegration
programmes of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL). That is to say that we
acknowledge efforts made with regard to gender
aspects of United Nations peacekeeping missions,
including UNAMSIL and the United Nations Mission
in Liberia, but we would like to see those efforts given
more attention in the future, as well as being clearly
reflected in the reports.

My third and last remark is on cooperation
between United Nations missions in West Africa. We
welcome their joint operations in the border regions
and we would like to encourage them to consider
further steps in that direction. It is our hope that
progress can also be made in the efficient pooling of
resources so that the heavy financial burden on
Member States can be eased.

As far as the sanctions are concerned, we thank
Chairman Bryant for his very substantive comments on
the issues related to the measures under resolution
1521 (2003). We will take them into due consideration
during the upcoming mid-term review.

