First of all, let me express my gratitude to the Republic of Estonia for the invitation to the today's open debate of the Security Council. We commend you, Sir, for the choice of this very timely and critical issue for consideration on this month's agenda during your presidency. I would like to thank Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Laureate and member of the Elders, for their very informative addresses. Let me thank the organizers of today's event for the opportunity to speak on the important topic of "Protection of civilians in armed conflict". The advent and rapid spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on a global scale have had a severe impact on the protection of civilians in conflict- affected States. We note with deep concern the continued spread of the coronavirus pandemic in all regions of the world, which poses a great threat to human health and safety. It is obvious that people in conflict-affected States are paying the highest price in the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic, and this is happening against the backdrop of ongoing armed conflicts. The current situation requires the immediate unification of our efforts and the adoption of decisive actions by the whole international community. In this matter, the central role of the United Nations and the Security Council cannot be underestimated. The Kyrgyz Republic therefore supports Secretary-General Guterres's call for a global ceasefire and enhanced international cooperation to successfully counter the COVID-19 pandemic. Today, armed conflicts in different regions are causing increasing pain and concern in the international community. In the unstable situations in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Libya, Gaza, Africa and Afghanistan, armed conflicts and terrorist attacks claim the lives of innocent citizens every day and increase the number of refugees. Continuing armed conflicts around the world highlight the need for timely and effective measures for the protection of civilians. We strongly condemn all acts of violence against civilians and call on the international community to join efforts for the swiftest possible resolution of armed conflicts through dialogue and negotiation between the conflicting sides. In this regard, Kyrgyzstan fully supports all initiatives of the international community to resolve the conflicts and protect civilians. We believe that the protection of civilians must continue to underpin the work of the Council and the international community. All States Members of the United Nations need to ensure the protection of women, children and persons with disabilities during armed conflict and take serious response measures to protect medical personnel and medical infrastructure. In our view, respect for human rights, including equality and non-discrimination, access to basic life services, disarmament, mediation and other tools can play a vital role in conflict prevention. We believe that, given the existing and emerging centres of instability around the world, the role of the United Nations should be strengthened as much as possible. In that regard, we support the peaceful resolution of the ongoing conflicts and crises around the world by promoting, under the auspices of the United Nations, dialogue among all political and military forces. The Kyrgyz Republic pays great attention to preventive diplomacy, peacebuilding and peacemaking, and the protection of civilians. In 2003, the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic established the Interdepartmental Commission for the Implementation of International Humanitarian Law. One of the functions of the Commission is to consider issues related to the implementation of the international obligations of the Kyrgyz Republic in the field of international humanitarian law. The Commission's activities are based on such principles as humanity, non- discrimination and the protection of victims of armed conflicts, of civilians, of medical personnel and of civilian objects. We have ratified eight of the nine international human rights treaties. On 7 May 2019, Kyrgyzstan ratified the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In 2018, we successfully completed our term on the Human Rights Council. According to data from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, this year Kyrgyzstan became the first country in the world to resolve its stateless problem, having reduced the number of stateless persons from 13,000 to zero over the past five years. We have positive experience of participating in the settlement of international and local conflicts, in United Nations peacekeeping operations and within the framework of the Peacebuilding Fund, and we are also contributing to the process of restoring Afghanistan. We highly appreciate the work of the ICRC in Kyrgyzstan. The ICRC supports the national authorities in disseminating knowledge and information about international humanitarian law. In particular, the ICRC provides technical support to the armed forces with the aim of integrating international humanitarian law into their operational documents. With the support of the ICRC, seminars are held on the law of armed conflict and on the protection of civilians, as are information sessions on international humanitarian law, which helps to increase the level of training of military personnel of units and military command-and-control bodies. Ongoing ICRC projects and programmes in the country are relevant and important, including in the field of humanitarian law, emergency situations and the penitentiary system. We believe it is essential that the international community focus greater attention on preventing conflicts and protecting civilians in armed conflicts. We are keen to harness the potential and experience of the United Nations and other international partners with regard to the specifics of our national development and the historical and cultural traits peculiar to the Kyrgyz Republic. Our active and productive cooperation with the United Nations system is evident in the growing presence of its institutions in our country. We intend to continue our joint work, and we are very interested in the possibility of attracting additional structures and expanding the United Nations presence in our country. The Government of the Kyrgyz Republic intends to continue to support and continue active work in cooperation with all Member States, the United Nations system and all international partners to achieve our goals.
