Western Sahara is currently facing a complicated and fragile situation in combination with a lot of challenges. The presence of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) would continue to help address these issues on the ground, prevent an escalation of tension and facilitate talks among relevant parties. We therefore voted in favour of resolution 2548 (2020), on the renewal of MINURSO's mandate. We would like to highlight the following points. First, it is necessary for MINURSO to improve its effectiveness and efficiency to cope with demanding requirements and challenges, especially the coronavirus disease pandemic. We stress the importance of upholding and implementing the Security Council's mandate in earnest and of considering the legitimate views of concerned parties with a balanced and impartial approach. Secondly, we would like to reaffirm our principled position on the situation concerning Western Sahara. Viet Nam supports solving the Western Sahara issue through peace talks among directly concerned parties based on international law and relevant long-standing United Nations resolutions. We also emphasize the need to find a just, lasting and mutually acceptable solution that ensures the right to self- determination of the people of Western Sahara, in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, in favour of peace, cooperation and development in the region. Thirdly, MINURSO should continue to play a crucial role as an essential instrument in the maintenance of peace and security in Western Sahara. We reiterate our support for the efforts of the United Nations and MINURSO in promoting the political process in Western Sahara and maintaining stability in the region. We emphasize the primary role that the United Nations plays in resolving the issue through mediation, conflict prevention and implementation of confidence-building measures. Moreover, we join other members in reiterating the Council's call upon all parties to cooperate fully with MINURSO and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General. Last but not least, in order to facilitate that role and accelerate talks among the relevant parties, it is also important that the views and legitimate concerns of Security Council members be taken into account when the Council discusses the situation concerning Western Sahara, including the renewal of the mandate of MINURSO.
