Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank the presidency
of the Security Council for convening this important
debate. I would also like to thank all of the briefers for
their very informative input on today's discussion. We
value Assistant Secretary-General Alexandre Zouev's
remarks regarding the strategic priorities of the United
Nations police components. And we appreciate the fist-
hand experience provided by the Police Commissioners,
including Ms. Unaisi Bolatolu-Vuniwaqa from the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS),
Mr. Awale Abdounasir from the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and Mr. Serge
Therriault from the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti. I ask that they please convey our
sincere words of appreciation to all policewomen and
policemen who bravely perform their duties. We also
welcome to the Chamber the representative of the
Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized
Crime. That organization proves how civil society
initiatives are significant in facilitating debate and
innovative approaches as the cornerstones of building
an inclusive global strategy against organized crime.

We all agree that the main role of police in
peace operations is to detect crime, maintain public
order and safety and protect life and property, not to
mention the much-needed capacity-building for the
host nation's police. All of those measures performed
by police during peacekeeping operations significantly
contribute to building the resilience of the host State.
However, all of those objectives cannot be achieved
without effective conflict analysis and early-warning
and prevention efforts, especially in enhancing conflict-
prevention, which saves people from needless suffering
and requires an understanding of the drivers of conflict
at all levels.

United Nations police, which benefit from a
presence on the ground and are trained to interact
with people in local communities that are sometimes
very distant from the capital, should contribute to
early-warning mechanisms. That can be achieved
through the timely identification of elevated risks of
tensions. We believe that that aspect of the police's
role in the peacebuilding process should be further
studied, developed and implemented on the ground.
As a strong advocate of the increased role of women in
peacekeeping, we would like to draw attention to the
significance of their operational contribution. From
the police perspective, the participation of women in
peacekeeping, in particular in community policing,
provides the indispensable sense of security among the
local population.

The aspects of United Nations policing that I
mentioned cannot be achieved without well-resourced
police officers and, needless to say, United Nations
police are a clear reflection of what police-contributing
countries (PCCs) commit to global peace and stability.
In that respect, I would like to refer directly to the role
of the United Nations missions represented by our
briefers. I must also highlight the efforts of MONUSCO
in the implementation of a performance evaluation
system that is based on objective criteria for both
individual police officers and formed police units. It
is worth pointing out that no performance issues have
been identified so far for individual police officers,
while one formed police unit needs reinforced capacity.
That is ofparticular importance, as protecting civilians
in urban areas is one of the capabilities assessed.
Another point that I would like to touch upon is the
indispensable role of the police in the transition process
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
significant role of specialized police teams - which
are responsible for providing support for rebuilding
the capacities of the host State police - needs to be
underlined. We have been following the work of the
Police Division on that matter and we express our strong
support for the concept. The current deployment of five
specialized police teams is already a promising sign
of interest among the PCCs. We encourage the Police
Division to put emphasis on the further development of
those units, while taking into account the experience
already gained from the first stage. We consider that
sharing with the PCCs the lessons learned from that
process would improve and foster the implementation
of the specialized police team concept, in particular to
support the implementation of a targeted mandate.

The President of the Republic of Poland, in his
speech during the high-level meeting on Action for
Peacekeeping held on 25 September, reiterated our
commitment to the UNMISS police component. That is
clear and tangible confirmation that Poland is engaging
in initiatives that help to restore and strengthen the rule
of law.

In conclusion, let me highlight that the operational
and resource limitations serve to underscore the need
for a holistic approach that leverages the advantages
of each component and the numerous institutional
actors and agencies that are present in the mission area.
The police component, as an important instrument
contributing to the resolution of a crisis situation,
should be considered part of a systemic approach. That
would help utilize limited resources in a more effective
manner by benefiting from the synergy effect.

