Miss Durrant (Jamaica): The Security Council is
meeting today to examine the situation in Somalia with
a view to advancing the peace-building process and
consolidating the peace. We are therefore pleased to
welcome the Prime Minister of Somalia as well as the
Representative of the Secretary-General, and thank
them for their important contributions to our debate.
We also wish to express appreciation to the Secretary-
General for his report, which provides an account of
the political developments and an assessment of the
security and humanitarian situations, and examines the
possibility of establishing a United Nations post-
conflict peace-building presence in Somalia.

When we met last January, the Transitional
National Government (TNG) had just taken office. We
are now pleased to salute the Prime Minister of the
Transitional National Government, and wish to express
our solidarity. We recognize that although many
challenges remain, there is little doubt that there have
been several advances. We agree with the Prime
Minister that there can be no development without
peace and security, and the question that we must ask
ourselves is, what can the international community and
the Security Council, in particular, do to assist the
people of Somalia?

From our perspective, the first thing we need to
do is to underline our strong support for the
Transitional National Government and its efforts for
national reconciliation. We take our cue from the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), and we note that
paragraph 33 of the Secretary-General's report states,

"The OAU Council of Ministers reiterated,

inter alia, the OAU commitment to the unity,

territorial integrity and sovereignty of Somalia;
called on the TNG to intensify efforts to build
upon the outcome of the Arta process; supported
the efforts aimed at the establishment of the

NCRPS (National Commission for Reconciliation 
and Property Settlement); and reaffirmed that a

lasting solution to the conflict in Somalia could

be found only through dialogue and the
involvement of all the parties in a spirit of mutual
accommodation and tolerance. The Council of

Ministers also commended those political forces

in Somalia that had agreed to engage in this

process without preconditions, and strongly
condemned the warlords who persisted in their
stubbornness in blocking the peace efforts in

Somalia. Finally, OAU requested its Secretary-

General, in close cooperation with the regional

organizations concerned, to continue to support

the TNG in its efforts to sustain reconciliation
and reconstruction in Somalia."

It is against this background that my delegation
would be prepared to support the Secretary-General's
proposal for the establishment of a Committee of
Friends. We have noted that consultations involving
Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Saudi Arabia, the
Sudan, Yemen, the League of Arab States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
were carried out, and that there was broad agreement
that the Somali situation required urgent attention, and
that the TNG could be the basis for completing the
Djibouti peace process.

The report says that there was also a widely
shared view on the need for a mechanism that would
facilitate a uniform approach and exchange of
information among States and organizations with
interest in the Somali peace process. We do agree,
however, with the Prime Minister that this has to be
done within the framework of close collaboration with
the Transitional National Government.

A strong point of the Arta process was the
involvement of civil society, and we believe that it is
important that this should also continue to be the focus
of reconciliation efforts. In this context, we agree with
the Secretary-General that much more attention could
be paid to local political settlements, and that there is a
need to strengthen United Nations programmes to
enhance capacities at the community and local levels.

The report pays considerable attention to the
humanitarian and development situation in Somalia. It
notes that economic and social systems sustaining both
lives and livelihoods in Somalia have been disrupted
by more than a decade of conflict, as well as by recent
droughts and flooding. As a result, some 750,000
persons are in need of international assistance to cover
the food shortfall. The report also notes the persistence
of high malnutrition rates, and child mortality rates as
high as 224 per 1,000. We have taken note of the fact
that United Nations agencies are elaborating a
multisectoral strategy to protect and rebuild
livelihoods, to prevent and respond to emergency
situations and to support the transition towards peace
and reconciliation.

But the report stresses the need for adequate
financial and material resources to be made available.
We hope that there will be greater response to the
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal so that the
comprehensive approach proposed by the Secretary-
General can be supported. We must, however, express
our concern that, as stated in the report, programmes
linked to the TNG have received virtually no assistance
from international donors, including the United Nations
agencies themselves, and we hope that this matter can
be addressed speedily.

Security continues to be of concern. We have
heard from the Prime Minister of the steps taken by the
Transitional National Government in a situation in
which there was no government infrastructure, such as
a civil service, for more than 10 years. Further action
has been taken in regard to the police and judiciary, but
this has been hampered by the lack of funds.

We agree with the Secretary-General that a key
role for the international community is to support the
establishment of the rule of law and the emergence of
impartial national political and judicial institutions in
the country. We also agree with those who have
referred to the fact that without adherence to the arms
embargo, it will be impossible to stop the fighting
which has been ongoing recently.

The Secretary-General has reiterated that the
political, humanitarian and development challenges
faced by Somalia are of such magnitude that the peace-
building process is likely to take a long time to
complete. Jamaica strongly supports the establishment
of a peace-building mission in Somalia. But we have
taken note of the Secretary-General's conclusion that
the security situation does not make it possible for him
to recommend the deployment of such a mission at this
time. We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
for the safety and security of United Nations staff and
associated personnel. We therefore hope that a
comprehensive assessment of the security situation can
be carried out in the near future and the results made
available to the Security Council.

In conclusion, we agree with the Secretary-
General that the Somali parties should dedicate
themselves entirely to efforts to achieve the ultimate
objective: the return of their country to peace, stability
and overall normalcy. We have been heartened today
by the expressions of the Prime Minister on behalf of
the Transitional National Government. The
international community must continue to support these
efforts. The people of Somalia deserve this.

