Ms. Lintonen (Finland): I have the honour to
deliver the following statement on behalf of all five
Nordic countries: Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden
and Finland.

The Nordic countries welcome this six-monthly
open debate and wish to thank the presidency of the
Security Council and the Secretary-General for
organizing it, as well as Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his topical briefing. Timely briefings to the
Security Council by the High Commissioner for
Human Rights, the Emergency Relief Coordinator, the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and
other relevant actors will help the Council to act
sufficiently early on in conflict situations to effectively
protect civilians at risk.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is a
cornerstone of international humanitarian law.
Regrettably, and in spite of the established status of the
fundamental rule of distinction - identified by the
International Court of Justice as an intransgressible
principle of international customary law - civilians
often fall victim to the disregard of States and armed
groups of their obligations. Even State signatories to
the relevant instruments fail to abide by the relevant
provisions. The Nordic countries wish to emphasize
that unarmed men, women and children must not be
targeted. All necessary measures must be taken by
parties to a conflict to avoid civilian casualties.

The Nordic countries are deeply concerned by the
escalation of violence in Gaza and the killing and
injuries inflicted upon large numbers of non-
combatants. The ceasefire called for by the Security
Council must be given effect. Life-saving ambulances
must be given unrestricted access to the wounded;
medical personnel, hospitals and other medical units
must be respected and protected. It is also worth
recalling that disrespect of the rules by one party to a
conflict can never serve as a justification for the
deliberate targeting of civilians or civilian objects.

It is essential to strengthen local capacities to
protect civilians at risk of grave human rights
violations. Through the Nordic Coordinated
Arrangement for Military Peace Support, the Nordic
countries have offered training support for peace
support operations to partners, inter alia, in the western
Balkans and Ukraine. Our additional focus is now on
Africa, where we are examining potential Nordic
projects to support the development of the African
peace and security architecture.

In order to build sustainable peace and security,
there is a need for increased attention to women's equal
and active participation in conflict prevention, peace
negotiations, reconstruction and political participation.
As women and children are vulnerable in conflicts,
their situation should be addressed accordingly. The
comprehensive implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) is crucial. The Nordic countries are committed
to doing their share in the implementation process. A
concrete case in point is that all five Nordic countries
have drawn up national action plans on the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
The scope and brutality of sexual violence against
women in the eastern parts of the Democratic Republic
of Congo are particularly worrying. Hundreds of
thousands of women in the region have been raped, and
they continue to lack protection from further sexual
violence, despite the efforts of humanitarian actors, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and others. Much
more needs to be done in order to address these
horrible crimes. In this context, it is crucial to
implement resolution 1820 (2008) on sexual violence
in armed conflict.

We recognize the need to enhance the
complementarity and coordination of national policies
and strategies related to security, development, human
rights and humanitarian issues. International
humanitarian law grants children special protection and
sets a minimum age for participating in hostilities. The
short-, medium- and long-term impacts of armed
conflict on children, adolescents and young persons
must be addressed in an effective, sustainable and
comprehensive manner. The Convention on the Rights
of the Child clearly states that children have the right
to express their opinion in matters that affect them. We
have to expand opportunities for children's voices to be
heard and given due weight in peacebuilding and
reconciliation efforts. More attention needs to be paid
to this aspect of the implementation of resolution 1612
(2005) on children and armed conflict. The Nordic
countries wish to emphasize the need to mainstream
the rights of the child into all activities in conflict and
post-conflict situations.

The engagement of the Security Council has
greatly elevated the relevance of child protection
concerns within its international peace and security
agenda and has allowed for opportunities to improve
efforts and actions for the protection of children. While
there has been progress in some field, there is an urgent
need to address all grave violations; in particular,
sexual violence against children is a heinous
consequence of war. We wish to join the call by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict for strong action also to
be taken against those who sexually violate children.

On a more positive note, the Nordic countries
recall the establishment of the International Criminal
Court as an achievement of historical significance.
Now that the Statute is in force for 108 States and the
system laid down for it is fully operational and
functioning, there is much reason to be confident in the
Court's future. The ideas of justice and accountability

have been institutionally anchored at the international
level and more broadly embraced than ever before. The
first proceedings of the International Criminal Court
highlight the duty to protect civilians in armed
conflicts. The Nordic countries urge all States to ratify
the Rome Statute and to fully implement its provisions
in their national legislation.

We are also encouraged by the unequivocal
statement issued at the 2005 World Summit on the
responsibility to protect civilian populations from
genocide, crimes against humanity, ethnic cleansing
and war crimes. We look forward to the report of the
Secretary-General on this notion and believe that it will
provide a basis for further deepening the international
consensus on the necessary steps to be taken by both
States and international organizations to prevent
humanitarian catastrophes.

Let me conclude by affirming that the Nordic
countries will continue to be firmly committed with
respect to this issue of great importance.

