Mr. Kubis: Following the parliamentary elections
held on 12 May, complaints and allegations of electoral
fraud and mismanagement resulted in the decision to
conduct a partial manual ballot recount. The situation
has been further complicated by public demonstrations,
which started on 8 July in Basra governorate and spread
to other predominantly Shi'a southern governorates and
Baghdad. The protesters are mainly young people with
complaints over the lack of delivery of basic services,
shortages of electricity, lack of jobs and pervasive
corruption. However, their messages have swiftly
become increasingly politicized, criticizing national
leaders and successive Governments for ignoring the
needs of the people and social justice, expressing their
deep and growing frustration with old political leaders
and the political system, based on sectarian quotas
they deem corrupt, dysfunctional and stagnant, and
deploring foreign interference in the internal matters of
Iraq. It is to be noted that many of their demands echo
demands made in the demonstrations that engulfed
predominantly Sunni governorates several years ago.

The leader of the Fatah Alliance, Hadi Al-Ameri,
publicly acknowledged that politicians had failed the
people, reconfirming the need to reform the political
process and to establish a Government of services and
not of privileges for political parties. The head of the
Sa'iroun Alliance, cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, who himself
led massive public protests in Baghdad as recently as
2016, with similar demands as today's demonstrations,
urged the suspension of Government-formation talks
until the legitimate demands of protesters were met.
The historically low voter turnout witnessed during the
12 May parliamentary elections, when sapproximately
60 per cent of eligible voters did not participate, had
already delivered a strong message of dissatisfaction
with the current state of management of public affairs.

In his Friday sermon on 27 July, the Supreme
Religious Authority, Grand Ayatollah Ali Al-Sistani,
called for the early formation of a future Government
comprising competent, honest members and a Prime
Minister who should be decisive and courageous enough
to fight the financial and administrative corruption that is
the root cause ofmost ofIraq's problems. The new Prime
Minister should have authority and take responsibility
for his Cabinet. The new Council of Representatives
should abolish privileges and amend laws that do not
achieve justice and equality for the people. Al-Sistani
warned that if the new Government failed to abide by its
commitments and deliver on its reform programme or if
the new Council of Representatives or the Judiciary did
not act appropriately, the people, supported by all forces
of good in the country, would have no other option but
to develop other ways to impose their will on officials.

On 30 July, Prime Minister Al Abadi met in
Baghdad with Kurdistan Regional Government Prime
Minister Nechirvan Barzani. They also underlined the
need to expedite formation of the new Government and
to resolve all issues between Erbil and Baghdad based
on the Iraqi Constitution.

I note with appreciation that Prime Minister Al
Abadi has made major efforts to provide swift and
tailored responses to legitimate popular demands,
bringing temporary relief to people living under
arduous conditions. However, these measures remain
insufficient to address the depth of people's needs
and concerns.

I urge political leaders to listen to the voice of
the people and accelerate the process of formation of
a patriotic, inclusive and non-sectarian Government,
with a strong and empowered Prime Minister, which
will give priority to political, economic and social
reforms, investments, creation of jobs, reconciliation,
justice, equality, accountability and good governance,
including the fight against corruption; which will
put all armed formations under strict control of the
State and resolutely act against insubordinate militias
and criminal gangs; and which will ensure the full
sovereignty and real independence of Iraq, free from
foreign interference.

Based on the election law amended on 6 June, the
board of judges that was assigned to supervise the
electoral process adopted modalities for the recounting
of ballots that were subject to complaints or allegations
of fraud, in line with the Federal Supreme Court ruling
of2l June. On 6 August, the board ofjudges announced
that the manual recount had been completed. The process
then moved on to results-tabulation to generate the
provisional election results. Throughout the recounting
process, an electoral monitoring team from the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI),
complemented by experts of the United Nations
Development Programme, provided oversight, advice
and assistance. I welcome the orderly, transparent,
credible and well-organized conduct of the recount. I
commend the board ofjudges for its hands-on impartial
work. I applaud the dedication and professionalism of
all recounting staff, both Independent High Electoral
Commission and judiciary personnel. The recounting
increased public confidence in the electoral process
and election results.

The Deputy Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Political Affairs and Electoral
Assistance, Alice Walpole, and I met with numerous
political leaders, women, minority and civil society
actors to promote the meaningful participation of
women in political, economic and social life, including
their representation at the highest levels in political
and decision-making structures, including in the
future Government and Council of Representatives. On
31 July, UNAMI met with members ofthe national team
to discuss progress and challenges in implementing the
Iraqi National action plan on resolution 1325 (2000),
including the lack of a dedicated budget to support
activities under the plan. I am very pleased to note
that Ms. Suzan Araf Maroof, who is seated next to me,
participated actively in that meeting.

LastweekUNAMI facilitatedameetingwithwomen
leaders, civil society activists and elected women, which
adopted a consolidated vision of women's demands for
the inclusion of gender perspectives and gender equality
considerations in the Government's programme. The
recommendations are attached to my briefing notes.
This week Deputy Special Representative Walpole
chaired a United Nations meeting with Iraqi women
expected to sit on the next Council of Representatives.
Iraqi women politicians undertook to work across the
party divide * for example, to establish a women's
parliamentary caucus, for the first time, and women's
platforms to develop Government policies and strategies
to increase women's participation and representation
in politics, and foster gender mainstreaming in all
parliamentary processes.

On 19 July, Deputy Special Representative for
Humanitarian Affairs and Development Coordinator,
Ms. Marta Ruedas, convened a meeting of the
Development Cooperation Forum in Baghdad, where
more than 20 international partners were presented
with 61 United Nations country team projects that are
ready for funding through the $1 billion Recovery and
Resilience Programme. I urge Member States to support
Iraq by accelerating delivery on the commitments made
in Kuwait in February.

One year after the liberation of Mosul, United
Nations Mine Action Service clearance teams have
removed 43,700 explosive hazards in the city, including
1,000 improvised explosive devices. The United
Nations Development Programme's Funding Facility
for Stabilization has continued to support 2,361
projects, with the successful completion of more than
1,000 in five governorates. Since January, more than
684,000 displaced people have returned, while, as of
15 July, just under 2 million Iraqis remain displaced.

The security and protection environment remains
volatile, posing serious protection risks to Iraqi civilians.
Abductions, disappearances, detention, increased risks
of sexual and gender-based violence and violations of
child rights continue. For many, a combination of such
factors has led to secondary or repeated displacement.
As of 24 July, donors had contributed $324 million
to the humanitarian response plan, which is 57 per
cent of the plan's requirements. In order to ensure
that critical assistance to vulnerable communities is
available, I appeal to the donor community to continue
its generous funding.
The ongoing demonstrations in southern
governorates have brought to the fore their long-
neglected social, economic and development needs.
The United Nations country team in Iraq is developing
a strategy and programmes to scale up assistance.
Furthermore, it is expected that water scarcity in the
five southern governorates will increase in the coming
months, putting about 25 per cent of a population of
2 million at risk of water shortages, water borne-related
diseases and possible displacement. Since the peoples
of Iraq, Turkey, Syria and Iran all share water resources,
I urge them to enhance their cooperation in the efficient
management of water resources.

Although tangible results in the search for Kuwaiti
missing persons have yet to be achieved, the Iraqi
Ministry of Defence continues to carry out excavation
and exploration missions, as well as efforts to identify
new witnesses. On 25 July another session of the
tripartite mechanism took place in Kuwait. Repeated
calls to the international community have prompted
Member States in possession of satellite imagery from
1990-1991 to come forward with information that could
assist in identifying burial locations. Nevertheless,
the procurement of field equipment, the provision of
forensic DNA, anthropological training courses and
capacity-building for Iraqi and Kuwaiti technical teams
remain a major challenge and require further assistance
from the international community. I am also pleased to
report that the two sides are close to setting a date for
the official transfer of a considerable consignment of
Kuwaiti property.

