Ms. Norman-Chalet (United States of America): I thank the briefers for their presentations. In 2014, Russia occupied Crimea and fuelled the conflict in eastern Ukraine that has killed more than 13,000 people, displaced millions and precipitated an alarming humanitarian crisis. Russia's ongoing aggressive actions are an affront to international norms and a threat to our common security. The position of the United States is clear: we continue to support the Minsk agreements as the way forward in eastern Ukraine. We fully back the Normandy format process. The resolution to this conflict must be a diplomatic one, and we will continue to engage with allies and partners to support Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity. Through its actions, Ukraine has made clear its commitment to achieving a peaceful resolution of the conflict. President Zelenskyy has energized conflict diplomacy through outreach to Ukrainian citizens in eastern Ukraine, enabled improvements to humanitarian conditions on both sides of the line of contact, negotiated two prisoner exchanges and established a dialogue with President Putin that yielded the first Normandy summit since 2016. Unfortunately, Russia has not shown a similar willingness to fulfil its commitments under the Minsk agreements. It continues to arm, train, lead and fight alongside its proxy forces in eastern Ukraine. That stands in direct contravention of Russia's commitments under the Minsk agreements, including to establish an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. In that regard, today's attack by Russian-led forces near Zolote, which resulted in Ukrainian casualties, took place on the five-year anniversary of Russian-led forces taking the key rail hub of Debaltseve in direct contravention of the terms of the Minsk agreements reached only a week earlier. Now, as then, Russian-led forces continue to contravene commitments made by President Putin and Russian officials and to kill Ukrainians on Ukrainian territory. Instead of engaging constructively, Russia stalls and disseminates disinformation to distract attention from its central, unmistakable and unjustifiable role in fomenting this conflict. Russia also continues its hybrid activities against Ukraine, wielding economic and political leverage. Russia must end this conflict by withdrawing its forces from eastern Ukraine and Crimea. We call on Russia to immediately implement its security commitments under the Minsk agreements, as the parties can move forward with the Minsk political measures only once there is security on the ground. We also call on Russia to follow through with the measures outlined at the recent Normandy summit in Paris to immediately stabilize the situation in the conflict area, which include the opening of new civilian crossing points, disengaging military forces in areas of the greatest humanitarian significance and implementing ceasefire support measures. The United States underscores its unequivocal position on Ukraine. We do not, and will not, recognize the Kremlin's purported annexation of Crimea. Our sanctions against Russia will remain in place until Ukraine regains control over its territory. In the name of international peace and security, we call on Russia to respect Ukraine's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognized borders, extending to its territorial waters. We condemn the abuses taking place under Russia's repressive occupation and call on Russia to release the more than 80 Ukrainian political prisoners it is holding and to end its campaign of intimidation against Crimean Tatars and opponents of the occupation. We will never accept anything less than the full restoration of Ukraine's control over its own territory, whether in eastern Ukraine, Crimea or its territorial waters.
