Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks the Russian Federation for taking the initiative
to convene this open meeting on a comprehensive
assessment ofthe situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, and is confident that the meeting will enhance
understanding and consensus among all parties and
contribute to de-escalating and stabilizing the regional
situation. China welcomes Russian Deputy Minister for
Foreign Affairs Sergey Vasilievich Vershinin to New
York to preside over this meeting, and thanks Secretary-
General Guterres for his comprehensive briefing.

At present, the situation in the Middle East and
North Africa is grave. Inter-State differences, sectarian
disputes and ethnic conflicts are interactive. Wars,
conflicts, terrorist threats and humanitarian disasters
are intertwined. The complex hotspot issues, such as
Palestine, Syria, Yemen and Libya, have been going
simmering for years, defying solutions. The ongoing
instability in the Middle East and North Africa is
detrimental to the interests of the peoples of the region,
with ramifications for world peace and development.
The countries of the region and the international
community need to embrace the philosophy of common,
integrated, cooperative and sustainable security and
together build a community of a shared future and find
a path to peace, stability, development and prosperity.
China would like to make the following observations
on how to solve the hot-spot issue in the region.

First, there is a need to pursue dialogue and
consultations in a comprehensive effort to take forward
the political settlement of hot-spot issues in the region.
The question of Palestine is at the core of the Middle
East issue - a fundamental issues that bears on
peace in the region. It is imperative to adhere to the
two-State solution and on basis of the relevant United
Nations resolutions, and to resume peace talks as early
as possible in order to resolve the issues of borders,
settlements, the status of Jerusalem and refugees.

We must support the work of the United Nations
Special Envoy for Syria and the Astana dialogue
to maintain the momentum of the ceasefire and to
reactivate the Geneva peace talks as soon as possible
in order to reach a political solution acceptable to all
Syrian parties.

It is necessary to support the mediation efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen
and facilitate an early return of the Yemeni parties to
the track of political dialogue.

We must support Libyan parties in their effort to
achieve reconciliation and to strengthen their capacity
for integrated national governance and development.
Efforts should be made to ensure the comprehensive and
effective implementation of the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action on the Iranian nuclear issue.
Secondly, there is a need to enhance synergy and
to maintain a country-led and -owned process, with the
United Nations as the main channel of mediation. The
future and destiny of the region should be determined
through joint consultations among the countries of
the region. It is imperative to respect the principles
of sovereign equality and non-interference in internal
affairs, as established in the Charter of the United
Nations, respect the will of the countries concerned in
taking forward the country-led and -owned political
process. The United Nations should play its role as
the main channel of mediation, actively promote the
political processes in Syria, Yemen, Libya and Iraq,
and provide support for dialogue among the parties to
the conflict. Regional organizations should promote
mutual trust and solidarity among all parties concerned
and cooperate with the United Nations. Countries
outside the region should play constructive roles in
facilitating peace and providing help, but should not
wilfully interfere in the internal affairs of other States
or impose specific models.

Thirdly, an integrated approach should be followed
in addressing the various drivers of the crises in the
region. Multiple civilizations and religions originate
and converge in this region. It is imperative to respect
cultural and religious diversity, engage and learn from
each other on an equal footing and prevent cultural
differences and religious conflicts from exacerbating
the regional conflicts.

Combating terrorism in all of its forms and
manifestations is a shared responsibility of countries
of the region. Those countries and the international
community should strengthen cooperation in their
fight against terrorism, consolidate their achievements
in that fight, prevent the spillover of foreign terrorist
fighters and their returnees, and curb the spread of
terrorist ideology. The parties should work together
to alleviate the humanitarian situation of refugees and
provide greater assistance to countries hosting massive
numbers of refugees.

Fourthly, there is a need to promote sustainable
development and address the root causes of instability
in the region. War, conflict, terrorism and the refugee
migration crisis can all be traced to the root of poverty
and underdevelopment. Development has been the key
to the solutions to all problems and that also holds true
for this region. It is necessary to support the countries
of the region in exploring appropriate development
paths by themselves, fully implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, building up their
capacity for poverty reduction and development, and
consolidating the material basis for peace.

The Middle East and North Africa have produced
brilliant civilizations and have glorious histories that
have made important contributions to humankind's
progress. We are confident that the countries and
peoples of those regions have the will, the ability and
the wisdom to find a solution that will restore peace and
tranquillity. As a permanent Member of the Security
Council, China has always maintained an objective and
impartial position, and played a constructive role in
seeking solutions to hot-spot issues in the region. We
have always respected the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of the countries of the
region. We stand for solutions reached through dialogue
and consultation, not force, and firmly support the
mediation efforts of the United Nations.

As the largest developing country, China is ready to
strengthen its practical cooperation with the countries
of the region under the framework of the Belt and Road
Initiative, thus contributing to the achievement of
regional development and prosperity.

