Mr. Minton (United States of America): I would
also like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
for his extremely useful comments, which as usual
have brought the situation very much into focus. It is
enormously encouraging information to receive about
the efforts of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET) to develop
the civic and economic institutions of East Timor. This
is all very positive. At the same time, my delegation is
disturbed by the information that he has provided on
the rise in negative activities by the militias, and by the
apparent continued tolerance and active encouragement
of those activities by some elements in the Indonesian
Armed Forces (TNI).

I therefore think that the work of the Council is
pretty well defined. We have to encourage the positive
efforts that UNTAET is making to develop the
economy and the society in East Timor. We have to
devote continued attention and exert ongoing pressure
to see to it that the refugee situation is resolved and
that the very damaging activities of the militias and of
those that support them, come to an end.

This meeting is also timely because the
anniversary of the popular consultation - when 80 per
cent of the Timorese population expressed its choice
for the future, a choice that was then recognized by
President Wahid and the Government of Indonesia - is
just one day away. The United States Department of
State yesterday released a statement marking that
anniversary and congratulating the people of East
Timor for their long, difficult and courageous struggle
for independence, which is now a year closer to
realization. My delegation looks forward to conveying
that message directly to Xanana Gusmao and Jose
Ramos-Horta, who will both be in New York as special
guests of the Secretary-General for the Millennium
Summit.

The United States statement yesterday went on to
note that, sadly, over 100,000 refugees remain in camps
in West Timor. The security situation in those camps is
still completely unacceptable to my Government. As
we heard from Assistant Secretary-General Annabi in
his briefing today, the situation cannot be tolerated and
is not satisfactory. The Council has to make that clear
in our proceedings today. The State Department
spokesperson yesterday urged the Indonesian
Government to restore security throughout West Timor
and to develop a workable plan for the repatriation and
resettlement of the refugees, as we have urged in this
Council time and time again.

In the Council, we have deplored recurring militia
activity along the border and in East Timor, and the
resultant deaths of two United Nations peacekeepers. It
is possible that the 30 August anniversary may tempt
the militia and others to resort to even more violence.
Today's meeting is useful in conveying that such
violence cannot and will not be tolerated. The militias
and those who support them must be stopped, disarmed
and disbanded immediately.

The international community and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
must see concrete action by the Government of
Indonesia to address the troubling security problems
with the militias before UNHCR resumes its important
functions in West Timor. And UNTAET must be
allowed to carry out its important work in conjunction
with the people of East Timor, who spoke so clearly
just a year ago. We hope that our proceedings today
the briefing and the comments around this table will
support those objectives.

