Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. Through you, I should also like to
convey my gratitude to Mr. Ibrahim Gambari, Joint
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
African Union and the United Nations for Dafur, for
the briefing he has given us on the report (S/2012/548)
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Darfur and
on the state of the implementation of the mandate of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID). We hope that our discussion today
will lead to the strengthening of the peace process and
to stability throughout Darfur, following an arduous
path towards the implementation of the Doha Document
for Peace.

The report of the Secretary-General before the
Council emphasizes that there has been progress on the
political front when it comes to the implementation of
the Doha Document for Peace. That came about once
the Darfur Regional Authority embarked upon its task
of establishing its offices in both Darfur and Khartoum.
Paragraph 17 of the report also refers to the austerity
measures recently introduced by the Government of the
Sudan. In spite of them, however, between 3 and 18 April
the Government earmarked approximately $27 million
for the Darfur Regional Authority. The Government of
the Sudan continues to make all the necessary efforts to
fund the Authority.

I would also like to refer to paragraph 6 of the
report, which mentions our Government's issuance of
two decrees intended to expedite the implementation
of the Doha Document. The first established the High
Follow-up Committee for Peace in Darfur, which is
chaired by the President himself. The second decree
broadened the membership of the Darfur Peace
Follow-up Office, which had been established pursuant
to the Doha Document itself.

We note that the draft resolution on extending the
mandate of UNAMID does not adequately reflect that
progress. Various parts of the draft resolution contain
negative references with respect to serious delays in
the implementation of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, which contradicts what we have just hear from
Mr. Gambari. He pointed out that a number of rebel
movements had been in contact with him and with the
Deputy Prime Minister of the State of Qatar in an effort
to join the Doha Document.

Mr. Gambari also pointed out that 140 workshops
had been jointly organized by UNAMID and the
Government of the Sudan, including the participation
of many individuals from Darfur, with a view to
considering the Document and its implementation.
Mr. Gambari also mentioned that those workshops
were organized without restrictions and that women
made up more than 30 per cent of the participants. All
of that bears witness to the fact that there has been real
progress in the march towards peace in Darfur, but the
draft resolution to extend the mandate of UNAMID
does not reflect all of that progress.

Similarly, we have heard Mr. Gambari say, and as
is also positively reflected in the Secretary-General's
report, that the Darfur conference held in El Fasher
from 10 to 12 July enjoyed the participation of a large
number of members of the rebel movements. They
were perfectly free to participate in the conference
with no restrictions on their freedom of speech, and
they all criticized the Government. Does that not bear
witness to the seriousness and the commitment of the
Government to the peace process in Darfur? We expect
the Security Council to reflect that commitment in the
draft resolution in order to encourage all the parties to
implement and meet all expectations.

Paragraph 5 of the report of the Secretary-General
reflects the fact that the high committee consisting ofthe
signatory parties of the Doha Document and UNAMID
met in June 2012 and agreed on a precise timetable
for the implementation of the Doha Document. That
new, positive development is reflected in the context
of a detailed schedule for implementation of the Doha
Document.

We also expected the draft resolution to include
provisions that would be more firm vis-a-vis the
movements that are refusing peace, and contain more
binding and stringent language, especially after
the Secretary-General indicates in the report that
the rebel movements rejecting peace in Darfur are
backing their declarations through their adherence to
the so-called Sudan Revolutionary Front, according
to which their goal is to overthrow the Government.
Moreover, the representatives of these movements have
made it crystal clear to Mr. Gambari, according to the
Secretary-General's report, that they are committed to
the goal of the Sudan Revolutionary Front to overthrow
the Government by force and military action.

Is it possible that the draft resolution concerning
the extension of the mandate of UNAMID does not
mention or condemn those serious developments,
since the principle task of the Council is to maintain
international peace and security? The absence of a clear
condemnation of movements that have openly declared
their goal to overthrow the Government is tantamount
to encouraging that grave trend.

The report before us makes it Clear that
development and reconstruction projects enjoy the
priority attention of the Government and the Liberation
and Justice Movement in order to meet the need for
stability in Darfur and to secure the voluntary return
of displaced persons, as noted in the humanitarian
section of the report, which in paragraph 36 states that
37,444 internally displaced persons and 1,145 refugees
returned home and resumed their normal daily lives in
the period between 1 January and 31 March 2012. That
is a welcome and positive development, as were the
continuing voluntary returns in April, May and June,
which confirms the current stability and security in the
governorate of Darfur.

At the same time, it makes Clear that the international
community in general should offer the support necessary
to implement quick-impact projects and programmes in
support of returnees. In that regard, we welcome the
meeting held on 28 May, in which representatives of
the African Development Bank, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank and a
number of international partners participated. The
meeting marked the start of joint planning for the
Darfur Joint Assessment Mission provided for in the
Doha Document in order to assess development needs,
eradicate poverty and ensure sustainable economic
activity in Darfur.

What is striking is that, while the Secretary-General's
report notes the political activities of the various parties
under the Doha Document, embracing civil society in
Darfur, the draft resolution circulating among Council
members does not refer to all aspects necessary to
extend the Mission's mandate.

With respect to the contents of the draft resolution
concerning the movement of the Mission, we note that
UNAMID has stepped up its daily patrols to some 160
a day, as compared to 90 in previous periods. This
is evidence of the freedom of movement enjoyed by
UNAMID. We further note that before coming to New
York, Joint Special Representative Mr. Ibrahim Gambari
himself participated in a helicopter patrol over the five
administrative capitals El Fasher, El Geneina, Nyala,
Zalingei and El Daein in only two days. First of all, we
thank him for his commendable efforts in undertaking
that task. What is important to me is that those patrols
prove the complete freedom of movement of all
UNAMID staff given the visits to the various corners
of Darfur. Those visits demonstrate the stability, peace
and security in Darfur.

Another significant issue that I would like to share
with the Council at the end of my statement concerns a
matter that is extremely important to my Government,
namely, linking the Lord's Resistance Army to the
Darfur issue. As the Council knows, UNAMID has
a mandate only for the Darfur region. Moreover, the
Lord's Resistance Army is a rebel movement within
the territory of Uganda, and the Sudan has no common
border with Uganda. Furthermore, there are no elements
of the Lord's Resistance Army rebellion inside Darfur
and there is no official information based on credible
reports to that effect in Darfur. My country rejects the
inclusion of the issue of the Lord's Resistance Army in
the question of Darfur.

I would like to state openly to all Council members
that we have cooperated wholeheartedly in order to
further the peace process in Darfur. We continue to
cooperate with UNAMID and its officials, who have
borne witness to our cooperation. However, including
the issue of the Lord's Resistance Army will be an
impediment and a matter for condemnation that could
perhaps affect our cooperation with UNAMID and its
work in Darfur. If we truly wish to establish peace,
stability and security, we should keep that issue very
distinct from UNAMID and Darfur. Otherwise, we will
have hampered the peace process.

I want to make that important message very clear.
There are no grounds for linking the two issues of the
Lord's Resistance Army and UNAMID. If the draft
resolution includes it, that will complicate relations
between the Government of the Sudan and UNAMID,
and those who support such a position will be responsible
for the consequences arising therefrom.

Finally, I would like to say that the Government of
the Sudan vigorously condemns the Lord's Resistance
Army movement. We are ready to cooperate with all
members of the international community in order to put
an end to it. However, linking it to Darfur and UNAMID
is something that we condemn and deem unwarranted.

In conclusion, I would briefly like to say that we
trust the Council to commit itself to peace and security
by ensuring that its draft resolution contains a clear
condemnation of the so-called Sudan Revolutionary
Front and its declared objective of overthrowing the members to informal consultations to continue our
Government ofthe Sudan by force. discussion on the subject.

