Mr. Zerihoun: I am grateful for this opportunity
to provide an oral update on the political and security
situations in Guinea-Bissau and on the country's
preparations for elections.

Since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018), on
28 February, encouraging progress has been made
in the efforts to break the political and institutional
deadlock that has persisted in Guinea-Bissau for almost
three years. As the Security Council is aware, during
the extraordinary session of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government of the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) on 14 April, President
Jose Mario Vaz of Guinea-Bissau made several key
commitments, which have since been fulfilled. Those
include the swearing-in of Mr. Aristides Gomes as the
consensual Prime Minister, on 16 April, the issuance of
a decree on the same day that confirms 18 November as
the date for the legislative elections, and the convening
of the plenary session of the National Assembly on
19 April, for the first time in more than two years. At
its meeting, the Assembly approved the appointment
of the President and the Executive Secretariat of the
National Electoral Commission and extended the term
of the legislature until November.

Since then, with the facilitation of an ECOWAS
ministerial delegation, which visited Bissau on 24 April,
a new inclusive Government has been sworn in. The
new Cabinet, which will be in office until the legislative
elections in November, comprises 26 ministers, four of
whom are women.

The significant breakthrough was achieved
following an agreement reached between the two main
political parties, the African Party for the Independence
of Guinea and Cape Verde and the Party for Social
Renewal, with the facilitation of the Catholic Bishop of
Bissau. It also owes much to the consistent pressure put
by ECOWAS on Bissau-Guinean political stakeholders,
which culminated in the imposition oftargeted sanctions
on individuals deemed to be obstructing efforts to end the
impasse, as well as the encouragement and facilitation
of United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the other members
of the group of five international partners in Bissau,
namely, ECOWAS, the African Union, the European
Union and the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP). Those encouraging developments
pave the way for launching the electoral process and
creating openings for other peacebuilding initiatives
that have been long stalled because of the impasse.

Nonetheless, several key provisions of the
ECOWAS-brokered Conakry Agreement of October
2016 have yet to be implemented. As a crucial next
step, the political stakeholders in Guinea-Bissau have
initiated discussions that will culminate in the holding
of a national round-table dialogue, as provided for
in the Conakry Agreement. Both the Government
programme and a stability pact, which outline the
principles for key reforms until the end of the current
term of the legislature, are expected to be endorsed
by the political stakeholders following the national
round-table dialogue. The primary focus of the first
meeting of the new Council of Ministers, on 10 May,
was on preparations for the elections. UNIOGBIS will
continue efforts, including within the framework of
the Guinea-Bissau group of five international partners,
to encourage the Government to move forward the
convening of the round table and, more broadly, the
implementation of the remaining priorities outlined in
the Conakry Agreement.

With respect to the legislative elections, a United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) project
document on electoral support to the Government, in the
amount of $7.7 million, has been finalized. The project
will support technical preparations for cartography
activities, an update of the voter register, voter education
and electoral administration. The Government of
Guinea-Bissau has made an unprecedented contribution
of $1.8 million to the UNDP basket fund. UNDP has
also contributed $200,000 to the fund, which, among
other priorities, will allow the UNDP to procure
biometric equipment for the electoral technical wing of
the Ministry of the Interior. The tender and procurement
process for the purchase of the biometric equipment and
software will be launched on 21 May, and the National
Electoral Commission, which supervises the process, is
expected to begin voter registration on 1 June.

Additional resources are urgently needed to fill
a funding gap of approximately $5.7 million to cover
voter registration and operational costs for the elections.
In order to avoid yet another delay in the elections, it
will be important for the international community to
provide the requisite support to bridge the funding gap.

However, we remain concerned about the
drug-trafficking situation and associated forms of
transnational organized crime. Since the adoption of
resolution 2404 (2018), there have been at least five
reported seizures of drugs at the international airport
in Bissau, which many fear might be just the tip of the
iceberg. It is our hope that ongoing efforts to enhance
UNIOGBIS monitoring and reporting capabilities, in
cooperation with the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and other partners, will, in due
course, expose the true extent of the problem and
contribute to combating impunity.

Also since the adoption of resolution 2404 (2018),
steps have been taken by UNIOGBIS, with the
support of the Department of Political Affairs (DPA),
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the
Department of Field Support, to reorient the resources
and interventions of the mission towards the effective
implementation of the new priorities articulated by
the Security Council. To that end, a DPA-led technical
assessment mission - comprised of the relevant
United Nations departments and offices - was sent
to Bissau for the period from 24 to 31 March. The
team met with national, regional and international
stakeholders, and worked closely with UNIOGBIS
to help realign the mission's resources, and internal
work on the reorientation is well under way. It was
agreed that resources would be temporarily redeployed
from the former rule-of-law and security institutions
component to support the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in conducting good offices
and providing support for the elections, as well as for
the newly established component on drug trafficking
and organized crime. UNODC will be integrated into
that component.

In addition, future United Nations police
deployments are expected to focus on criminal detection
and investigation, and the promotion of human rights
and gender equality will be mainstreamed in all mission
activities. The report and recommendations of the
technical assessment mission to Bissau will also inform
the strategic review mission, which will take place in
late August or early September. The strategic review
will encompass the Secretary- General's assessment
of UNIOGBIS, including options for a possible
reconfiguration of the United Nations presence in the
country and a reprioritization of tasks, as requested by
the Council in resolution 2404 (2018).

The latest successful efforts to assist Bissau-
Guinean stakeholders to end the political and
institutional impasse and launch the country on the
path of sustainable peace and development provide
cause for optimism. The period leading up to the
legislative elections, and particularly leading up to the
next presidential elections, in 2019, will be critical and
fraught with uncertainties.

Before concluding, I would like to recognize the
commendable contribution of Mr. Modibo Toure, who
completed his assignment as Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on 6 May, particularly his
laudable efforts in forging close and constructive
relations with ECOWAS and the region. I would also
like to welcome his successor, Mr. Jose' Viegas Filho,
who will assume his responsibilities later this month
and continue to build on progress made in Guinea-
Bissau. I would also like to express our appreciation
to our partners - ECOWAS, the African Union, the
European Union and the CPLP for their contributions,
cooperation and efforts, which have helped open the way
for a better future for Guinea Bissau - an opportunity
that the people of Guinea-Bissau should be encouraged,
assisted and influenced to grasp.

