Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
am grateful for the report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina
(S/2000/1137) and for the oral briefing by Mr. Jacques
Paul Klein, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Coordinator of United Nations Operations
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We are grateful also for the
statement just made by the representative of the United
States.

As we have said on other occasions, the rule of
law is a prerequisite of stable peace. For that reason,
the progress made by the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in fulfilling its
mandate is of great importance.

With respect to the police, I wish to highlight,
among other positive elements, the professionalism
with which the police acted during the general
elections held on 11 November and on the fifth
anniversary of the Srebrenica massacre. It is also

S/PV.4245

 

encouraging that the political and administrative
obstacles to the recruitment of police officers from
among minorities have been overcome.

Turning to the judicial system, we view as
appropriate the decision of the High Representative,
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, to create an Independent
Judicial Commission to assume many of the functions
of the UNMIBH judicial system assessment
programme. But in our view, it is unsatisfactory that
the new Commission can begin to function only after
that programme comes to an end is not satisfactory.
Also of concern are the difficulties, particularly
financial difficulties, facing the establishment of a
police mechanism for the protection of judges and
witnesses.

Given the magnitude of the problems facing
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the areas of illegal
migration, trafficking in human beings and the trade in
stolen goods, it is obvious that the State Border Service
must function fully with adequate human and financial
resources. Here, we agree with the Secretary-General
that investment in that Service is an essential
preventive measure.

The return of refugees and displaced persons is
undoubtedly another precondition for stable and lasting
peace. We therefore view as a positive sign the
progress made during the past year on the return of
members of minorities. The other side of that coin is
the lack of housing, as well as the existence ofillegally
occupied housing and the unprofessional behaviour of
local police in incidents related to the return of
members of minorities. Clearly, a great deal remains to
be done before the Dayton Agreements are fully
implemented.

On a previous occasion, we supported the idea of
setting the deadline of December 2002 for the
conclusion of UNMIBH's activities, as long as internal
or external circumstances do not change. If it is the
mission's understanding that it can, without difficulty,
fulfil its mandate with 1,850 International Police Task
Force officers, we will support the adoption of such a
measure.

As for the presence of the Stabilization Force, as
a contributing country, we believe, together with the
Secretary-General, that a review of its presence or
mandate must be conducted in the light of UNMIBH's
security requirements.

In conclusion, we would like to reiterate our
conviction that peace and reconciliation will be
tangible in Bosnia and Herzegovina only when its
people and, in particular, its leaders, truly understand
that differences can also form the basis for building a
State.

