Ms. Wollie: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to address the Security Council and
speak on behalf of Liberian women and women's
organizations. I would like to thank the Spanish
Ambassador in particular, not only for opening up
this space for the voice of civil society, but for Spain's
leadership in the Security Council on the women and
peace and security agenda over the past two years.

Liberia is at a critical junction as the United
Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) continues its
drawdown. That coincides with the upcoming 2017
electoral processes. UNMIL played a major role in the
2005 and 2011 elections, providing up to 70 per cent of
security and logistical support in many ways, such as
airlifting ballot boxes where there was no road access
and augmenting security.

As I speak to the Council today, I am expressing the
fears of the women of Liberia regarding security and
logistical gaps without UNMIL, which could present
challenges that could be exploited by unscrupulous
politicians to question the credibility of the elections,
thereby triggering unwanted violence. On behalf of the
women of Liberia, I call on the Security Council to take
that into consideration when discussing the future of
the United Nations presence in Liberia, especially for
the 2017 election and the period immediately following.

Another major security concern for women and girls
is the proliferation of illicit drugs in the country, which
especially affects young people and ex-combatants.
Many of those young people are involved in various
crimes, such as sexual and gender-based violence, armed
robbery and mob violence. That is a serious security
threat as UNMIL draws down. It requires support for
an effective national response to those problems, from
enhancement of law enforcement capacity to better
programmes for treatment and rehabilitation. Those
will contribute to peace consolidation.

As the international community prepares to assist
Liberia in the conduct of presidential and legislative
elections, please remember that women's representation
in the national legislature and in local districts is
extremely low. While the lack of major security
incidents is proof that UNMIL has completed its
mission and can leave, please remember that sexual and
gender-based violence continues to be the number one
crime reported to the police. As the report (S/2016/968)
of the Secretary-General notes, in the more than 1,500
cases of rape registered in 2014 and 2015, less than
4 per cent of the alleged perpetrators were convicted,
and that trend has continued in 2016.

In Liberia women and girls are victims of harmful
traditional practices, such as female genital mutilation,
child marriage and abductions and forcible initiations
into secret societies. As we place our hopes in meeting
the Sustainable Development Goals, please remember
that less than 9 per cent of Liberian girls complete
secondary education, and that part of the reason for
that is because they are exposed to alarming levels of
violence, abuse and exploitation in schools.

Liberian women need the Peacebuilding Commission
to fill any gaps left by the possible departure of the
peacekeeping Mission. In the past few years, the
Peacebuilding Fund has invested in the work of women's
organizations in Liberia. With its support, women-led
peace huts have served as a safe spaces for women and
contributed to resolving local conflicts for years. We
hope that that type of support will be scaled up so that
women can participate in peaceful elections and help to
strengthen national reconciliation, the rule of law, the
security sector and an equitable management of natural
resources. Those are the kinds of investments that will
secure Liberia's path to peace consolidation.

With support from the Peacebuilding Fund,
Liberian women, over the years, have developed the
resolve to stand up for their rights, and have seen a show
of solidarity in the passing of the rape law, domestic
violence act and the affirmative action act. That
kind of solidarity is also being exhibited as Liberian
women review the 2005 manifesto and update the 2017
manifesto, identifying and making recommendations on
issues that are important to women and girls in Liberia.

Increased funding to women and women civil
society organizations will maximize the potential
of Liberian women and the efforts being made by
the international community and the Government to
consolidate peace in Liberia. Inclusive community-
based early-warning initiatives that engage women
as early-warning monitors will enhance conflict
prevention in Liberia during the transition and beyond.
We can build on the Economic Community of West
African States Conflict Prevention Framework, which
includes the National Early Warning System and
National Response Mechanism.
A landmark study that looked at 70 countries over
four decades concluded that the most effective way
to reduce Violence against women was the strength
of women's organizations or women's movement in
any given country. The international community has
celebrated, in this forum and many others, the heroic
contribution of Liberian women to ending the civil war,
helping disarm the armed groups, conduct peaceful
elections, prevent a relapse into conflict and defeat
the deadly Ebola epidemic. I represent those women
here today. I can tell the Council that there is no more
meaningful tribute to Liberian women than the long-
lasting and sustained partnership of the international
community. I hope that we will not be forgotten and
that the Council will continue to partner with us. If we
are strong, peace in Liberia will be strong.

