Ms. Andreyeva (United Kingdom): I would like
to pay tribute to my Dutch colleagues for their tireless
efforts to reach a consensus on the important resolution
2405 (2018), adopted today. I would also like to thank
all of our briefers and the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Ambassador Yamamoto, for his
briefing and for his and his team's continued efforts in
challenging circumstances.

I am delighted to share the Chamber with so many
women on International Women's Day. I am especially
pleased that we are discussing Afghanistan today, as I
had the privilege to spend several years in Afghanistan
working to support education for Afghan girls and a
future in Parliament for Afghan women. As Ms. Safi
and Ms. Sarabi have demonstrated in their briefings
and their own impressive work, women have a vital role
to play in securing Afghanistan's future, and we should
all stand beside them. Afghanistan cannot find lasting
peace with only half its population. The United Nations
must maintain a strong role in promoting and protecting
the rights of women across Afghanistan and continue
to support the Afghan Government in implementing its
national action plan on women and peace and security.

Ensuring accountability and equal access to justice
for all are essential to long-term peace and stability.
We welcome the adoption of Afghanistan's revised
penal code and the clarity it brings. We encourage
the Government of Afghanistan to ensure its full
implementation in line with the law on the elimination
ofviolence against women, which we hope will continue
to be used to guarantee Afghan women the protection
and accountability they deserve.

The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) is an essential mechanism
in supporting Afghanistan's recovery from conflict.
The continued presence of UNAMA and the resolve,
resourcefulness and skill with which its staff support the
Afghan people are a strong signal of the international
community's commitment.

The United Kingdom welcomes the Secretary-
General's decision to host a ministerial conference on
Afghanistan in Geneva on 28 November. Implementing
the findings of the strategic review and the Secretary-
General's report of August 2017 (S/2017/696) will allow
UNAMA to be as efficient as possible and to adapt as
circumstances change. I am pleased to see that this is
reflected in resolution 2405 (2018), adopted today, and
I hope it will send a strong signal to the Mission's hard-
working personnel that we fully support them.

UNAMA's mandate to support peace and
reconciliation in Afghanistan remains at the core of
the Mission. That will be delivered sustainably only
through a credible, inclusive, Afghan-led and Afghan-
owned political process where all Afghan citizens,
whatever their background, can resolve grievances
through dialogue. Of course, for peace to be sustainable
it must be inclusive. The sharp focus on the involvement
of women in peace and security in this mandate renewal
is particularly welcome.

With inclusiveness in mind, we highly commend
the bold offer laid out by President Ghani, Chief
Executive Abdullah and Afghanistan's National Unity
Government at the recent meeting of the Kabul Process
for Peace and Security Cooperation. We welcome the
credibility, flexibility and openness of the offer, which
gives the Taliban the opportunity to be part ofa political
process towards peace. While the Council was not able
to reflect those recent developments in the mandate
renewal, I hope we will find another opportunity to
endorse it and to lend our full support to those Afghan-
led efforts.

Finally, the United Nations must play a strong role
in supporting free and fair elections. Elections, both
this year and next, are an opportunity for the nation
to communicate its aspirations to the political parties.
Those elections are a crucial point at which political
trust can be renewed and stability forged. We commend
the progress made by Afghanistan's Independent
Electoral Commission towards electoral reform and we
encourage it to redouble its efforts to ensure that voter
registration is completed according to agreed timelines.
We hope that UNAMA will support those efforts fully.

In conclusion, we fully support UNAMA, and
we welcome the renewal of its mandate today. As a
Council, we have collectively endorsed the importance
of inclusion, including of women, and of upholding
and promoting human rights. We call on all parties
to engage meaningfully in a political process to bring
lasting peace and stability to the people ofAfghanistan.

