Mr. Vaverka (Sweden): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, and your team on the professional and
efficient manner in which you have conducted the
Council's work over this past month. It has been a busy
month and, looking back, there are four items from
the programme of work that I would like to briefly
reflect upon.

First, we were very pleased that the Council, on
9 August, was able to unanimously agree an ambitious
presidential statement (S/PRST/2017/14) on the risk of
famine in Yemen, Somalia, South Sudan and north-
easternNigeria.Thestatisticsregardingthehumanitarian
situation in those countries are alarming and completely
unacceptable. Sweden decided to propose a presidential
statement to build on the consensus from the Arria
Formula meeting on famines, which was organized
by eight Council members in June. We did so as we
considered that there was a need for a unified, concrete
and comprehensive statement by the Council in support
of the efforts of the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners, and the leadership of the Secretary-General.
We also believed that it was important that the Council
highlight the need to do more to prevent the conflicts
that are driving many of these humanitarian crises, as
well as the need for more humanitarian funding and
unhindered humanitarian access. I thank all Council
members for their constructive cooperation on the
presidential statement. We now look forward to the
Secretary-General's briefing to the Security Council
in October, and to more regular reporting on the links
between famine and conflict.

Secondly, turning to some of the country-specific
items on the agenda, our meeting (S/PV.8026) on the
final report (S/2017/672/Rev.1) of the Group of Experts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo extended
pursuant to Security Council resolution 2293 (2016)
was of particular importance to us. From a Swedish
standpoint, that meeting came to centre on the
unacceptable murder of the two experts, Zaida Catalan
and Michael Sharp. I would like to thank Council
members for their solidarity with the families attending
that meeting. Now that the United Nations Board of
Inquiry into the murders has delivered its findings and
recommendations, we welcome the Secretary-General's
determination to pursue a further investigation. We
owe it not only to the families, but also to ourselves and
the Organization to make sure that those responsible
for these reprehensible murders are brought to justice.
We count on continuing support in that endeavour.
Thirdly, following the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's launch of a long-range intercontinental
ballistic missile on 28 July, and the resulting heightened
tensions in the region, the North Korean nuclear issue
has taken up much of our attention this month. We
came together once again yesterday (see S/PV.8034)
in response to another missile launch, this time over
Japan. While those recent launches - demonstrating
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's continued
non-compliance and disregard for Security Council
resolutions - remain of serious concern, it was
important that the Council was able to act quickly, by
adopting resolution 2371 (2017) earlier in the month
and yesterday's presidential statement S/PRST/2017/ 16.
This demonstrates that the Council stands united and
determined to deal with the growing threat posed by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's nuclear
and missile programmes. However, sanctions alone will
not resolve the situation on the Korean Peninsula, but
must be accompanied by creative diplomacy, dialogue
and confidence-building measures.

Fourthly and finally, this morning we heard from
Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura and Under-Secretary-
General Stephen O'Brien on the situation in Syria
(S/PV.8036), which remains deeply troubling.

As co-penholders for the humanitarian track,
Sweden stands ready to initiate meaningful Council
action that could complement existing Council products,
with the aim of improving the situation for Syrians on
the ground. The reduction of hostilities seen in parts of
Syria needs to be consolidated and civilians protected.
Humanitarian access must now be expanded. Finally,
we regret that the Council remains unable to refer the
situation in Syria to the International Criminal Court.
The crimes of the past six years cannot go unpunished.

Before concluding, allow me to pay tribute to Japan
for its diligent work and excellent stewardship on the
revision ofpresidential note S/2010/507 on the Council's
working methods, which was agreed today. The note
is an invaluable tool for enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the Council, while ensuring the
consistency and predictability of the Council's work.

Let me conclude by once again thanking you,
Mr. President, and the Egyptian delegation for your
work this month and wishing the Ethiopian delegation
every success for its presidency in September.

