Mr. Wlosowicz (Poland): At the outset, the Polish
delegation wishes to express its deep concern at the
escalation of armed tensions in southern Lebanon. We do
not accept military means as a solution to the problems of
the Middle East. This is why we deplore rocket attacks
launched at northern Israel as well as the air
bombardment of Lebanon. Such actions victimize the
civilian population, which is unacceptable. The Middle
East peace process is in jeopardy.

Poland, always guided by the principles of respect
for territorial integrity, the sovereignty of States and the
peaceful resolution of conflicts, firmly confirms its
attachment to the right of nations to a secure and peaceful
existence. We are strongly against any form of violence,
the resort to which always gives rise to stumbling blocks
on the path towards dialogue, coexistence and
understanding. This truth has been confirmed by the
history of the Middle East. Violence must not determine
the fate of the peoples who inhabit that territory.
 

We call upon all the parties involved to exercise self-
restraint and to refrain from any actions that might result in
further escalation of tensions in the region. We further
appeal to the sides in the conflict to take all necessary
measures to ensure peace and regional stability. In this
context, we deem it important to underscore the need for
cooperation by the parties concerned with the Security
Council, with a View to implementing resolution 425
(1978).

Since the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) forces are instrumental in this process we insist
that the parties renounce any action that might endanger
their safety and security. We call upon them to refrain from
creating situations which might put at risk the civilian
population living on either side of the Israeli-Lebanese
border and to respect the pertinent international conventions
which are in force in this regard.

May I add that Poland supports the statement of the
European Union presented on this item by the delegation of
Italy.

