Mr. Qian Qichen (China) (interpretation from Chinese): The Security Council's convening of this
ministerial meeting on Africa during this session of the
General Assembly shows that the international community
attaches importance to Africa and appreciates the efforts
made by the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) over the years to settle regional
conflicts.

The drastic changes in the international situation in
the wake of the cold war once sent shock waves through
Africa. In recent years the overall situation in Africa has
been moving towards a relaxation of tensions. The
economy is beginning to pick up; people have
increasingly realized the importance of gaining strength
through unity; and the economic integration process has
gained momentum. With the relentless efforts of African
countries, the OAU and other regional organizations,
some of the hot spots or conflicts on the African
continent have been eliminated or eased. However, owing
to historical reasons and various complex internal and
external factors, the situation in Africa remains fluid.
Particularly since the beginning of this year, local turmoil
and conflicts have occurred from time to time.

Without stability, there can be no development, and
without development, stability cannot last long. The

 

international community, developed countries in particular,
while concerning themselves with stability in Africa, should
pay more attention to the continent's development. They
should help African countries lift themselves out of poverty
as soon as possible and achieve sustained economic growth.

There are more than 50 countries in Africa, accounting
for about 50 per cent of the members of the Non-Aligned
Movement and one third of the Member States of the
United Nations. With abundant natural resources and great
potential for economic development, Africa is an integral
part of the world economy. There can be no world peace
without stability in Africa, nor can there be prosperity in
the world without the development of Africa.

While we heartily rejoice over the positive changes in
Africa, we are deeply concerned about the local turmoil and
conflicts that have brought economic losses and suffering
to the people there, for whom we feel sympathy and
concern.

We appeal to the parties concerned in those African
countries caught up in civil strife to set store by the
fundamental interests of their people and country and to
settle their conflicts and disputes through peaceful
consultation, so as to turn hostility into friendship and
restore peace and tranquillity to those countries at the
earliest possible date.

We hope that all ethnic groups and tribes in Africa
will strengthen their solidarity and work together for peace
and development in their respective countries.

We support African countries in choosing their own
political system and road to development on the basis of
their respective national conditions, and we oppose any
external interference in the internal affairs of African
countries.

We appreciate and support the efforts made by African
countries, the OAU, the League of Arab States and other
regional organizations in Africa to resolve regional conflicts
and deal with hot spots through peaceful means.

We maintain that the international community, the
United Nations included, should pay attention to the
African issue; seriously consider the reasonable proposals
and demands of African countries, including through the
OAU, the League of Arab States and other regional
organizations; support and coordinate with African countries
in their efforts to safeguard regional peace and security; and
fully respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
African countries in the handling of their problems. We
would support the submission by Secretary-General Kofi
Annan of a report on how to resolve the problems now
facing Africa.

We call for the early establishment of a just and
equitable new international political and economic order
so as to create a good external environment for stability
and sustained development in Africa and to ensure lasting
peace and development there.

As a permanent member of the Security Council,
China has always attached importance to Africa. It has
supported African countries in their just struggle for the
maintenance of national independence, State sovereignty
and territorial integrity, and in their efforts for economic
rejuvenation and social progress. It has stood for the
settlement of differences and conflicts within Africa
through peaceful consultation. We believe that African
countries are fully capable of resolving their internal
conflicts and disputes.

The past few years have seen visits to Africa by the
Chinese President, the Premier and the Vice Premiers of
the State Council, and various Ministers, including the
Minister of Foreign Affairs. China and African countries
have made considerable progress in their friendly relations
and cooperation. In the years to come, China will
continue to unswervingly support the just propositions and
reasonable demands of African countries, strengthen its
friendly relations and cooperation with them and make its
contribution to peace, stability and development in Africa.

Africa is a promising continent. I am convinced that
with their own efforts and the assistance of the
international community, African countries will gradually
achieve stability and a sustained economic development.

