Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): There is a bitter irony about the
present predicament of Sierra Leone. The country began to
descend into a spiral of senseless violence, power struggles,
coups and counter-coups in March 1991, when a motley
group of fighters calling themselves the Revolutionary
United Front (RUF) entered eastern Sierra Leone at Koindu
and at the Mano River bridge. This invasion came on the
heels of the decision of the Government of Sierra Leone to
participate actively in the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) peacekeeping operation in
neighbouring Liberia. Sierra Leone has thus paid dearly for
taking seriously and responsibly its commitments and
obligations to regional stability.

The latest in a series of coups took place in May
1997, when mutinous elements within the military
overthrew the new democratically elected Government and
joined forces with the RUF. That development threw Sierra
Leone into chaos and has constituted a threat to peace and
security in the region. It is therefore incumbent on the
Security Council in this crucial period to go beyond the
actions it took in resolutions 1132 (1997) and 1171 (1998).

The draft resolution put before the Security Council
for action today represents an appropriate response. It
addresses the complexity of the problems facing the
restored democratic Government of President Kabbah, and
it complements the political and military assistance of
ECOMOG, the Monitoring Group of ECOWAS, in the
effort to restore peace and normalcy in Sierra Leone.

Slovenia will therefore vote in favour of the draft
resolution by which the Security Council decides to
establish a United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNOMSIL) for an initial period of six months. We
agree that the presence of United Nations military
observers, civilian police and human rights monitors will
represent a real contribution in the effort to stabilize the
situation and create conditions of durable peace in Sierra
Leone.

One of the issues high on the agenda is disarmament
and demobilization. The reinstated Government inherits a
country with no functioning army but a large number of
fragmented armed elements. On the one hand, there are the
remnants of the military junta and the RUF, and, on the
other, there are the members of the Civil Defence Forces
(CDF). The likelihood of further conflict will remain high
unless real progress can be made to disarm and demobilize
the combatants. In this context, Slovenia condemns the
continued resistance of the deposed junta and the RUF,
and joins the other members of the Security Council in
demanding that they lay down their arms immediately.

Equally important is the question of reconciliation
and reintegration. This is a sensitive issue, especially in
the light of the numerous child soldiers who have been
forcibly recruited by the RUF. In order to ensure the
loyalty of these young children, the RUF elements often
force them to brutalize or murder their own families, thus
destroying the bonds of trust between children and their
communities. A genuine, long-term process of
reconciliation is needed to pull these children back into
society. Slovenia therefore welcomes the efforts to make
Sierra Leone one of the pilot projects for a more
concerted and effective response to the post-conflict needs
of children.

Despite all the destruction and mayhem, Sierra
Leone is still a richly endowed country. Indeed, the green
in the Sierra Leonean tricolour stands for the country's
ample natural resources. But Sierra Leone's most
important asset is the fact that it is a nation in which the
indigenous ethnic groups share broadly similar cultures.
There is no religious strife, and intermarriage is common.
The ethnic groups of the country have preserved peace
among them in the period of the rule of the junta.
Moreover, the people of Sierra Leone demonstrated at the
February and March 1996 elections their strong support
for democratic rule and the ability to use democratic
means, which guarantee the legitimacy of political power.

In this context, it is also important to note that Sierra
Leone is not suffering a civil war. The RUF has no Viable
political support or even an identifiable constituency,
which is why it has in the past refused repeated
invitations to join the political process. Together with the
remnants of the military junta, it now constitutes an
amorphous formation which has no clear leadership
structure. The Violence against the civilian population in
Sierra Leone, as horrible as it is, has therefore not
undermined the foundations of the country.

Sierra Leone possesses all the prerequisites for a
successful nation. What is required is that Sierra
Leoneans draw upon their strengths and that the
international community help them in their efforts.
Slovenia is therefore encouraged by the ability of the
Security Council to act today unanimously. The degree of
unity among Council members will undoubtedly

 

contribute to the process of success of UN OMSIL's mission
to help the people of Sierra Leone forge a secure future for
themselves and for their children.

