We thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing and welcome Ms. Susannah Sirkin once again to the Security Council. I would like to take this opportunity to acknowledge the many humanitarian workers who are addressing the needs of the people of Syria and express our admiration for their work. It is clear for the Dominican Republic that, at this juncture, the most important role the Security Council can play is to facilitate the work of those real heroes, so that they can do their jobs in saving the lives of those who have endured the consequences of this conflict, who have been subject to neglect, hunger, displacement, fear and now, once again, profound uncertainty. The Dominican Republic will not now repeat what we all already know about the humanitarian situation of millions of Syrians. But let us nevertheless take a moment to think about what we can do about the situation, having no other concern in mind than the needs of the people - no political considerations, no transactional approaches, no bargaining - just the needs of the people. Is that so hard to do? If we were to take only that approach it would be easy to protect the services that Syrians are receiving through the cross-border mechanism. Let us take one example: food insecurity. The World Food Programme has indicated that there are currently 9.3 million food-insecure people across Syria. Within the framework of the cross-border mechanism, in 2020 alone, the United Nations has reached 56,974 households in the north-west of the country, providing support so as to improve food security and livelihoods and to protect and build productive farming and livestock assets, including those of internally displaced persons. Ensuring the continuity of food production and sufficient local availability and affordability of agricultural produce and animal-source foods is also an important contribution towards preventing malnutrition in the urban and rural human populations in north-west Syria, particularly in women and children. This crucial support includes capacity-building for farmers and local partners and provision of animal-health services. The cross-border mechanism in Syria is therefore not only about warehouses, boxes, trucks and delivery of assistance. It supports the lives and futures of hundreds of thousands of people in rural areas. It allows women and children to have access to health, education and protection services that otherwise would not be available to them. Indeed, Ms. Sirkin just talked about the devastating impact of the conflict on health care. In short, the cross-border mechanism allows people to cope with the devastating impacts of conflict and our collective inability to solve the conflict through peaceful means. There is no alternative to the cross-border mechanism - not now, and at least for the Dominican Republic, not until we can see assurances that cross-line access into both the north-west and the north-east is timely and sustained. We need assurances that cross-line access leads to independent and impartial needs assessments followed by principled humanitarian assistance. Only then will we be able, as stated before, to shift to an all-modalities mutually complementary approach, which is, of course, the best-case scenario given the dire and massive needs present in Syria. A single modality is simply not enough. We reiterate our position that, given the potential impact of the coronavirus in the north-east, a temporary reauthorization of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing is needed. We are also determined to continue to work towards the renewal for 12 months of the cross-border assistance mechanism for the north-west in order to support the programming and procurement procedures that precede such a massive operation. This objective is based on the increasing needs of the population, including those who continue to be displaced. In this context, we would also mention the fragility of the security situation. Let us join our efforts and take people-centred decisions. It is in our hands. Let us do the right thing.
