Mr. Mansour (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I wish express our warm congratulations to
you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. I would also like to thank the members of the
Security Council for undertaking the initiative of
convening a public meeting regarding the situation in
the Middle East, including the question of Palestine.
Suffice to say, it is of the utmost importance for the
Security Council, with its responsibility to maintain
international pence and security, to address the perilous
situation in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem.

Before I begin my statement, I wish to recall that
today the Palestinian people are observing Land Day,
known as "Youm al-Ard" in Arabic, to commemorate
the killing of six Palestinians peacefully protesting the
Israeli confiscation of Palestinian land in the Galilee in
1976. Land Day has become a time to remember and
protest Israel's persisting systematic policies of
injustice and oppression against the Palestinian people,
especially the illegal expropriation of their land and
their expulsion from it.

I wish to note that I will omit some of the
paragraphs of the text of my statement in order to save
time.

The Security Council is meeting today on the
heels of an important development that took place in
the Middle East. On the 28 and 29 March the Arab
League convened its annual summit in Khartoum, in
which, among other things, it unanimously affirmed the
principal of establishing an independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and the need
for a just solution for the Palestine refugees on the
basis of General Assembly resolution 194 (III). The
summit rejected all unilateral Israeli actions, including
attempts to judaize Jerusalem, the continuation of its
illegal settlements campaign and the construction of its
expansionist wall in the occupied Palestinian territory,
including in and around East Jerusalem.

Moreover, the eighteenth annual summit of the
Arab League called for the reinvigoration of the Arab
Peace Initiative adopted in Beirut in 2002, which called
for full Israeli withdrawal from all the Arab territories
occupied since June 1967 in implementation of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), which were reaffirmed by the Madrid
Conference of 1991, and the land for peace principle.
The summit called for Israel's acceptance of an
independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem as
its capital in return for the establishment of normal
relations in the context of a comprehensive peace with
Israel. This initiative - drafted by the Custodian of the
Two Holy Masques, King Abdullah Bin Abdulaziz Al
Sand of Saudi Arabia, and adopted by the Arab
countries and the members of the Organization of
Islamic Conference - is an opportunity that must not
be missed. Israel should seize this unique historic
moment.

The Arab Peace Initiative adopted in Beirut
called for the formation of a special ministerial
committee to act as a catalyst to internationalize the
initiative by garnering the utmost support by the
international community, in particular from the United
Nations, including the Security Council.

As members are all aware, the Palestinian people,
languishing under Israeli occupation, went to the polls
on 25 January of this year to vote for their new
legislature. The international community, including the
international observers monitoring the elections, hailed
the Palestinian people for their commitment to
democracy. The elections were deemed by all to be
free, transparent and fair. Indeed, it was a very proud
day for the Palestinian people, not only because of the
festival of democracy displayed, but because they
conducted the elections in a disabling environment
under Israeli military occupation.

The new cabinet has been approved by the
Palestinian parliament and was sworn in by President
Mahmoud Abbas yesterday. It must be reiterated that
the Palestinian people must not be punished by anyone
for exercising their democratic right to elect their
representatives. As in all democratic elections, the
choice of the people deserves respect and support. In
this context, Israel must immediately release monthly
tax payments belonging to the Palestinian people, in
accordance with an economic protocol signed between
the two sides in 1994 in Paris.

It is important to recall that on a number of
occasions since the Palestinian elections, President
Abbas has reaffirmed the commitment by the
Palestinian side to all obligations and agreements
signed by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
and by the Palestinian National Authority. They
includes the provisions of international law,
international conventions, United Nations resolutions,
including General Assembly resolution 194 (III), the
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative adopted in Beirut
and all the agreements signed with Israel.

The Government of Israel has intensified and
accelerated its attempts to carry through with its
unilateral actions intended to further entrench the
illegitimate measures already taken by the occupying
Power in the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. The political platform of the newly
elected Acting Prime Minister of Israel was based on a
dangerous campaign that called for a unilateral
definition of the borders of Israel in the next four years
by keeping control of strategic parts of the occupied
West Bank, occupied East Jerusalem, the Jordan Valley
and three major illegal settlement blocs.

This illegal plan is an attempt to legitimize the
Israeli settlements and would effectively mean the end
of the two-State solution, for it would result in the
creation of a series of Bantustans in the occupied
Palestinian territories, violate the rights of the Palestine
people and deny the rights of the Palestinian refugees.
That plan, which attempts to weaken international
opposition to the catastrophic expansionist wall, is also
a blatant violation of international law and Security
Council resolutions. It represents a complete departure
from the road map and its substance, as well as from the
principle of achieving a peaceful settlement through
negotiations between the two parties and without
prejudgment or pre-emption of the final status issue.

For our part, we are committed to a just, lasting
and comprehensive final settlement, in accordance with
international law and legitimacy, negotiated and agreed
by both parties, based on the borders of 4 June 1967.
We reject and oppose all unilateral solutions, including
the idea of a transitional Palestinian State with
temporary borders. Such solutions would not end the
occupation or create a viable, contiguous and sovereign
Palestinian State.

In this regard, the international community must
condemn and reject the E1 plan. It represents a
departure from the road map and would render final
status negotiations devoid of all meaning. It would
isolate occupied East Jerusalem from the West Bank by
encircling it with illegal settlement structures and the
expansionist wall, put an end to its territorial contiguity
with the rest of the Palestinian territory and tip the
demographic balance of Jerusalem in favour of Israel
by sustaining a Jewish majority through the
incorporation of Jerusalem's illegal settler population.

Israeli unilateralism and militarism must be
rejected and must not be allowed to replace
constructive political dialogue and pragmatism. The
unilateral withdrawal from Gaza, since it was not
negotiated with the Palestinian side and ignored all
Palestinian concerns, has proved to be disastrous. It has
not been a step forward, as some had thought it would
be. Israel continues to retain ultimate control of the
Gaza Strip by controlling its borders, territorial sea and
airspace. The withdrawal has turned the Gaza Strip into
a massive prison, entirely besieged by Israel, with no
attributes of sovereignty or independence.

While the unilateral withdrawal from Gaza was
intended to represent the end of Israel's military
occupation of Gaza, it has become clear now to all who
comply with and respect international law that the
Fourth Geneva Convention continues to apply to the
Gaza Strip. In this connection, the Palestinian side will
reject any and all unilateral actions in the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem. The occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, constitutes one
single territorial unit. To suggest that Gaza should
enjoy a status different from that of the West Bank
would violate the territorial integrity, unity and
contiguity of Palestine and the substantive law of self-
determination.

Israel has continued with its illegal colonization
policy and de facto annexation of huge parts the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. Israel has carried out
all of those actions in spite of the absolute prohibition
on such colonization under the Fourth Geneva
Convention and its Additional Protocol I, which
defines such actions as war crimes, as does the Rome
Statue of the International Criminal Court. Israel has
carried out all of those actions in spite of the fact that
the Security Council has reaffirmed the applicability of
the Fourth Geneva Convention in 27 resolutions that
request the occupying Power to comply with its
provisions, some of which specifically request the
cessation of settlement activities and consider the
annexation of East Jerusalem to be null and void.
Furthermore, Israel persists in disrespecting the law by
failing to heed to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, of 9 July 2004, which
found that the construction of the wall in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including in and around East
Jerusalem, is contrary to international law.

Moreover, the occupying Power bas begun to
physically transform the Qalandiya checkpoint in the
West Bank into an international crossing point. Those
actions are further undermining the territorial integrity
and contiguity of the occupied Palestinian territory and
are thus making the vision of a two-State solution
increasingly impossible. Without a viable Palestinian
State, there cannot be a solution whereby two States
live side by side.

Israel's disingenuous pronouncement that it has
"no partner" with whom to negotiate peace should be
viewed from the perspective of unilateralism. The
Palestine Liberation Organization, which is headed by
President Mahmoud Abbas, is the sole legitimate
representative of the Palestinian people everywhere. It
is therefore the only real negotiating partner.

It is obvious that it has been Israel's occupation
and colonization of the Palestinian territory that has
obstructed a comprehensive peace agreement. This has
occurred regardless of whether or not the Palestinian
people have had a Government, whether one headed by
the late President Yasser Arafat or one headed by
President Mahmoud Abbas.

It must be stated clearly that it is neither the
Palestinian people nor Palestinian democracy that
represents a challenge to the resolution of the conflict.
Rather, that challenge can continue to be attributed to
Israel's "no partner" mantra, its confiscation and
colonization of Palestinian land, its oppression and
subjugation of an entire people, its consistent violation
of international law, its defiance of United Nations
resolutions and the political paralysis of the
international community.

I would like to draw the attention of the Council
to the tragic situation in which the Palestinian people
continue to find themselves in the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem. In grave violation of
international law, including international humanitarian
law and human rights law, the occupying force is
continuing to carry out its deadly attacks against the
Palestinian people, including extrajudicial executions.
It has become common practice for the occupying Power
to launch military attacks against targets in densely
populated civilian areas in the occupied Palestinian
territory, endangering the safety and lives of thousands
of civilians. Israel is continuing to behave as a State
that is above the law, with no concern for reproach,
punishment or the consequences of its actions.

The wounding, maiming and killing of
defenceless Palestinian civilians, including women and
children, has continued unabated. As of today, more
than 3,800 Palestinians have been killed by the Israeli
occupying forces in military attacks since September
2000. Thousands have been injured, many seriously
and permanently, by the occupying forces. Thousands
of Palestinian civilians continue to be detained or
imprisoned by the occupying Power under conditions
that continue to be a matter of grave concern.

In the context of that culture of impunity, on
14 March 2006, Israeli occupying forces, using tanks,
armoured vehicles, helicopters and bulldozers, invaded
the West Bank town of Jericho and stormed the Muqata
building, killing two Palestinians and wounding at least
35 other people. During that military raid, Israeli
occupying forces kidnapped six Palestinian detainees.
We hold Israel, the occupying Power, responsible for
the safety of those men and demand that the Israeli
authorities return them to Palestinian custody. To do
otherwise, including any attempt to try them in an
Israeli court, would be a violation of international law,
as well as of the Ramallah Agreement. The Security
Council members must remain seized of the matter and
assist in the return of these men to Palestinian custody.

Furthermore, Israel has not ended its imposition
of collective punishment on the Palestinian people in
the occupied Palestinian territory, including arbitrary
restrictions on their movement through the placement
of hundreds of checkpoints.

I would also like to address the catastrophic
humanitarian crisis unfolding in Gaza. As documented
by various agencies and human rights organizations,
the occupying Power has prevented the most basic food
supplies and medicines, including grain, dairy products
and even baby formula, from entering Gaza. The policy
of starvation - or, as an adviser of the Acting Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert described it, "putting the
Palestinians on a diet" - must be halted immediately.
In this connection, Israel's tightened control over the
Karni crossing, the only commercial crossing for the
import and export of goods to Gaza, must be lifted, as
it is in clear violation of the Agreement on Movement
and Access brokered by United States Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice and Quartet envoy James
Wolfensohn with the Palestinian Authority and Israel
on 15 November 2005. This Agreement stipulates that
the passage will operate continuously. We call on the
international community to compel Israel to lift its
strangulation of the Gaza Strip, since it has dangerous
economic, social and health implications for an already
impoverished people.

It is high time for the international community to
take urgent measures to address this ongoing tragedy.
The United Nations has a permanent responsibility
with respect to the question of Palestine until it is
resolved in all its aspects. The Security Council must
take the lead in this regard. The Council must take bold
and courageous actions to ensure Israel's compliance with
its resolutions and its adherence to international law. Such
a position by the Council would greatly contribute to
bringing an end to the cycle of violence and bloodshed
that has prevented the two peoples - the Israeli and
the Palestinian peoples - and the entire region from
attaining genuine peace, freedom and security.

The Arab countries, including Palestine, have
spoken clearly. Their hand of peace has been extended.
There is a partner, in spite of Israeli assertions to the
contrary. Israel must not be allowed to use this
excuse - or any excuse, for that matter - to pursue
its unilateral actions by further entrenching its
occupation and colonization of more Palestinian land.
The time has come for Israel to embark genuinely on
ending its occupation of the occupied Palestinian
territory in order to pave the way for the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State, based on the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and for a
just solution to the Palestine refugee problem.

On this day, as we commemorate Land Day,
Palestinians everywhere join hand in hand in the same
struggle against occupation, oppression and
subjugation, and in favour of peace, justice, self-
determination and national liberation. The time is long
overdue for these hopes and rights to be realized.

