Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): I have the
honour to address the Council on behalf of Mr. Amre
Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of Arab
States.

The League of Arab States welcomes the
opportunity to participate in this important meeting to
discuss the challenges facing cooperation between the
United Nations and regional organizations with respect
to the maintenance of international peace and security.
I am especially grateful to the delegation of Greece for
the discussion paper (S/2006/719, annex) it prepared to
guide the debate.

I wish to make a number of points on the item on
the Council's agenda. First, peacekeeping and the
maintenance of international peace and security
constitute the fundamental pillar of the Security
Council's mandate. Here, the Council is facing
significant challenges with respect to a world situation
marked by tension. The Security Council, the United
Nations and regional organizations thus have an
additional burden to bear as they confront difficult
issues that can be dealt with only through close
partnership among them all.

Secondly, cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations is defined in
Chapter VIII of the Charter. However, international
circumstances demonstrate that that relationship needs
to be re-examined in the light of changing
circumstances. On the one hand, the number of
traditional conflicts and regional problems is
increasing, yet, on the other hand, conflicts of other
types are occurring; we cannot neglect their impact on
international peace and security. Indeed, this demands
an increased role for the Security Council and other
United Nations bodies and for regional organizations.

Thirdly, regional organizations continue to
develop new ways and means to address the growing
number of problems and conflicts, in particular with
regard to peacekeeping. That is not sufficient, however,
because the institutional and legal frameworks are not
always adequate. They can be adequate only if the role
of these organizations in peacekeeping is enhanced, in
particular through cooperation between regional
organizations and the Security Council in the areas of
training, capacity-building and financing. We are
seeing proof of that in Darfur.

Fourthly, cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations in the maintenance of
international peace and security cannot occur without
the restructuring and reform of the United Nations and
its institutions. It was my honour to participate in the
high-level group that was instructed by the Secretary-
General to examine this matter. We believe that the
recommendations made with respect to cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
could assist us in following the road to international
peace and security.

Fifthly, balance between United Nations bodies
and their operations under the Charter is an essential
principle for reform. In recognizing that, the Security
Council assumes the primary responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. At the
same time, we should acknowledge that the success of
the Economic and Social Council, as well as of the
Human Rights Council and other United Nations
bodies that operate in the field of development and that
implement the purposes and principles of the United
Nations, must have a positive impact in order to create
an environment conducive to bringing about
international peace and security. Therefore, we need to
strengthen cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations in all areas - economic, social,
human rights and the status of women - for more
effective maintenance of international peace and
security and for producing more tangible results.

Sixthly, Security Council reform must be carried
out. I have two suggestions. First, the Council must be
reinvigorated and enlarged on the basis of longer and
renewable mandates for the Council members. That
would enable the Council to have a larger role on the
international and regional levels. Secondly, the Council
must be reinvigorated with respect to the large ongoing
conflicts, particularly between the West and Islam.
Such conflicts are not only a clash of cultures and
civilizations but also political conflicts that have
repercussions on international peace and security. That
has caused a number of wars, invasions, Violence and
terrorism. I do not think, therefore, that they can be
resolved only through a dialogue among civilizations
but through a comprehensive and responsible
treatment, including political aspects, under the
auspices and oversight of the Security Council.

I do not need to tell you, Madam President, that
the United Nations and the Arab League were
established at the same time. The Arab League has
been the regional twin of the United Nations since their
inception in 1945, and they have since faced the same
difficulties and challenges. The Arab League has
developed its tools and now has a Peace and Security
Council, among other instruments. It invites
involvement from different people in its work,
becoming a more transparent organization. We are
convinced that cooperation between the Arab League
and the United Nations, as well as the other regional
organizations - first and foremost the African Union,
the European Union and the Organization of American
States - will help us to achieve a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East, a goal all Arab countries and
the international community urgently seek.

Finally, in order for the Security Council to
maintain its credibility and effectiveness, we call on it
to deal with the threats that confront international
peace and security with the necessary speed and
neutrality. We see that the Council deals with questions
that are very sensitive. However, there are other
matters that are more sensitive that need to be dealt
with more quickly than some of the less serious
matters. So we are reminded of the standards that the
Council uses in maintaining international peace and
security. The Council's credibility would be
undermined and its role and that of the United Nations
and regional organizations would be diminished.

The Arab League has made an appeal for a
Council meeting tomorrow to reinvigorate the peace
process and to stop the deterioration of the political
and security situation in the region, which could
threaten international peace and security. The world
could witness the way in which the Council deals with
an extremely serious matter, such as that of the Middle
East. Will the Council hesitate, or will it assume its
responsibilities? I am confident that under your
presidency, Madam, the Security Council will be
responsible and serious in dealing with this matter.

