Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): We
welcome you in the chair, Mr. President, for this
important debate on the situation in the Middle East.
We in our turn would like to thank the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Robert Serry, for his briefing. He brought us up to
date on the Israeli-Palestinian peace process and on
other situations in the Middle East.

Gabon would like to recall its support for the
legal framework founded on the relevant resolutions of
the Security Council and of the General Assembly. We
also recall our position here in favour of a two-State
solution: a Palestinian State and an Israeli State living
side by side in peace.

The present context in the Middle East calls for
new efforts to resume negotiations and to arrive at a
dynamic compromise, one that must be based on
parameters that are broadly accepted by the
international community, which were recalled in
President Obama's statement.

My delegation remains concerned at the long-
standing stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
talks, despite the commendable efforts of the
international community to restart direct negotiations
between the two parties, in particular the Quartet
meeting held on 11 July at the imitative of the United
States Government. It is regrettable that this meeting,
while it inspired some hope, did not lead to the
resumption of negotiations. The stalemate is
unacceptable and, if it continues, risks creating a rift in
the international community on the prospects of the
peace process.

It is well known that a great number of countries
support the decision of Palestine to declare its
independence. If this situation is not met with a
resumption of negotiations, it could create an even
more difficult situation in the Middle East. The current
situation in the region thus calls for renewed efforts.
We remain concerned by the cycle of attacks and
reprisals that is hampering the consolidation of the
progress made on the ground by the Palestinian
Authority, whose efforts we call on the international
community to continue to support.

With regard to the impasse and obstacles, it is
ever more urgent to restart the peace process on the
basis of principles that are clear and accepted by all
parties, which must include, of course, the
establishment of a climate of trust between the parties,
a commitment to pursuing peace negotiations in good
faith, the security of Israel, and the creation of a
Palestinian State. The stability of the entire region also
depends on this commitment.

Turning to Lebanon, my delegation welcomes the
formation of the new Government under the leadership
of Prime Minister Najib Mikati. We hope that this
Government will work to resolve security concerns,
particularly those raised by non-State armed groups,
and to return to dialogue and national reconciliation.
With regard to the situation in Syria, while it
remains concerned, my delegation notes the recent
adoption by the Parliament of a draft law authorizing
political pluralism. We urge the Government to
continue on this track in order to win back the trust of
the population and the international community.
We condemn the continued colonization of
Palestinian land. We also condemn the indiscriminate
attacks against Israel. We wish to see the two parties
return to the negotiating table in order to break the
current deadlock.

