Mrs. Nakamitsu: I congratulate the German
presidency for convening today's briefing. The possible
use of nuclear weapons, either intentionally, by accident
or through miscalculation, is one of the greatest threats
to international peace and security. The potential
consequences of a nuclear war would be global and
affect all Member States. Therefore, it is entirely
appropriate that the Security Council discuss measures
related to preventing such a catastrophic outcome,
and in particular the one instrument that has perhaps
played the greatest role in doing so. The Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) has
been an enduring feature of the international security
landscape for nearly 50 years. The NPT is widely
acknowledged as the cornerstone of the international
non-proliferation regime and the essential foundation
of nuclear disarmament. Its role as a pillar of our
collective security is likewise an accepted fact.

There are four key elements to the success of the
Treaty. First, it includes verifiable non-proliferation
obligations in the form of safeguards on peaceful
nuclear activities. Secondly, it is the only treaty that
includes legally binding commitments to pursue nuclear
disarmament. Thirdly, the Treaty establishes a strategic
balance across the three pillars of nuclear disarmament,
nuclear non-proliferation and access to the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy in ways that seek to maximize
their benefits for all States parties. Fourthly, its near
universality provides clear authority and ensures
almost global subscription to its normative framework.

Throughout its long history, the NPT has provided
tangible security benefits notjust for its States parties but
for all States. That President Kennedy's dire prediction
that there would be between 10 and 20 nuclear-armed
States by the 1970s did not come true can largely
be attributed to the NPT. That, there are only four
States with nuclear-weapon capabilities, or suspected
capabilities, outside the Treaty in 2019 remains one of
the greatest success stories of multilateral diplomacy.
We can all agree that the spread of nuclear weapons
to a greater number of States equates with a greater
possibility of their use. That that has not happened is
because of the value States parties continue to place in
their membership of the NPT and the non-proliferation
benefits it provides.

We must today reconfirm that the security
benefits that have been derived from the
implementation of article VI - those related to
nuclear disarmament - have been equally important.
Under the leadership of the nuclear-weapon States,
States parties' efforts to implement article VI helped
ease global tension, reduced great Power conflict and
built confidence among nuclear-armed competitors.
Reductions in nuclear arsenals, frameworks to reduce
nuclear risk and efforts to drive forward multilateral
nuclear disarmament are all effective measures under
article VI, and every one of them helped to create
an environment conducive to broader international
cooperation for various global challenges of our
time, from peace and security to development and
climate change.

Two pillars of the NPT - disarmament and
non-proliferation - are two sides of the same coin.
Backward movement on one will result in backward
movement on the other. The implementation of
commitments made under both strengthens mutual trust
and advances the cause ofa world free ofnuclear weapons.
As the Secretary-General has stressed, disarmament
and non-proliferation are important mechanisms that
help make the world safer and more secure. They are
measures to help prevent, mitigate and resolve conflict,
and can and should be pursued in tandem with other
peacemaking and security processes.

The NPT has proven to be remarkably durable.
However, that durability should not be taken for
granted. Today, we find ourselves in an international
environment defined by competition over cooperation,
and the acquisition of arms prioritized over the pursuit
of diplomacy. The disarmament success of the post-
Cold War era has come to a halt. In its place, there is
dangerous rhetoric about the utility of nuclear weapons
and an increased reliance on these weapons in security
doctrines. Expensive modernization programmes that
will make nuclear weapons faster, stealthier and more
accurate have effectively announced the arrival of a
qualitative nuclear arms race. Rapid technological
developments will begin to impact our international
security environment in many different ways, including
by potentially lowering barriers to the acquisition of
nuclear weapons. Last but not least, regional conflicts
might heighten proliferation drivers.

The disarmament and arms control framework
upon which the gains of the post-Cold War era were
made is eroding, but we have nothing else yet with
which to replace it. As a result, the prospect of the
use of nuclear weapons is higher than it has been in
generations. Together, these developments are placing
the NPT under increasing stress and are exacerbating
the fault lines that have been clearly evident between
States parties for some time now. In this context, the
2020 Review Conference will be a defining moment.

I do not believe that the failure to achieve consensus
in 2020 necessarily signals the demise of the Treaty,
but it would set a poor precedent and it would further
highlight divisions between States parties. It would
raise questions about the willingness of States to seek
collective security for all, rather than narrow, short-
term and eventually unsustainable security benefits
for individual States. I believe that we should avoid
this situation.

The year 2020 - the fiftieth anniversary of the
NPT's entry into force and the twenty-fifth anniversary
of its indefinite extension - presents a golden
opportunity to make the practical gains that will ensure
the Treaty's continued viability. A strong, political-level
re-affirmation by all to the Treaty will be important. In
the short time remaining between now and 2020, I hope
that States parties will consider four things.

First, there is a need for demonstrated
implementation by all States parties of commitments
made during previous review cycles. Past commitments
cannot be arbitrarily abrogated or else they become no
more valuable than the paper on which they are written.
The failure of implementation undermines potential
future gains across all three of the Treaty's pillars.

Secondly, we need genuine dialogue about our
current predicament in international security and how
the NPT can be a vehicle to reduce nuclear risk and
enhance stability in ways that also take concrete steps
towards nuclear disarmament.

Thirdly, there is a need to ensure the strategic
balance between the pillars. The NPT is often described
as a grand bargain. I see it more as a series of bargains
or, rather, commitments made. It is important to
recognize that they are all mutually reinforcing.

Fourthly, we need creative thinking about what a
successful outcome in 2020 will look like.

Since 1995, review conferences have produced
decisions, action plans, practical steps and measures
to improve the effectiveness of the review process
itself. In 2020, States parties will need to consider what
possible outcome can both ensure success and drive
forward implementation of the Treaty.

The security benefits provided by the NPT have
been manifest in times of relative stability. They should
be even more so in an era of international turbulence.
The NPT should be a mechanism through which to help
create a safer and more secure world. It should be a
basis on which to build trust and confidence, to address
emerging threats and challenges, and to lay the ground
for future gains in the pursuit of our collective goal
of a world free of nuclear weapons. Whatever a new
arms control and disarmament approach in the twenty-
first century might look like, one thing is clear - the
NPT will still be at the centre of our collective security
mechanism. It will have to stay fit for purpose.

I remain convinced the 2020 Review Conference
will be an opportunity to make headway on all of these
goals and to make sure that this linchpin of international
security remains fit for purpose through the next 25 or
even 50 years.

