Mr. Mulet (spoke in French): I thank members
for the opportunity to update them on the situation in
eastern Chad and north-eastern Central African
Republic. The Council has before it the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad
(MINURCAT) (S/2009/ l 99), which contains
comprehensive information about the situation. I
should like to take this opportunity to highlight several
points of special interest and to inform members about
several key developments that have occurred since the
issuance of the Secretary-General's report, in particular
concerning force generation and the Detachement
integre' de securite (DIS).

As members are aware, MINURCAT, which took
over from the European Union-led military force
(EUFOR) on 15 March 2009, is a new force. It has
benefited from the decision of several countries that
have contributed troops to EUFOR to extend the
deployment of their troops under MINURCAT. In
addition, several other Member States, including
Ghana and Togo, were also able to deploy troops
before the transfer of authority between EUFOR and
MINURCAT on 15 March. Thanks to those
contributions, MINURCAT's force numbered 2,085
troops when authority was transferred and 2,425 on
22 April.

Despite those auspicious beginnings, there is now
an urgent need to reinforce MINURCAT up to its
authorized strength and to equip it to meet the
challenges facing it. As a result, we are concerned by
the difficulties that we have encountered in the area of
force generation. In a context of strong global demand,
MINURCAT had only an extremely brief window of
time between the Council's authorization of the force
and the transfer of authority; the troop-contributing
countries had only two months to prepare.
09-31234

Thus, Ghana recently indicated that it would not
be able to deploy a full battalion to Farchana by
15 May, as initially planned, because of delays in
acquiring equipment for the contingent. Ghana will be
able to deploy only a vanguard of 200 troops by
mid-May; the remaining 600 troops will deployed by
October. Moreover, the Nepalese battalion, which will
constitute the reserve force in Abeche, will be able to
deploy only 285 troops before the rainy season begins,
also because of delays in acquiring equipment for the
contingent.

In his report, the Secretary-General foresees a
progressive strengthening of MINURCAT'S force from
2,085 troops on 15 March to 3,845 by the end of June,
to reach its full strength of 5,200 by the end of 2009.
Regrettably, we are now obliged to make a number of
adjustments following the delays to which I have just
referred. When the rainy season begins at the end of
June, MINURCAT's force strength will probably be
approximately 3,000 troops, with units present in all
sectors and a small reserve force in Abe'che. We expect
that, with the full deployment of contingents later in
the year, the force's strength will reach 4,700 troops by
the end of 2009. We will reach the ceiling of 5,200
troops only if Member States provide the Mission with
military helicopters and their support elements.

That leads me to the second difficulty, which we
must overcome as soon as possible: the lack of
elements essential to the force, particularly a
communications unit in Abeche' and most of the
military helicopters required. Currently, we have
received offers of only six military helicopters,
including four Mi-8s provided by the Russian
Federation; 12 more helicopters are still needed. It has
also been difficult to operationalize the helicopters that
we already have. Those four helicopters can be used
for operations only with the written agreement of the
troop contributor. We are trying to obtain such
authorization as swiftly as possible. In addition,
although Uruguay has pledged to provide two
helicopters, that commitment must still be approved by
the Uruguayan parliament.

I cannot stress strongly enough the risk posed by
the lack of military helicopters to the operational
effectiveness of the force. The concept of operations
provides for the presence of military helicopters with
the capacity to carry out both day and night operations,
to ensure that the force has the required mobility,
capacity to project and deterrent force 24 hours a day.
09-31234
The Mission's civilian helicopters have a capacity that
is limited to medical evacuations and providing support
to patrols as a result of restrictions concerning night
operations and the need for prior approval regarding
their landing sites.

Furthermore, although MINURCAT is capable of
conducting an average of 15 ground patrols per day,
these are currently limited in duration and scope, as
longer patrols require reliable and effective air support
to guarantee medical evacuation capacity. I would
therefore like to call upon the members of the Security
Council to do everything within their power to ensure
that MINURCAT has the military helicopters required
to implement its mandate and to minimize the risks
facing the Mission's troops.

It is all the more urgent to strengthen
MINURCAT given the security, political and
humanitarian challenges described the report of the
Secretary-General. At the political level, there has been
little progress in the implementation of the political
processes under way in Chad and between Chad and
the Sudan. The implementation of the 13 August 2007
agreement between the Chadian Government and the
political opposition is currently deadlocked as a result
of disagreement regarding the electoral law. The troops
of the armed Chadian opposition remain outside the
process and continue to consolidate their forces in
western Darfur. On the Chadian side of the border,
Chadian National Armed Forces have also strengthened
their positions, and the climate is tense.

In such a context, relations between the Sudan
and Chad remain difficult. I hope that the Contact
Group for the 13 March 2008 Dakar agreement
between Chad and the Sudan will be able to meet again
in the near future. I would like to encourage the
members of the Council to use their influence to
re-launch the Dakar process and to prompt the
Government of Chad, the political opposition and the
armed opposition groups to make more progress in
moving towards lasting and inclusive peace in Chad. In
this regard, the Secretary-General welcomes the efforts
of Libya and Qatar.

In the absence of political reconciliation,
especially in Darfur, the humanitarian situation
remains particularly difficult. As the Secretary-General
indicates in his report, 250,000 Sudanese refugees,
160,000 internally displaced persons and 700,000
among the local population in the east of Chad are
3
dependent on humanitarian assistance. In March,
15 non-governmental organizations wrote to the
Government of Chad to express their concern regarding
the security situation, which, according to them, is
currently deteriorating. They cited the great number of
incidents of banditry and armed attacks against
humanitarian personnel.

Beyond the zone of responsibility of
MINURCAT, in eastern Chad, other developments are
also ground for concern. A meningitis epidemic has
developed in the country, with 914 cases counted by
the World Health Organization as of 15 April. In
southern Chad, the ongoing flow of refugees from the
Central African Republic into the Salamat region was
the result of clashes between Central African Armed
Forces and rebel factions in the north of the country.
Between mid-January and 19 April, 17,621 new
refugees were counted in a number of sites near the
border, where they have been receiving assistance from
the humanitarian community since February. Access to
these sites, however, is difficult and will be even more
so after the start of the rainy season.

(spoke in English)

Given the lack of security in eastern Chad,
MINURCAT support to the Chadian community police
force known as the Detachement inte'gre de securite'
(DIS), which provides law and order in refugee camps
and other humanitarian sites, is particularly critical.
The 850-strong DIS is now fully trained, and 775
officers are deployed across eastern Chad, a significant
achievement on the part of MINURCAT and the
Government. But the DIS is a very new body and needs
to be further consolidated and guided to carry out its
vital functions in a manner consistent with its concept
of operations. This is made clear by recent incidents of
DIS ill-discipline, notably the alleged murder of a
civilian by a DIS commander in Farchana on 22 March.
We are working with the Government of Chad to
ensure that DIS posts are equipped with gun safes and
weapons storage facilities, where the weapons of off-
duty DIS officers would be kept. We are also
encouraged that the Chadian authorities have submitted
this case to the judicial system.

In a further troubling incident, DIS officers
themselves came under attack on 15 April, when a
group of around 25 armed individuals attacked the DIS
station in Farchana and stole a number of weapons, as
well as ammunition, communications equipment and
personal belongings. A DIS officer and a security guard
were injured. Information gathered by a MINURCAT
fact-finding team suggests that the attackers may have
been military elements. The Government of Chad has
also launched an investigation into the incident.

The events just described highlight two different
problems: cases of ill-discipline and the vulnerability
of the DIS to attacks. In our response to these
problems, we must strike a balance between
maintaining the credibility and safety of the DIS and
the need for the contingent to retain the trust of those it
is intended to support, namely internally displaced
persons, refugees, the local population and the
humanitarian community. Following the attack on the
DIS of 15 April and given the current lack of law and
order in eastern Chad, the Government of Chad has
proposed to equip the DIS with AK-47 submachine
guns. This proposal requires careful consideration in
order to ensure that the DIS maintains its community
policing character, consistent with the concept
endorsed by the Council in resolution 1778 (2007) of
25 September 2007.

In the coming weeks, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations will conduct a midterm
review of the DIS, in cooperation with other
departments and United Nations agencies. The review
will take stock of the concept and performance of the
DIS, including the issues I have just described, as well
as the impact of United Nations support and the way
forward. We will also assess the funding situation and
means of increasing international support for the DIS
and broader rule-of-law efforts by MINURCAT in
eastern Chad. It is vital that we match the deployment
of the DIS with corresponding progress in the areas of
judicial and penal reform and respect for human rights,
and I encourage Council members and donors to
support these needs through the Trust Fund for the
Support of the Activities of MINURCAT.

As outlined in the report, significant efforts were
made during the reporting period to put in place the
necessary legal and administrative arrangements for the
deployment of MINURCAT's military component. As
the Council is aware, on 13 February the United
Nations and the Government of Chad signed a
memorandum of understanding on the transfer of sites
and infrastructure. In accordance with that agreement,
MINURCAT is working to build new airport parking
spaces as quickly as possible. Following a recent
Government request that MINURCAT provide prior
notification of its aviation parking needs, we have
reiterated that the memorandum of understanding
provides for unimpeded access to the two airport
parking spaces in N'Djamena and Abeche.

Unfortunately, certain legal arrangements are yet
to be finalized, including amendments to the Status of
Mission Agreements to reflect the military component
of MINURCAT. We have called upon the Governments
of Chad and the Central African Republic to conclude
these amendments, which were submitted to them in
draft form on 3 and 18 March, respectively. We also
look forward to the finalization of memorandums of
understanding with Libya and Cameroon to provide for
the transit of goods through their territories, which are
currently under discussion with both Governments.

Finally, further to the request of the Council, I am
pleased to report that the Mission is developing a
strategic workplan, including mechanisms to measure
and track progress on the implementation of
MINURCAT's benchmarks. The plan is expected to be
finalized by July 2009 and will be presented in outline
form in the next report of the Secretary-General on
MINURCAT. I would like to reiterate, however, that
achieving the benchmarks endorsed by the Council -
including the voluntary return and resettlement of
internally displaced persons, the demilitarization of
refugee and internally displaced person camps, and
improvement in the capacity of Chadian authorities to
provide security with respect for human rights in
eastern Chad - will require broad efforts involving
many actors. In particular, we will continue to rely on
the support of the Council to ensure that MINURCAT
has the military assets and political support necessary
to carry out its very important mandate.

