Mr. Zhang Dianbin (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China welcomes the convening of this meeting by
Ukraine and appreciates that country's leadership
as President of the Security Council in guiding the
Council's work for the month February. We once again
convey to the delegation of the Russian Federation our
condolences on and sadness felt over the passing of
Ambassador Churkin.

With regard to this month's work, I would like to
focus on the following three issues.

The first concerns the situation in Europe. This
month, the Council held a ministerial meeting on
conflicts in Europe (see S/PV.7886) and held briefings
on the work of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and the question of Kosovo.
Recent years have witnessed general stability in Europe
and progress on some hotspot issues. But complicated
and uncertain factors remain, and conventional and
unconventional challenges are increasing. All that
calls for the concerted and united efforts of countries
in addressing them. China hopes that the European
countries will establish a new type of international
relations featuring win-win cooperation, enhance their
cooperation with each other and remain committed
to the peaceful resolution of their differences and to
comprehensive, just and lasting solutions to issues.

The second issue concerns the prevention of
conflicts. Peace has been the common aspiration and
lofty goal of humankind. China stands for resolutely
defending the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and for establishing a new
type of international relations featuring win-win
cooperation and developing a shared, comprehensive,
cooperative and sustainable security vision. The roles
of the United Nations and the Council in stopping war
and peacekeeping should be fully utilized. We must
address the underlying causes of conflicts for the
sake of development. We should also scale up efforts
for preventive diplomacy and peacebuilding. We must
remain committed to solving differences through
political means.

The third issue concerns combating terrorism. This
month, the Council held an open debate on the protection
of critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks (see S/PV.78 82). At a time when the fight against terrorism is
facing increasing challenges, infrastructure has become
an easier target for terrorist attacks. The international
community should pay great attention to that and be
united in its efforts. Terrorism is the common enemy of
humankind, and China advocates a unified criterion in
our fight against terrorism in which we fully leverage
the leading role of the United Nations and the Council,
while abiding by the purposes and principles of the
Charter and enhancing coordination and scaling up
cooperation in the fight against terrorism so as to
jointly maintain world peace and security.

In conclusion, I wish the United Kingdom all the
best in its Presidency for the month of March.

