Mr. Tesfay (Eritrea): At the outset, I would like
to thank the presidency of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela for having organized this open debate under
the theme "Respect for the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations as a key element for
the maintenance of international peace and security",
which is timely and most appropriate.

Let me also seize this opportunity to express
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his remarks
this morning.

This year marks the seventieth anniversary of the
establishment of the United Nations, founded to save
succeeding generations from the scourge of war and
ensure justice and development for all nations. In this
dynamic and evolving era, maintaining global peace
and security has been and remains one of the cardinal
goals of the United Nations; yet conflicts and wars have
become a constant feature of our lives. Many of these
wars are waged in total disregard for the Charter of the
United Nations and, increasingly, without its mandate.
As a result, collective and coordinated remedial action
is required by all countries, large and small.

The world has changed almost beyond recognition
since 1945. The global demographic, economic,
political and cultural realities of the world and of States
bear little resemblance to the past. And yet the United
Nations, the Organization that supposedly represents
the entire community of nations and the peoples of the
world, remains thoroughly dominated by the few and
has marginalized the overwhelming majority.

The international community has a choice to
make: do we want to see a United Nations that is an
effective multilateral instrument for the maintenance of
international peace and security, or one that continues
to maintain its present archaic nature, with dominant
and powerful countries misusing it to justify their
hostile and hegemonic policies towards nations that
do not dance to their tune? If the choice is the latter,
the confidence of the majority of nations in, and their
support for, the United Nations will be further eroded.

Every Government and nation has been calling
for the revitalization and restructuring of the United
Nations. However, two decades after reform of the
Security Council was formally placed on the agenda
of the United Nations, and despite many extensive and
viable proposals, we are where we were 70 years ago.

It is vital that all nations, small and large, and
peoples as well as political and social forces that stand
for peace, independence, respect for international law,
justice, equity and sustainable development, forge
a common front in order to defend the time-tested
principles of the equal sovereignty of nations, respect
for territorial integrity, and peaceful coexistence. The
right ofnations to choose their social and economic path
of development must not only be respected but must
be the main principle of the United Nations. Respect
for the dignity and rights of citizens and migrants
and fidelity to the Charter of the United Nations and
international law should also be guiding principles. The
United Nations Charter and its principles must not be
compromised for diplomatic and political expediency.

To underline and understand how those principles
have been compromised and abused, it is appropriate
to mention Eritrea's historical and current experience
with the United Nations. Eritrea has been and is today
a victim of the hypocritical working methods of the
United Nations, which is fully dominated and controlled
by a few permanent members of the Security Council.

For the geopolitical interests of the major Powers,
and becoming a victim of the Cold War, six decades
ago - in 1952, to be precise - the Eritrean people
were denied their inalienable right to self-determination
and independence by the United Nations. For 30 years,
the Eritrean people were savagely bombed from the
air and on the ground, with the aim of crushing their
just struggle for independence. However, through
sheer determination and a grass-roots participatory
system, the Eritrean people were able to achieve their
independence on 24 May 1991.

Today, once again, the Eritrean people are being
subjected to unfair and illegitimate sanctions by the
Security Council on the basis of fabricated allegations
that have proved to be unfounded. Moreover, the
Security Council continues to neglect the illegal
occupation of our sovereign territory by Ethiopia.
That occupation continues in violation of international
law, several Security Council resolutions and the final
and binding delimitation and demarcation decisions
by the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission, the
implementation of which is guaranteed by the United
Nations.

In conclusion, Eritrea endorses the concept note
submitted by the presidency (see S/2016/103, annex).
Eritrea also strongly believes that there is no other
international body better suited than the United Nations
to handle regional and international issues. Yes, it has
to be maintained, but it also has to be reinvigorated,
enhanced and reformed.

