Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): Thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important open debate, as well
as for your useful concept paper (S/2013/4, annex),
which reflects many of the vital challenges and
accomplishments of United Nations peacekeeping. We
also highly appreciate the remarks of the Secretary-
General.

My delegation associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Egypt on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

Indonesia concurs with the observation in the
President's non-paper that modern-day peacekeeping
has progressively evolved and adapted itself to
changing demands and circumstances. We particularly
welcome the note's focus on the mutually reinforcing
peacekeepingfpeacebuilding nexus.

As Blue Helmets are entrusted with more complex
and multidimensional mandates, all peacekeeping
stakeholders, namely, the Security Council, the General
Assembly, the Secretariat and troop-providing and
host countries, should constantly make efforts so that
the missions are supported adequately and meet their
objectives effectively.

We are confident that today's debate and resolution
2086 (2013), adopted earlier, will further the Council's
critical work, along with that of stakeholders, on
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping.

As a unique global partnership, United Nations
peacekeeping endures as a tremendously potent and cost-
effective tool in saving humankind from conflict and
instability. We must do everything that we can to enable
it to maximize its effect. That requires that the various
components ofUnited Nations peacekeeping -military,
police and civilian - work together closely and unite
in a sense of common purpose. That also requires that,
in the face of understandable overlap between the
dynamic boundaries of peacekeeping, peacemaking,
peace-enforcement, peacebuilding and development,
the United Nations and its partners are always ready
with responsive, comprehensive and properly supported
strategies to foster peace with both immediate and
longer-term measures, guided by the needs and
priorities of affected communities.

The wide-ranging nature and scope ofthe challenge
necessitates that explicitly clear guidelines are provided
to Blue Helmets, with the required equipment, training
and resources. While United Nations peacekeeping
operations are deployed, in principle, to support the
implementation of a ceasefire or peace agreement,
their active role in peacekeeping, peacemaking and
peacebuilding in many cases is inevitable.

In his 2009 report on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304), the
Secretary-General pointed to the unprecedented
demands on leadership capacity by the United Nations,
which relate, among other things, to the number, size
and complexity of peacekeeping missions, which
have expanded dramatically in recent years. In that
regard, Indonesia commends the increased focus by
the Council on the peacekeeping/peacebuilding nexus
over the past two years and welcomes the Council's
various pronouncements on including peacebuilding
elements in peacekeeping mandates, as appropriate,
along with the emphasis on national ownership. We
also support the Council's commitment to continuing
to improve its reflection on early peacebuilding tasks
related to institution-building. Strengthening core
national capacities is essential to laying foundations for
sustainable development and peace.

The General Assembly has also underscored the
importance of supporting national civilian capacity
development and institution-building, including
through peacekeeping operations in accordance with
their mandates. While peacekeepers undertake many
important peacebuilding and other multidimensional
tasks, we should also utilize the principle of comparative
advantage to achieve best outcomes, in particular with
respect to highly specialized and longer-term tasks.
Certain specialized civilian tasks need civilian experts
with specific experiences and skills.

The approach to multidimensional peacekeeping
should therefore reflect developments that are taking
place under the United Nations civilian capacity
review along with the work being carried out by the
Peacebuilding Commission. Other United Nations
entities are also conducting some very useful
programmes on development and peacebuilding, and
we need to promote an integrated and complementary
approach. We strongly support the call by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in its 2012
report on the importance of ensuring coherence
among peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development.

For Indonesia, peacekeeping is an important
element in its foreign policy as well as an integral part of
its constitutional mandate. Indonesia's participation in
United Nations peacekeeping goes back as far as 1956.
We are currently participating in six United Nations
peacekeeping missions, and our Garuda Contingent
has also been working on critical peacebuilding-
related tasks. We aim to increase our contribution and
participation in United Nations peacekeeping.

Finally, let me reiterate that peacekeeping alone
is not sufficient. A comprehensive approach that
addresses root causes, inclusive political processes,
peacemaking, development and strong national
institutions is necessary for sustainable peace. We
should all work together to ensure the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations and help to put in place and
bolster a responsive multidimensional framework that
supports peacekeeping.

