Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): Madam President,
may I extend to you my delegation's heartiest
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of September.
My delegation's sincere appreciation also goes to the
Council for the consideration of the Secretary-
General's comprehensive report on the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIPSIL), contained in document S/2009/438, and we
thank the Secretary-General for such a well-
accomplished effort.

Through you, Madam, allow me also to convey
my gratitude to the members of the Sierra Leone
country-specific configuration, and particularly its
Chair, Ambassador John McNee, for his effective
leadership and instructive statement to Council; to the
Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Michael von der Schulenburg, for his very helpful
and insightful briefing today; and to the entire
membership of the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Fund for their tireless efforts in ensuring that the
process remains on course.

Three months ago, we met in this Chamber to
consider the quarterly review of the implementation of
the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone. At today's
meeting, we are undertaking another review, which
should lead to an extension of UNIPSIL's mandate for
the next 12 months.

In retrospect and by way of an attempted
assessment, the Government and the people of Sierra
Leone are convinced that there has been some
significant value added. The rapid and innovative
approach that the UNIPSIL leadership adopted to
address the 16 March skirmishes that were sparked off
between followers of the two main political parties
truly exemplifies the raison d'etre of the Office. In this
regard, I am pleased to place on record my appreciation
of the high level of maturity and commitment that the
two main political parties have demonstrated, and
continue so to do, in implementing the joint
communique signed on 29 April to foster peaceful
coexistence and responsible dialogue in governance.

Although significant progress is being recorded
in promoting, among other things, inter-party dialogue
and in combating corruption, narcotic drug trafficking
and cross-border organized crime, as well as in
enhancing security across the country, at the same time
the Government is not oblivious to the challenges in
addressing governance, human rights issues and the
youth unemployment situation and its attendant
uncertainties and consequences, and in establishing and
making basic relevant institutional mechanisms and
structures operational.

The economic and financial downturn is no doubt
also negatively impacting the Government's ability to
address some of the socio-economic challenges
confronting our fragile peace consolidation process. In
an effort to address those challenges, the Foreign
Minister, The Honourable Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura,
and the Chair of the Sierra Leone country-specific
configuration, Ambassador John McNee, on 10 June
co-hosted a high-level event to mobilize support and
marshal resources for the Government's Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision of the United Nations
country team as a coordination mechanism for partner
collaboration with the Government.

In that respect, I wish to reiterate the need for
support to the projected $350 million multi-donor trust
fund for the implementation of the strategic
frameworks announced at the June high-level event,
due to be formally launched in London in November
this year.

We welcome any resolution of the Council that
extends the mandate of UNIPSIL for a further one year,
to be reviewed biannually. On the issue of benchmarks,
we consider that there are already built-in benchmarks
in the implementing and monitoring mechanism of the
United Nations Joint Vision agreed with the
Government and that there is no need for additional
ones that, in any event, would require the further
express support of the Government and all
stakeholders, which may not be readily and timeously
forthcoming.

On an exit strategy and its time frame, much as
Sierra Leone undoubtedly does not wish to remain
indefinitely on the Council's peacebuilding agenda and
to overstay its welcome, we are however mindful of the
existing and emerging threats and challenges to peace,
security and development confronting the subregion
and of the need to continue monitoring progress
through a UNIPSIL mandate within the framework of
the ongoing strategies now being implemented. We
believe that security within the subregion is still a
considerable challenge and too fragile, considering the
current subregional dynamics, the Yenga issue and the
narcotic drug trafficking and cross-border organized
crime in the West Africa subregion in general and in
the Mano River Basin and Gulf of Guinea in particular,
to warrant any foreseeable safe exit of the much-
needed international presence, assistance and support
that UNIPSIL offers and provides before the 2012
elections in Sierra Leone.

On behalf of the Government and the people of
Sierra Leone, including the opposition, members of
civil society and all vulnerable groups, I would like in
conclusion to reiterate our sincere gratitude to the
Council, the United Nations, our bilateral partners and
the wider international community for their continued
engagement on Sierra Leone for a better and peaceful
transformation and transition and to reassure the
Council again of the Government's determination to
maintain the momentum towards national recovery and
peace consolidation by striving steadfastly to overcome
the lingering socio-economic problems of the country
and to secure its future development free from want
and fear.

