Mr. Feltman: I am pleased to brief the Security
Council on the final report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Office in Burundi (BNUB).
As members of the Council know, the report before
the Council (S/2015/36) reviews the progress made in
implementing the mandate ofBNUB since 31 July 2014.
It also takes stock of the overall mandate implementation
ofUnited Nations peacekeeping and political missions in
Burundi since 2004. Further, it presents an assessment
of the remaining challenges facing Burundi, after the
closure of BNUB on 31 December.

In accordance with Security Council resolution
2137 (2014), BNUB ended its drawdown and its mandate
on 31 December. I joined Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Onanga-Anyanga in Bujumbura
to mark the symbolic closure of the Office on
12 December during my Visit to Burundi and had the
pleasure to co-chair a warm flag-lowering ceremony
with the Minister of External Affairs and International
Cooperation.

As the Council is aware, Burundi has made
substantial progress, overcoming formidable challenges
since the end of the civil war. Burundi has adopted
power-sharing as a system of governance, established
ethnically balanced institutions and held regular
elections, and remains committed to the promise of
national reconciliation. Burundi is much safer and
secure than it was a decade ago. These achievements,
and the spirit of the Arusha Accords on which they
were built, are first and foremost attributable to the
determination of the Burundians to break with the past
and work towards a peaceful, democratic and prosperous
nation. It is also the result of a remarkable level of
steady engagement of regional countries, the United
Nations and international partners, demonstrating that
concerted international action can yield positive results.

Let me emphasize some of the key challenges
that Burundi still faces. The spirit of Arusha, with its
principles of dialogue, consensus and democracy, has
eroded since the 2010 elections as political polarization
continues to hamper efforts to consolidate peace,
democracy and development. Concerns remain about
shrinking political space, restrictions of the right to
free assembly and expression, and the challenges of
building an independent justice system, which is a
critical element of a functioning democracy. Much
greater efforts are also required to strengthen pro-
poor economic growth and to create employment
opportunities, especially for the country's youth.

Organizing peaceful and credible elections is one
of the most pressing challenges facing Burundi this
year. As previous elections, the 2015 elections present
Burundians with the opportunity to further strengthen
peace-consolidation efforts undertaken since the Arusha
Accords. For that to happen, it would be desirable for
the following requirements to be met: First, it is critical
that the Independent National Electoral Commission
manage the electoral process in an inclusive manner,
with integrity, impartiality and independence.

Secondly, Burundians, regardless of party affiliation,
must be free to exercise their civil and political
rights, including their rights to freedom of expression
and peaceful assembly. Moreover, it behooves the
Government to ensure that opposition parties and their
leaders are able to fully participate in the electoral
process. Conversely, opposition parties must play their
part, remain engaged throughout the electoral process
and use peaceful and democratic means to address all
electoral disputes.

Thirdly, it is the responsibility of the Government
to prevent violence without impinging on the people's
rights to freedom of expression and peaceful assembly
by ensuring that State officials and security forces act
impartially and in line with the law.

Finally, individuals committing unlawful acts of
political violence must be prosecuted without delay.

As requested by the Council, the United Nations
Electoral Observer Mission in Burundi (MENUB)
started operations on 1 January with the mandate to
follow and report on the electoral process in Burundi
before, during and after the 2015 elections. Special Envoy
Uteem undertook his first visit to Burundi from 3 to
17 January, during which he held fruitful meetings with
Government officials and members of the diplomatic
corps in Bujumbura. He also inaugurated MENUB in
the presence of political party leaders, representatives
of civil society organizations and the diplomatic corps.
Regrettably, Government officials, the president of the
Commission e'lectorale nationale independante (CENI)
and representatives of the ruling Conseil national pour
la defense de la democratic-Forces pour la defense de la
democratie (CNDD-FDD) did not attend the ceremony,
as the status of mission agreement had not been signed.
We signed that agreement yesterday and believe that
the Government will do so today.

Clashes at the border with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo between the Burundian army
and armed groups have decreased sharply since July
2014. However, on 30 December, the Burundian army
reported clashing with an unidentified armed group
of approximately 100 to 200 members entering from
neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo into
Burundi's Cibitoke province. Over the course of several
days, the Burundian army reportedly defeated the
group, killing between 95 and 105 of its members. The
Government did not formally identify the attackers,
and no-one has claimed responsibility for the clash.
In another incident, on 4 January, five unidentified
gunmen dressed in military fatigues executed three
members of the ruling CNDD-FDD in a bar in Ruyigi
province, some 250 kilometres east of Bujumbura. If
not managed carefully, incidents such as those, at a
time of elections, could heighten political tensions.

Beyond the elections, Burundi faces challenges
no less critical. Improvements in health, education,
employment and infrastructure need to be at the
heart of the political debate if the country's leaders
are committed to placing the national interest above
all others. The Government will need to broaden
political space and allow democratic institutions
to provide the checks and balances essential for a
functioning democracy, especially if it wants to forge
broader consensus in policy formulation. Security
and justice sector institutions will require sustained
professionalization and capacity-building, especially if
they are to retain the public trust.

Addressing the remaining challenges will require
the efforts of all Burundians and sustained support
from Burundi's development partners. The joint
communique of the Burundi partners conference of
12 December re-emphasized the mutual commitments
of the Government and its partners adopted at the
2012 Geneva Partners Conference. As part of its
commitments, the Government guaranteed a credible,
inclusive and peaceful electoral process, while
international and regional partners pledged to continue
to support the country's peace consolidation and
socioeconomic development efforts.

In that regard, I am pleased to note that the United
Nations will continue to provide support through the
Peacebuilding Fund to enhance political dialogue and
social cohesion, youth participation in political and
socioeconomic life, human rights and the resolution of
land disputes.

I would like to underscore the importance of
the Security Council's support for regional peace
and security efforts. The Council's support for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region presents an opportunity in that respect.
The African Union, the East African Community and
the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region
all have important roles to play in that regard.

In concluding, I would like to take this opportunity
to thank the people and the Government of Burundi
for the cooperation extended to BNUB, including
the seamless and timely completion of the mission's
drawdown and exit. I would like to thank the former
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, for his outstanding
leadership and all BNUB staff for their contribution
to the United Nations efforts in Burundi. I would also
like to reiterate our appreciation to the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Peacebuilding Fund and all bilateral
donors for the fruitful partnership for peacebuilding in
Burundi.

Finally, I thank the Council for its continued
commitment to Burundi through the deployment of
United Nations field presences in the country over the
past 10 years.

