Major General Deconinck: I thank you, Madam
President, and all members of the Security Council for
their support to the missions in the field and for their
tributes, which I will convey when I return to Bamako,
and to Mali, next week.

I would like to add something to what my colleague
from the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur said. It is important to develop
our planning process, to study the equation between
the mandate and the means so that we can define the
ways and means and ends. But that is not enough. What
is missing is what we call in the military a restated
mission: did we understand what is expected of us and
what is expected of the mission? That is important.

In answer to the United States representative's
question as to whether the mandate is achievable,
I cannot answer that. I would have to explain the
operation design of the whole Mission, the desired
end-state of the Mission, the military end-state and the
decisive points and objectives. After laying all that out,
I might be able to say whether it is achievable or not.

But I would first like to turn to effectiveness,
starting with my own Mission. As Force Commander,
my task is to support the implementation of the
Peace Agreement, create or recreate a safe and
secure environment throughout Mali so that we can
redeploy the armed forces and security forces, so that
the national, regional and local authorities can be
redeployed, and so that basic services can be ensured.
As Force Commander, I also support the entire Mission
with a force in various domains in the field. I also have
to protect United Nations personnel and uphold the
United Nations mandate. In theory, I could say, "Yes,
I can achieve that mandate, of course." But I have to
bring safety, security and peace in an asymmetric
environment, and sometimes - indeed, more and
more often - in combat conditions. In answer to the
question as to whether the mandate is achievable, we
would therefore have to say perhaps not.

On the other hand, with respect to ways and means
and ends, I could say, as my predecessor did in 2016,
that I need - we need - more resources, capabilities,
people and so on. In 2016, we increased the personnel
ceiling by almost 2,000. At the moment we are still
working with a gap of 1,400. But the number 1,400 says
nothing. It is about capacities. We are still lacking some
capacity. Capacity is the product of people, equipment,
training and mindset - people, training, equipment and
mindset. So when we are talking about effectiveness, I
have to cope with that gap in capacities. I will live with
that gap until the end of my mandate at the end of this
year, and my successor will likely live with that gap
too. What we have to do is increase our effectiveness.
And that relates to the Santos Cruz report. I will not
enter into a debate about whether that report is or is not
endorsed or approved by the Council.

I will say that, in April or May oflast year, I started
taking measures to increase effectiveness, because I
have to do that. It is about force generation, and I kept
pushing the force-generation button with the Council
and the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.
We definitely need that. It is about tasking: reducing
tasks with no added value. For instance, we must stop
guarding some small compounds, close them and
regroup units. It is about stopping guarding Operational
Coordination Mechanism compounds and mixed unit
compounds. But they have to be capable of doing that.
It is about simply receiving more force protection
units, which would mean I would be able to generate
additional units using my own resources. That is about
increasing effectiveness.

Of course, training and equipping soldiers and
advising are mentioned in the Santos Cruz report, as
is working on the mindset of the soldiers. It is about
counter-threat, which should not be confused with
counter-terror: "I have to live and I have to act under
threat continuously". Counter-threat is also about
countering improvised explosive devices, countering
indirect fire and so on, which should not be done with
kinetic action alone. When it comes to countering
indirect fire, for instance, we have to address the whole
chain of command of the opponent, which we do in the
Mission as a whole. It is a whole-of-mission concept.
We spoke about intelligence. Of course, there is a
crucial need to have current and actionable intelligence
to first understand the situation, not only for the force
but also primarily for the mission. Where and how
should effort be directed f in which domain and
location - in order to increase situational awareness.
Secondly, we need intelligence to prevent attacks.
Three weeks ago, in the aftermath of the attack in
Timbuktu, I told my intelligence people that they would
have to predict the next location, the next date and the
form of the next attack. There is a need for intelligence.
Presence, posture and profile have nothing to do with
kinetic action, but it is important to be present, have a
good posture and profile. It is also about being present
and maintaining credibility among populations and
deterring the opponent.

I will now move onto force protection.
(spoke in French)

The French delegation asked what technological
capacities we still need to strengthen protection. The
answer is straightforward: we need more early-warning
radars, as we only have a few and I need one in every
compound. I also need additional short-range and
medium-range drones and command systems.

(spoke in English)

On the performance of contingents, we are
continuously evaluating units. My Deputy Force
Commander is in Kidal this week to evaluate two
battalions. We do that not only evaluate, but also to
take action and to correct what is wrong. We are also
measuring the performance of our operations. When
it comes to operations, Madam President, you asked
how we could avoid inactivity and how our mandate
could be more active. We are of course working with
the whole Mission in that regard with all the means
at our disposal, every six to eight weeks. We conduct
such activity, first, for situational awareness, secondly,
to ensure the freedom of movement of the force and
of our partners and, thirdly, to counter the threat and
operate within the seven pillars. That allows us to
employ a bottom-up approach to integrate the Mission
at that level.

Command control is also on my wish list, as I cannot
change policy alone. To do that, I need the support of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations.

Lessons learned from past errors are also essential,
so as to avoid future failure and to better act or react to
recurring incidents.

On effectiveness and coordination with military
actors. I am only the Force Commander; there are many
military actors active in Mali. I have sometimes heard
talk of a military traffic jam in Mali. That is certainly
not the case - I would be happy to have 10 more
battalions in any of my forces.

We coordinate on our main areas - operations,
logistics, support, intelligence and so on - with five
partners. The first of those partners is the Malian
armed forces. We also coordinate with the European
Union Training Mission in Mali, the Group of Five
for the Sahel and Operation Barkhane, as they are all
mutually reinforcing. I cannot perform any kinetic
action related to counter-terrorism; instead, I must rely
on our partners to do that. There is therefore a need
for coordination and better synchronization among the
partners, which we undertake every day.

I will mention one point about one of our partners,
the Malian Defence and Security Forces. I do not think
I mentioned the need for sound security sector reform
plan for the Malian Defence and Security Forces. Such a
plan is key because those forces are not only part of our
exit strategy, but they also represent part of the solution
for implementing the peace agreement. Security sector
reform is therefore key, not only for Mali but also for
the surrounding countries.

My last point will touch upon female personnel,
in response to the question from the representative of
Sweden on how to attract more female military personnel
within the force. First, I will say that the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali is the most dangerous mission in the world,
limiting its effectiveness. Secondly, we need women to
engage with the population. Again, it is about situational
awareness and so on. We need women. However, it is
the responsibility of troop-contributing countries to
engage more and to commit more female personnel.

On the question about the protection of
hospitals - which hospitals? The hospitals of the force
or the civilian hospitals in the country? That is not
my job. It is of course my job in the case of threats
or attacks against civilians and any body. When I say
body, I mean including hospitals and so on, on Malian
territory; of course it is myjob. But the Malian Defence
and Security Forces are on the front line. I am there in
support in such cases.

