Mr. Wu Haitao (China): China welcomes the
signing of the ceasefire agreement between the Syrian
Government and the opposition, and appreciates the
positive result achieved by the Russian Federation and
Turkey in facilitating its conclusion. China welcomes
the fact that the Security Council unanimously adopted
resolution 2336 (2016). This reflects the support of the
United Nations and the international community for a
comprehensive ceasefire in the Syrian Arab Republic and
a political settlement of the Syrian issue. The resolution
is conducive to the strengthening of mutual trust among
the conflicting parties, the advancement of the political
process, the easing of the humanitarian situation in
the country and the efforts to combat terrorism. China
hopes that the Syrian Government and the opposition
groups concerned will effectively and comprehensively
implement the ceasefire agreement and calls on other
opposition groups to join the ceasefire arrangement as
soon as possible.
The political solution is the only way out for
Syria. The international community should seize the
current favourable opportunity and work on the basis
of respect for the sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity of Syria to create conditions
for relaunching the political process in the country as
soon as possible. China hopes that the United Nations
and the international community will work towards
the comprehensive implementation of the 2012 Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolutions 2254
(2015) and 2268 (2016).

Special Envoy De Mistura has announced the
relaunching of Geneva talks in February 2017. We hope
that the peace talks will promote the political process
in Syria with a view to achieving positive results at an
early date. China hopes that the Astana meeting, as an
important component part of the political process led
by Syria and an important step towards the relaunching
of the Geneva peace talks will play a positive role in
advancing the political settlement of the question of
Syria. China calls on the Syrian parties to cherish
this hard-won achievement, set as their priorities the
fundamental interests of their nation and the security
of their people, come back to the track of dialogue and
consultations, and work under the principle of Syrian-
owned and Syria-led processes so as to reach a political
settlement acceptable to all.

China has taken active part in promoting the
political process in Syria and is willing to continue to
work with the rest of the international community for
a comprehensive, fair and appropriate settlement of the
Syrian issue.

