Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting. I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the members of the
Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) and Ukraine.

On 7 October, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), which, inter alia, condemned
the violence, especially the excessive use of force,
against Palestinians. It also called for the cessation of
violence and called upon Israel to abide scrupulously
by its legal obligations under the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

However, the violence has continued and the
Council has not taken any action to address the
situation. It was in this regard that the NAM. caucus
some weeks ago proposed the establishment of a
protection force for Palestinian civilians in the
occupied territories. After extensive consultations, it
was decided to change the proposed force to an
observer force. It is our strong conviction that such a
force would not only protect civilians, but would have
a stabilizing effect on the situation in the region. We
will always maintain that peace will benefit both
Palestinians and Israelis.

The NAM. caucus, under all circumstances,
endeavoured to engage all Council members and, in
particular, had useful exchanges with the French and
United Kingdom delegations, and we thank them for
that. The caucus had, on request, delayed action on the
draft resolution several times to accommodate the
views of other members, and in particular to give the
Secretary-General and other actors involved in
mediating the situation an opportunity to proceed with
their efforts.

The caucus has furthermore amended its own
draft several times to accommodate the views of other
members. The latest amendments include a substantive
change in operative paragraph 3, which now, instead of
deciding to establish a United Nations observer force,
only expresses the Council's determination to establish
such a force. This clearly takes into consideration other
actors involved. The draft resolution therefore contains
the minimum action that the Council should take,
bearing in mind the tragic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The argument has been advanced that the Council
should wait for bilateral peace efforts to run their
course before action is taken on this draft resolution. It
has also been suggested that the consent of both parties
is required before an observer force can be established.
We strongly disagree with both those views. We do not
believe that Council action is subject to peace
negotiations, although we actively support those
initiatives. The Council has its own important
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security. By establishing the observer force, the
Council can substantially contribute towards stabilizing
the situation in the region. We also do not believe that
the consent of the parties is required to establish the
force, but we agree that their cooperation is needed.

The Non-Aligned Movement strongly supports
the efforts of the Secretary-General to get the peace
process in the Middle East back on track. We also
strongly support the efforts of all the other players
involved. The Non-Aligned Movement, however,
believes that the Council has its own role to play in
these circumstances. It is in that regard that we have
submitted this draft resolution, which is balanced. The
members of the Non-Aligned Movement and Ukraine
will therefore vote in favour of the draft resolution.

