Mr. Dehghani (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement's appreciation to Azerbaijan as President
of the Security Council for having convened this
important open debate to discuss the progress achieved
in the implementation of the measures set out in the
note by the President of the Security Council of 26 July
2010 (S/2010/507). This open debate could help us to
direct discussions towards enhancing the transparency
and efficiency of the work of the Security Council and
to meet the expectations of the general membership of
the United Nations.

This debate is the sixth debate on the working
methods of the Council. The increased frequency in
recent years of holding such debates is indicative of
the fact that Member States attach great importance to
this matter. The same interest has been shown by the
Non-Aligned Movement.

NAM. has always emphasized the need for the
Council to increase transparency and take a balance
approach to interaction with non-members. Some
positive steps have been taken by the Security Council
pursuant to note 507. The Movement appreciates
the work leading to the note by the President of the

Security Council contained in document S/2013/515,
on enhancing efficiency and transparency as well as on
the interaction and dialogue with non-members of the
Security Council, and emphasizes the importance of the
efforts of Ambassador Maria Cristina Perceval, Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, which were eloquently
elaborated upon in her briefing today The points listed
in the note are very close to the position of NAM. with
regard to the working methods of the Security Council.

NAM. urges all States to uphold the primacy of,
and full respect for, the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations pertaining to the functions and powers of
the Assembly and calls on the Presidents of the General
Assembly, the Economic and Social Council and the
Security Council to conduct regular discussions and
coordination among themselves regarding the agenda
and programme of work of the respective principal
organs in order to establish increased coherence and
complementarity among those organs in a mutually
reinforcing manner, respectful of one other's mandates
and with a view to generating mutual understanding
among them.

We believe that the Security Council should avoid
resorting to Chapter VII of the Charter as a tool for
addressing issues that do not necessarily pose a threat
to international peace and security. Rather, it should
fully utilize such means to settle disputes and prevent
conflict as negotiation, mediation, arbitration and
judicial decisions and other provisions of relevant
chapters of the Charter of the United Nations, including
Chapters VI and VIII, before invoking Chapter VII,
which should be a measure of last resort.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the use
of wrap-up and informal briefing meetings, pursuant
to the note by the President contained in document
S/2012/922. However, NAM. believes that the issues
discussed in the wrap-up meetings should be limited to
the items and issues discussed at the Security Council
within the programme of work of each month. It also
welcomes the commitment reiterated by Council
members to continue that practice and encourages all
efforts to sustain and improve such meetings, which are
of great relevance to the broader membership.

With regard to the reporting practice by the
Council, we welcome the informal meetings between
the presidency of the Council and Member States on
the preparation of the annual report of the Security
Council, which can help enhance the quality of such

reports. We call on the Security Council to submit
a more explanatory, comprehensive and analytical
annual report to the General Assembly that assesses the
work of the Council, including such cases in which the
Council has failed to act, and the views expressed by its
members during its consideration of its agenda.

Furthermore, NAM. calls on the Security Council
to elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
different outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or "elements" to the press.
It calls on the Security Council, pursuant to Article 15,
paragraph 1, and Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter
of the United Nations, to submit special reports for
the consideration of the General Assembly. It further
calls on the Security Council to ensure that its monthly
assessments are comprehensive and analytical, and
issued in a timely fashion. The General Assembly may
consider proposing parameters for the elaboration of
such assessments.

NAM. welcomes the increase in the number of public
meetings and expects that the quantitative increase of
those meetings shall be associated with a qualitative
improvement by providing more opportunities and
meaningful exchanges of view to take into account the
contributions of non-Council members, in particular
those whose interests are or may be directly affected
by possible decisions of the Council. Furthermore,
concerned non-members of the Council should be
given an opportunity to express their views and
positions on such briefings. The general observations
and positions formulated by numerous non-members of
the Security Council during its debates or open debates
should be properly taken into account in any possible
outcome of those debates and should also be reflected
in the Council's annual report. NAM. appreciates the
convening of Arria Formula meetings as a practical way
to ensure greater interaction with non-members of the
Council and regional and subregional organizations.

We welcome the commitments to maintain regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission,
make more effective use of public meetings, and
invite the Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the Chairs of its country-specific configurations, as
appropriate, to participate in formal Council meetings
and informal interactive dialogues. NAM. also welcomes
measures taken to improve consultations with troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) and police-contributing
countries as part of the effort to plan and execute
peacekeeping operations more effectively and with

clearer mandates, and expects the finalization of a
presidential note on the enhancement of consultation
with troop- and police-contributing countries. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
continue to involve TCCs frequently and intensively in
its deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction. NAM. appreciates the meetings of the
Working Group held this year.

The Movement believes that further steps are
needed, along with the necessary political will of
Member States, in particularly the permanent members
of the Council, to improve the working methods of
the Council through both the General Assembly and
the Security Council. Transparency, accountability
and consistency are the key elements that the Security
Council should observe in all its activities, approaches
and procedures. Every effort should be made to render
the Council more democratic, representative and
accountable. In that way, the Security Council will
be able to deal more efficiently and effectively with
its mounting workload and with the multiplicity and
complexity of the issues on its agenda in maintaining
international peace and security. The Non-Aligned
Movement stands ready to contribute to the achievement
of those goals.

