Mr. Fernandes (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank the Guatemalan delegation for having organized
today's debate. We extend a warm welcome to the
country's Minister for Foreign Affairs, whose presence
demonstrates the importance of the subject and the
commitment of his country to the causes of peace and
justice.

(spoke in English)

I thank the Secretary-General for his informative
briefing. I also thank the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the representative of the
Office of the Prosecutor for their insightful remarks.
As the quest for peace and justice is a key common
purpose of the United Nations and the ICC, it is most
relevant that we discuss ways to improve the relationship
between them.

As a founder of the International Criminal Court,
Brazil remains steadfast in its commitment to the
Rome Statute, which we consider to be a remarkable
achievement in the development of international law. In
Brazil's view, sustainable peace and justice go hand in
hand and are mutually supportive. For any society that
has suffered the trauma of violent crimes, such as those
typified in the Rome Statute, coming to terms with
the past and addressing grievances is a very important
aspect of true reconciliation.
From that point of View, justice is not only a
matter of redressing evil done to individuals, but also
a powerful tool to help rebuild societies free from
resentment and the ensuing instability. In discharging
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
must take those elements into consideration.

At the same time, a referral to the ICC by the
Security Council should not be the default procedure
whenever violations occur. The political circumstances
of any given conflict and the likely consequences of
resorting to the ICC must be carefully considered by
the Council. As we know, balancing the imperative of
justice and the search for peace is a challenge that the
Council may occasionally be called upon to address.

In order to succeed in that critical effort, the
Council should consider that peace and justice will be
best served if the involvement of the ICC is very well
timed. A referral of a given case to the Court must not
negatively impact the political calculations of those on
whom war and peace may depend. In some cases, the
risk ofjeopardizing a peaceful solution that may spare
many innocent lives is real and should be duly taken
into consideration.

We must also bear in mind that the most immediate
and effective means for saving lives is the cessation ofall
violence. In that regard, we believe that the prerogative
of invoking article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute should
be used with caution, after other tools have proven
to be inadequate or insufficient and after thorough
consideration has been given to its repercussions for the
prospects of peace.

The power ofthe Security Council to refer and defer
cases is unique. Given the fact that the decision to refer
a case to the ICC is based on political considerations,
the Council must avoid all risk of double standards and
selectivity. When the Council decides to pursue the
referral track, it must do so rigorously and consistently,
following a principled and coherent approach, so as to
promote, first and foremost, peace and international
criminal accountability. Brazil believes that the
observance by the Council of certain conditions when
referring a case may help to ensure that both peace and
justice will be strengthened.

First, we reiterate Brazil's commitment to the
integrity of the Rome Statute and our firm opposition
to any form of exemption from the jurisdiction of the
ICC of certain categories of individuals. Initiatives
aimed at establishing such exemptions are not helpful
to advancing justice and accountability and do not
contribute to strengthening the role of the Court. The
notion of selective criminal accountability is foreign to
the values we uphold when advocating for the cause of
justice.

Working towards universalization of the Rome
Statute also stands as a priority. Nearly two-thirds of
the United Nations membership has ratified the treaty.
We need to ensure further progress towards universal
adherence, which will advance the legitimacy and
credibility of the Court, thereby allowing it to better
serve, as it must, the purpose of promoting peace and
justice.

Another crucial aspect regarding referrals of
situations to the International Criminal Court is
the financial burden of such decisions. Referrals
of situations may entail formidable expenses to an
institution that already works on a tight budget. If
we want to be coherent in the support for the Court
expressed by so many speakers today, we must give
practical meaning to the provision of the Rome Statute
according to which expenses of the Court may be
provided by funds of the United Nations, subject to the
approval of the General Assembly.

Finally, the issue of cooperation deserves further
consideration. In that context, the Security Council
is particularly important in following up on its own
referrals, making sure that the Court receives enough
political support, and fostering the use of relevant
regional and subregional organizations to help the fight
impunity.

In its 10 years of existence, the International
Criminal Court has already demonstrated that it is an
essential institution for furthering justice. As such,
it can also make an invaluable contribution to peace.
In that endeavour, the ICC will continue to count on
Brazil's support.

