The President (spoke in Russian): On behalf
of the members of the Security Council, I wish to
express our deepest condolences to the royal family,
the Government and the people of the Kingdom of
Thailand on the passing oins Majesty King Bhumibol
Adulyadej.

I request members of the Security Council to
stand and observe a minute of silence in His Majesty's
memory.

The members of the Council observed a minute
ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The question concerning Haiti

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(S/2016/753)

The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Argentina,
Brazil, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala and Peru
to participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
8/2016/862, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by Angola, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile,
Colombia, France, Guatemala, Japan, Malaysia, New
Zealand, Peru, Ukraine, the United States of America,
Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document 8/2016/753, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

Infavour:
Angola, China, Egypt, France, Japan, Malaysia,
New Zealand, Russian Federation, Senegal, Spain,
Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America,
Uruguay and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)


The President (spoke in Russian): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 2313 (2016).

The meeting rose at 11.25 am.

