Mr. Grauls (Belgium): Thank you, Mr. President,
for giving me the opportunity to speak today in my
capacity as Chair of three Sanctions Committees: the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999), concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities; the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004),
concerning Cote d'Ivoire; and the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
concerning Iran.
Since the departure of my predecessor,
Ambassador Johan Verbeke, in June of this year to take
on new responsibilities within the United Nations
system, I have had the honour to preside over these
three Committees. This has proven to be both a
privilege and a challenge.

The comments I am about to make are my
personal observations based on my experience and that
of my predecessor. They are not attributable to any
other delegation, nor should they be seen as a record of
the work of these subsidiary organs. For a factual
account of the work delivered in the past two years, I
would like to refer to the annual reports of the three
Committees, which may be found on their respective
websites at the end of each year. At the end of my
briefing, I will also say a few words about the state of
play within the Informal Working Group on
international tribunals.

I would like to start my briefing with the
Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee.

When my predecessor took on the chairmanship
in January 2007, he did so in the wake of the adoption
of two important Security Council resolutions at the
end of 2006: resolution 1730 (2006) establishing the
focal point process for de-listing requests, and
resolution 1735 (2006), strengthening the sanctions
regime and enhancing the Committee's procedures in
order to ensure more clarity and transparency.

Subsequently, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1822 (2008) in June, which in my view
represents a milestone in the life of the Committee.
Resolution 1822 (2008) introduced a number of
important innovations with regard to the procedures for
listing and de-listing, the notification of sanctioned
individuals and entities, the posting of narrative
summaries of reasons for the listing of all entries on
the Committee's website and the review mechanisms,
thus adding to the transparency and fair and clear
procedures character of the sanctions regime.

The Committee members committed themselves
to transposing resolution 1822 (2008) in a new
framework for the practical implementation of these
new mechanisms before the end of this year. In order to
find solutions fitting for all members, multiple rounds
of negotiations ensued that were sometimes arduous
and complex. This new framework has now been
approved and will form a solid basis for my successor
08-64915
to continue the implementation work on resolution
1822 (2008).

May I pay tribute here to the very professional
support I got from the experts of the member States
and from the Monitoring Team. I also appreciated the
flexibility shown by delegations during the final stages
of the negotiations. All these efforts have truly paid
off, since the Security Council included many of the
aforementioned innovations when it adopted the recent
resolution imposing targeted sanctions in the context of
Somalia.

One cannot ignore the international context in
which these developments have taken place. The
reality is that Security Council sanctions regimes find
themselves increasingly under pressure and have
recently been questioned, especially in light of the
need for fair and clear procedures for listing, de-listing
and the granting of humanitarian exemptions.

I do believe that the Al-Qaida/Taliban Committee
has made significant progress in this regard. However,
it is also my belief that all of us must remain
committed to continuing to ensure that due, and
probably even more, attention is given to these
concerns.

I do not think there is any doubt in anyone's mind
that terrorism remains one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security. The sanctions
regime against Al-Qaida, the Taliban and their
associates is still one of the most important tools of the
international community in the fight against terrorism.

In that light, it is important that Member States
use this tool to the fullest extent possible by proposing
the names of key actors for listing and complying fully
with the sanctions measures. In that spirit, my
predecessor and I gave four briefings to the larger
membership in order to engage it in the activities of the
Committee.

That said, I know that the challenges ahead will
be great. More needs to be done to ensure that the right
individuals and entities are targeted. Due respect for
fair and clear procedures can only increase the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime.

I now turn to the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1572 (2004)
concerning C6te d'Ivoire. Primarily, I shall address
three characteristics of the activities carried out by the
08-64915
Committee during the two years of the Belgian
chairmanship.

First, those activities took place in the broader
context of the momentum resulting from the
Ouagadougou Agreement of 4 March 2007. While
resolution 1721 (2006) had proved difficult to
implement, the Ouagadougou Agreement marked the
assumption of ownership of the peace process by the
Ivorians and regional actors, which entailed a relative
withdrawal by the Security Council. The Ouagadougou
Agreement contained sanctions provisions, to which
the Ivorian political actors have referred regularly in
their statements, including before the General
Assembly. On the other hand, neither the Security
Council nor the Sanctions Committee has ever
considered any request based on those provisions of
the Agreement.

Another characteristic of the Committee is that
various reports of the Group of Experts have identified
serious failures in the implementation of Security
Council measures both by Cote d'Ivoire itself and by
other countries, particularly those in the region. In
particular, the experts noted a certain degree of
ignorance, indifference and, in certain cases, contempt
in Cote d'Ivoire regarding the sanctions measures
adopted by the Council. The Republican Guard's
persistent refusal to authorize embargo inspections by
the United Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire and the
subsequent halt in those inspections are elements of
great concern. One may suppose that, in the current
context in Cote d'Ivoire, better acceptance of the
sanctions by the Ivorian authorities and others, as well
as improvements in implementation, will remain
challenges for the international community.

Finally, I was struck by the lack of follow-up to
the allegations of human rights violations noted in
particular by the United Nations. Despite some
observed progress, allegations of human rights
violations remain numerous and grave, in particular
cases involving sexual violence against women and
children. Most reported cases are not being prosecuted
by the Ivorian legal authorities. That situation is
intolerable and should be followed very closely.

The activities of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006),
concerning Iran, were carried out against the backdrop
of the verification efforts of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) and political negotiations
9

related to the nuclear issue. The Committee's activities
were carried out in strict compliance with the mandate
received from the Security Council. Moreover, during
the first two years of the Committee's existence, the
sanctions regime saw three successive waves of new
measures imposed under resolutions 1737 (2006) of
December 2006, 1747 (2007) of March 2007 and 1803
(2008) of March 2008.

The Iran sanctions have undoubtedly affected the
nuclear programme and the major actors and
intermediaries involved in it. However, it must be
noted that, despite the pressure exerted by the
sanctions and the repeated offers of cooperation from
the international community, the Iranian authorities
persist in refusing dialogue and in cultivating
ambiguity. More than five years after the disclosure of
Iran's clandestine programme, the IAEA remains
incapable of confirming its peaceful nature. The last
report of the IAEA shows once again that, at most, the
sanctions have delayed the programme, not stopped it,
nor - which is crucial - have they been able to
reassure the international community of its peaceful
nature.

The dual-track approach adopted by the Security
Council - pressure and dialogue - was further
confirmed by resolution 1835 (2008) of last September.
I believe that that resolution is both an invitation to
strengthen efforts to launch the dialogue and a request
for increased attention to the strict implementation of
the sanctions by all.

The Committee on Transactions could, therefore,
take a closer look at the national reports and examine
more thoroughly the breaches in the implementation of
the resolutions. In order to do that, in my view it would
be particularly useful for the Committee, following the
example of other sanctions committees, to be assisted
by a panel of experts and to undertake visits in certain
countries. In my view, such instruments are quite
simply the logical complements to a sanctions
committee.

Finally, I would like to mention the activities of
the Informal Working Group on Tribunals, which
Belgium has chaired during 2008. The discussions
within the Group mainly concentrated on the
establishment of a residual mechanism to carry out
certain essential functions of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda
after their closure.
10

My delegation delivered a statement regarding
the work of that body during the Security Council
debate last Friday. So, I do not wish to come back to
that in detail here. Moreover, there are further details
on that process in a letter that I will forward to the
President shortly and that will be circulated as an
official document.

To conclude, I would like to thank all those who
have been involved in the work of those subsidiary
organs over the past two years. I would most especially
like to thank the delegates, the Monitoring Team and
the Group of Experts on C6te d'Ivoire, as well as the
Secretariat for their valuable work and cooperation.

During my chairmanship of those three sanctions
committees, I have been able to observe how different
and, in a sense, how unique they are. Each committee
works within its own political context, being a country-
specific committee or tackling a global terrorist
phenomenon. Each has its specific mandate and its own
tools to implement it, for instance, with or Without a
group of independent experts. The interplay of those
distinct characteristics always seems to produce a
unique result.

The world is not the same as when we started, nor
is the Security Council. But certain threats to peace and
security remain and they must be addressed effectively
and fairly. Sanctions are a valuable tool in that respect,
and I am convinced that they can be further developed
to become an even better tool.

