My delegation wishes to thank Special Envoy Geir Pedersen for his briefing, and commend him and his team on their continued efforts in facilitating the political process in Syria, particularly during this challenging time with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). We have taken note of the Special Envoy's remark that there is a widespread sense that international competition is more prominent than cooperation, with Syrians paying the price. It is a strong reminder to the international community to engage in constructive diplomacy with Syria in order to support a political solution. As I mentioned at our last meeting (see S/2020/353), the political track needs to continue for the sake of the Syrian people. I am fully aware that it is easier said than done. My delegation therefore urges all parties, including the Council, to extend their full cooperation to the relevant United Nations-facilitated efforts, led by Special Envoy Pedersen. In today's meeting, I would like to highlight several points. First, a nationwide ceasefire in Syria is critical to ensuring sustained calm for all Syrians. We welcome the current relative calm in the north-west, as the Russian- Turkish ceasefire arrangement largely holds, and we thank the key parties in that regard. However, like the Special Envoy, we note the fragile situation, not only in the north-west, but also in other parts of Syria. This relative calm cannot be taken for granted. As tensions flare, we must urgently prevent an escalation. The Special Envoy also highlighted the ongoing risks of escalation and the need to prevent a return to all-out fighting. We must not unravel the little progress we have made. We applaud what Mr. Pedersen and his team have been doing to engage with civil society and women's leaders. While efforts are under way to prevent a COVID-19 outbreak, we must all remain committed to respecting a nationwide ceasefire. At the same time, we note that it will take more than a nationwide ceasefire to suppress the pandemic. A coordinated effort between all parties, including the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and the World Health Organization, is indeed crucial. Secondly, all parties need to keep the current momentum towards peace. The fear of an outbreak and its high risk it poses to the community has captured our attention. My delegation believes, however, that all work to achieve a renewed political framework must continue alongside efforts to mitigate the COVID-19 outbreak. We again thank the Special Envoy for his continued engagement with all key parties in order to ensure a Syrian-led and-owned political process on the basis of resolution 2254 (2015). With regard to the Constitutional Committee, we sincerely hope that the preparatory work for the third meeting of the Committee in Geneva will also continue, with the support of all Committee members and other key parties. Discussion must continue despite the pandemic. Thirdly, an all-out effort is needed to suppress COVID-19 in Syria. The number of cases in Syria remains relatively low, but we note the high risk of a major COVID-19 outbreak in Syria, as mentioned during today's meeting. The densely populated areas, internally displaced persons camps and collective shelters throughout the country, including detention facilities, are particularly at risk. The vulnerable groups therein live in cramped conditions, where social distancing is not possible, and lack adequate health facilities. Humanitarian assistance and access are important. The international community must redouble its efforts to contain the further spread of the pandemic in Syria. We commend the efforts of the Government of Syria to address the COVID-19 pandemic. My delegation wishes to reaffirm its commitment to the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic as a basis for advancing the United Nations-facilitated political process, in line with resolution 2254 (2015). In conclusion, my delegation continues to call for a global ceasefire and an end to violence worldwide. In this last week of the holy month of Ramadan and as we approach Eid al-Fitr, we once again call for peace, harmony and reconciliation. Let the people of Syria enjoy and celebrate Eid al-Fitr with calm and dignity.
