Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking the presidency of South Africa for a successful
steering of the work of the Security Council during the
month of October.

I take this opportunity to thank Mr. Nikolay
Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East
Peace Process, for his comprehensive briefing.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement
that will be made by the representative of the United
Arab Emirates on behalf of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

The volatile situation in the Middle East,
particularly that of Palestine, is one of the most
regrettable and long-standing crises of our times. It
remains one of the root causes of so many other crises
and dilemmas. Yet a peaceful, just and viable political
solution to that very central crisis continues to elude
the international community. The widely expected
meaningful and decisive political and legal actions to
end Israel's illegal, decades-long foreign occupation
of the Palestinian territory have been lacking from the
Security Council.

The limitless aggression, indiscriminate killing
of innocent Palestinians, including women and
children, intensification of Israeli settlement policies,
ongoing assault on Islamic and Christian holy places,
particularly the Al-Aqsa Mosque, constitute the most
blatant manifestations of the injustice committed
against the Palestinian people. These are changing the
demographics of the occupied territory. The Israeli
illegal blockade is making the already volatile situation
more perilous, thereby exacerbating the humanitarian
catastrophe. More and more Palestinian civilians
are being made homeless and forced to live under
inhumane conditions. An Israeli rights group recently
stated that Israeli authorities have demolished at least
140 Palestinian homes in occupied East Jerusalem
this year - the highest annual number since it began
keeping records, in 2004. Bangladesh condemns all
those acts ofwrongdoing and reaffirms its commitment
to the inalienable rights of the people of Palestine.

We are deeply concerned by the continued
socioeconomic downturn faced by the Palestinian
people, particularly the Challenges they face in
the achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The Israeli occupation has been directly
contributing to prolonging poverty, unemployment
and humanitarian crisis in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals will fail miserably if our Palestinian brothers and
sisters continue to languish in their political, social,
economic and cultural hardships. The international
community must deliver on its commitment to leave
no one behind by giving due attention to the legitimate
rights and needs of the Palestinian people. We are
concerned that the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) programmes, which over the years have
been providing essential humanitarian services to
refugees, are faced with serious budgetary shortfalls.
We urge the international community to come forward
in a collective show of generosity to ensure enhanced,
predictable and sustainable funding for UNRWA.

Israel's continued acts of aggression have given
rise to an egregious culture of impunity; ensuring
accountability is therefore a must. The international
community, with the Security Council at the forefront,
must fulfil its responsibility in ensuring accountability
for all Israeli atrocities and human rights Violations,
upholding the rule of international law and providing
protection for the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories. We reaffirm our support for the accession of
the State of Palestine to international organizations and
treaties and reiterate our call for the Security Council
to recommend and positively consider its admission
as a full Member of the United Nations. We also urge
for the timely implementation of the relevant Council
resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016), to end the
Israeli occupation, which is the bedrock for achieving
lasting peace in the Middle East. The implementation
of the Quartet road map and the Arab Peace Initiative,
along with the efforts of Middle East Quartet, is also
crucial.

During our war of liberation, in 1971, our people
had to endure the worst form of genocide - about
10 million Bangladeshi people had to take refuge
in neighbouring India. Our painful experiences
have emboldened us to stand by oppressed peoples,
which is why our Constitution stipulates our nation's
unequivocal support for oppressed peoples waging
a just struggle throughout the world. That is why we
did not hesitate to respond to the call of the distressed
humanity and opened doors to over 1 million Rohingyas
fleeing atrocious crimes in Myanmar. Driven by our
constitutional and moral obligations and the avowal of
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina - expressed yet again
during the recently concluded high-level week of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session - to
"stand firm in our support for our Palestinian brothers
and sisters" (A/74/PV10, p. 22), Bangladesh will
continue to firmly stand by the cause of the Palestinian
struggle until the establishment of the State ofPalestine
on the basis of a two-State solution and the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

