Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to the heads of the Tribunals
and the Residual Mechanism for briefing us on the
judicial proceedings, the speed at which they are winding
up and the transition to the Residual Mechanism.

In resolutions 2193 (2014) and 2194 (2014), the
Security Council took a step in the direction of both
Tribunals by agreeing to an extension of their judges'
terms of office. Mindful of the serious problems facing
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), the Council urgently called on this
body to step up its efforts to compress the timelines
for the completion of its cases. We take note of the
information in the ICTY's current report (S/2015/342, annex) on the steps that have been taken in that regard.
So far, however, they have not produced results. That
can only arouse serious concern. The staffing problems
that the ICTY report mentions can hardly represent an
adequate explanation of the situation. It would seem
that the Tribunal retains staffing resources sufficient to
organizing its proceedings without compromising the
speed of its work. Nor do the other reasons cited seem
overwhelming.

Apart from that, we would like to comment on the
situation regarding those accused with serious health
problems. For example, the report says that the trial
of Goran Hadzie was suspended as early as October
2014 owing to the state of his health. In our view, the
ICTY Trial Chamber and Prosecutor could analyse how
best to deal with getting on with the proceedings while
taking the humanitarian considerations into account.
Delays in the Tribunal will result in unprecedentedly
long pre-trial detention periods for the accused. Such
practices, by raising questions related to the right to
a fair trial, can hardly serve as examples for national
or international courts in the future. We believe the
Tribunal leadership can rectify the situation, shorten
the projected time frames for completing proceedings
and ensure the Tribunal's speedy transfer of its duties,
in accordance with the Security Council's requests. We
call on it to take all necessary measures and expect to
see results by the end of the year.

We welcome the information from the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda confirming that it will
complete the closure of its activities this current year.
We note the important role that States in both the
regions concerned and other countries have played in
supporting the Tribunals and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. According to the
ICTY Prosecutor's report, they have demonstrated a
high level of cooperation, particularly Serbia, whose
efforts have made a major contribution to completing a
number of the Tribunal's judicial proceedings.

The Residual Mechanism has rendered its first
judgement, and progress is being made in carrying
out other uncompleted functions of the Tribunals. We
expect the Mechanism's activities to be as effective as
possible, given the temporary nature of its mandate as
laid down in resolution 1966 (2010). In that context, we
recall that according to paragraph 17 of that resolution,
the initial four-year period for the Mechanism's
operation will end a year from now, and that in order for
it to continue to operate, a review must be conducted of
its work during that period.

