Ms. Coelho Da Cruz (Angola)(spoke in French): The
Angolan Government added its voice to those of other
members of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking
Countries (CPLP) to express its pleasure at the orderly way
that hundreds of thousands of Timorese voted on 30 August
1999 to determine the future of their country. It is
deplorable that in less than a week the will of the people of
East Timor has not been respected, despite the appeals of
the Secretary-General to all parties to respect the
democratic process, as well as his request to the Indonesian
Government to take all necessary measures to control the
illegal activities of the armed factions.

The situation in East Timor resembles a true massacre
and causes us great concern. The pro-integration militias are
not only carried out acts of intimidation, but they are also
carrying out real manhunts.

The acts of violence committed have caused very large
flows of refugees and of displaced persons and have also
forced the withdrawal of a large number of United Nations
staff. The steps taken by the Indonesian authorities have not
had the effect sought by the international community. At
this crucial time for the survival of the people of East
Timor, it is essential that the Government of Indonesia
demonstrate good faith and, as a matter of urgency, assume
all of its obligations under the 5 May Agreement in order
to avoid the genocide of the traumatized people of East
Timor.

We call upon the Government of Indonesia to heed the
appeal of the Secretary-General made in his statement
yesterday, where he stated that it was time now for
Indonesia to request assistance from the international
community to meet its responsibility, to restore order and
security to East Timor and to enable displaced persons to
return to their homes in safety.

The international community is now facing a historic
opportunity. The United Nations, which assumed the
responsibility of conducting the popular consultation
process, must bring to bear the authority entrusted to it by
the Charter and save the situation. The dispatch of a peace
mission is necessary, and the sooner the better, to guarantee
the peaceful implementation of the results of the
consultation.

