Mr. F edotov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): With the end of the cold war and the
emergence of a whole range of conflicts spawned by the
new instability, the international community is faced with

 

a gamut of problems in demining and in overcoming the
dangerous consequences of mines, which are hampering
both the socio-economic reconstruction of countries affected
by conflicts and the achievement of solutions to their
numerous humanitarian problems.

Unexploded land-mines, which have been laid in
abundance by parties to regional conflicts, continue to take
the lives of thousands of people even after relative stability
has been achieved. The countries that have suffered most in
this respect are Angola, Afghanistan, Cambodia,
Mozambique, Rwanda, Somalia and the former Yugoslavia.
Mines have been used extensively in the conflict in
Abkhazia, in the Republic of Georgia.

The problem of land-mines is particularly critical in
the context of carrying out United Nations peace-keeping
operations: United Nations forces are often deployed in
places where mines continue to pose a serious threat, and
quite a few United Nations peace-keepers are killed or
maimed by mines. The widespread profusion of mines
seriously hinders the movement of United Nations troops,
demobilization, the escorting of humanitarian convoys and
so on. In addition, the actual ability of the United Nations
to effectively carry out its peace-keeping functions is
jeopardized.

Similarly, the threat of mines does not allow the
operational activities of humanitarian missions to be carried
out as necessary. Particularly affected in this way are such
United Nations specialized agencies as the World Food
Programme, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF). We are convinced of
the urgency of intensifying the international community's
efforts to more fully realize United Nations potential for
demining in zones of regional conflict.

To an increasing extent, demining is becoming an
essential part of peace-keeping operations. When required,
it should be included, as it is already being included, in the
mandate of the relevant United Nations missions.
Alternatively, machinery should be provided for exploiting
the potential of regional and non-governmental
organizations in this respect.

One key issue, in our view, is the coordination of the
activities of various United Nations bodies and the full use
of their knowledge and resources in the implementation of
demining programmes, both during United Nations peace-
keeping operations and at the stage of post-conflict
reconstruction. We see this as a good reason for the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs (DHA) of the United
Nations Secretariat to keep its role as a centre for the
coordination of programmes to render assistance in
demining.

Here we would be grateful to the United Nations
Secretariat for clarification as to the division of functions
between the Department of Peace-Keeping Operations
(DPKO) and the DHA; their correlation and interaction.
It might be a good idea for an informal paper on this
subject to be prepared for Member States. We hope that
the special Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine
Clearance, established by the Secretary-General, will
enjoy more considerable resources than it does today and
will be able to play a more active and leading role in
financing programmes aimed at scientific and research
work in demining, in the training of experts and
specialists and in educating populations regarding safety
measures to decrease the dangers of mines.

It is also important that the coordinating role of the
United Nations in rendering technical assistance and in
organizing national potential to implement demining
locally be strengthened. Fruitful interaction has been
established between the United Nations, regional
organizations and individual States. We note with
satisfaction the drafting in the United Nations of standard
rules for the conduct of demining operations. We also
consider important the establishment of a central database
on questions of demining, to which all information on
problems of land-mines would be channelled. Work is
now under way in the Russian Federation to conclude the
special federal programme on demining on the basis of
the relevant programmes of individual regions affected by
the problem of mines. For us, interactions with the United
Nations, exchanging experience and receiving technical
assistance are matters of practical importance. In the
course of the implementation of peace-keeping operations
on the territory of the States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS), complex and expensive
problems are being solved in demining. In the zone of the
Abkhaz conflict alone, CIS peace-keepers have
neutralized more than 21,000 explosive objects. The
increasing danger of mines in the zone of the Abkhaz
conflict and the exacerbation of this conflict, since March
of this year, have affected the security conditions of the
local populations, refugees and displaced persons, as well
as that of the personnel of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG). This is seriously
hampering peace-keepers of the United Nations and of the
CIS in the implementation of their mandates. We have

 

proposals to resolve this problem, which we are now
discussing with the United Nations Secretariat.

We view the question of a total ban on anti-personnel
mines, which has been raised by several delegations, as a
subject for separate and substantive consideration and as is
well known, it is being dealt with in other formats.

We believe that the international community's position
on this question has been given form in the new version of
the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Mines, Booby-Traps and Other Devices (Protocol II) to the
Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of
Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed to
Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects.
Work on that was concluded on 3 May of this year in
Geneva.

On the basis that progress towards a full ban on anti-
personnel mines is possible only through the emergence of
real alternatives to that type of weapon, the Protocol raises
the idea of an extremely far-ranging task; the
implementation within a reasonable time-frame of a switch
to more predictable anti-personnel mines. There is the risk
that a ban on the production of anti-personnel mines, under
present conditions, would lead to the flourishing of an
illegal mine trade, which then might be capable of offering
simplified - and therefore more barbarous - mine
weapons.

We believe that the implementation of the provisions
of that Protocol and its full implementation - and by as
broad a group of countries as possible - would
significantly diminish the problems of demining and would
create more reliable protection from the danger of mines,
including during peace-keeping operations.

