Ms. Malcorra: It is with pleasure that I am here to
deliver a message on behalf of the Secretary-General.

"I commend the United Kingdom for conveying
this ministerial meeting and for its long-standing
leadership on Somalia. The stakes are high. The
international community must stand strong with
Somalia.

"Next year can be momentous. A peaceful
constitutional transition of power will make an
extraordinary milestone on Somali's path to
democracy. The new national consultative forum is
responsible for agreeing on the modalities for the
process. I urge the Federal Government to actively
engage as many people as possible, including
women, young people and minorities.

"At the same time, Somalia is consolidating its
federal system. I urge Somali leaders to complete
the process by the end of 2016. I also call on them
to achieve genuine, inclusive reconciliation in all
regions. Progress on the Provisional Constitution
will be essential in the next few months. I welcome
the commitment of Somali leaders to re-energizing
the delayed review.

"We are deeply grateful to the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) for its sacrifices.
The United Nations will not waver in our
commitment to the Mission. I call on all partners
to ensure that our military and political strategies
are fully aligned. We must also redouble our efforts
to strengthen Somali security forces so they can
secure the country for the long term.

"Military operations alone will not defeat
Al-Shabaab. Today, I renew my call on the
Security Council to support a comprehensive
approach that addresses the Al-Shabaab threat by
offering Somalis a better alternative. That will
require greater investments in community security,
human rights, justice and economic opportunity,
especially for young people. We must denounce the
propaganda of Al-Shabaab, address the grievances
that drive recruitment, and open the way for all to
renounce violence.

"The best way to weaken the pull of extremism
is to strengthen people's chances for a better future.
That is why I also urge the international community
to increase its contributions to the New Deal
Compact before its review in Istanbul in February.
An investment in the people of Somalia will also
benefit security in the region and the world. We
must urgently provide opportunities for Somalia's
strong women and girls, who suffer from poverty,
violence and abuse without fair participation in
decision-making. I urge the Federal Government to
work to exceed the goal of 30 per cent representation
of women in Parliament.

"Guaranteeing basic human rights is essential
to offering a credible alternative to extremism.
I have repeatedly stressed that all operations
against violent extremism, anywhere and under
any conditions, must fully respect human rights. I
commend the Government for actively participating
in the Human Rights Council's universal periodic
review. I also stress the importance of observing
international humanitarian and human rights law
in the conduct of military operations. In line with
resolution 2245 (2105), adopted today, we can build
on the tangible success of the United Nations/
African Union partnership and the achievments of
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM.
We can do even more with the new United Nations
Support Office in Somalia. I am committed to
strengthening our collaboration.

"Right now, some 3.2 million people in
Somalia need assistance to survive. Over the past
six months, more people have lost the ability to
feed their families. More children suffer from acute
malnutrition. Most of these are internally displaced
persons living under the constant threat of forced
evictions and abuse. The dire situation is growing
worse; we are expecting dangerous flooding and
drought. Our humanitarian response plan is only
36 per cent funded, so we cannot fully carry out
our life-saving programmes.

"Donors can make the difference between life
and death, and that can help move Somalia towards
greater stability and peace. The United Nations
will continue to do everything possible to achieve
political progress, boost security, promote human
rights and relieve suffering. I urge the Council to
provide active support. This is our path to defeating
the threat of terrorism and realize the vision of

Somali's for a united federal country that serves
all of its people and contributes to our common
future."

