Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Violence,
violence and more violence. This is the only news we
are getting out of the Middle East for nearly two
months. Given the alarming deteriorating situation in
the area, this meeting could not have been more timely.

Permit me at this point to offer my delegation's
sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting of the Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
offer our sincere condolences to the families of all
victims of recent violence in the region.

At the outset, allow me to reiterate Bangladesh's
total and unwavering support for the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people for a
sovereign and independent homeland of their own. We
believe that a just, lasting and honourable resolution of
the whole Arab-Israeli conflict can be achieved through
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).

I would like to express my delegation's deep
concern and anxiety about the volatile situation in the
Middle East caused by continuing violence, by heavy
loss of life among innocent civilians and by Israel's
continued use of excessive force and acts of
provocation against the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories. We condemn such provocation in
the strongest terms.

The latest Israeli missile attack does not stand up
to any logic. The bombing of a school bus, which
claimed two civilian lives and injured schoolchildren,
was a cowardly act of terrorism, and we condemn it.
This afternoon's news of further violence is, again,
very disturbing. Resorting to force and violence has
only served to deal a mortal blow to the peace process.

It is sad that the Middle East situation had to
deteriorate so fast, particularly when it seemed that the
peace process was about to make a breakthrough. We
would like to commend the Palestinian leadership for
its commitment to reaching a peaceful solution to the
Middle East issue. Reaching an agreement at Sharm el-
Sheikh, against all odds, was eloquent testimony to the
Palestinian leadership's commitment to peace.

Here, my delegation would like also to express its
deep appreciation for the continuing efforts of the
Secretary-General to contribute to a lasting solution of
the Palestinian issue, including his present involvement
in the dispatch of a fact-finding mission to the area. We
believe that subsequent deployment of international
monitors would help ease the situation in a big way.

Bangladesh has lent its support to the Middle East
peace process from the very beginning. We have not
lost trust in its ultimate success. We urge the
Palestinians and the Israelis to make their best
endeavour to put an end to the violence which has
vitiated the atmosphere in the region. Bangladesh
strongly believes that, once violence is shunned and
once dialogue begins, the peace process can indeed be
revived.

