Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing my delegation's congratulations to you, Sir, on
your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month, which will end today.
Ambassador Li Zhaoxing's leadership and wisdom have
indeed been evident during his tenure. I would also like
to express my delegation's deep appreciation to his
predecessor, Ambassador Legwaila of Botswana, for the
excellent manner in which he guided the Council last
month.

Allow me now to express my delegation's sincere
appreciation to the sponsors of the draft resolutions on the
United Nations peace-keeping Force in the Republic of
Croatia, the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. As my
delegation has already expressed Indonesia's basic views
during prior consultations, I shall confine my remarks to
just a few issues which my delegation considers of
particular importance.

The international community has indeed shown its
serious concern as it has sought to resolve the conflicts
that erupted after the break-up of the former Yugoslavia.
The search for a negotiated solution to these conflicts has
proven to be an extremely difficult task. In this regard,
we would like to commend the achievements of the
United Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) in
preventing a further escalation of hostilities and in playing
an important role in the peace process in all three areas
of its operation. We would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Yasushi
Akashi, the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Thorvald Stoltenberg, the present and previous Force
Commanders, and the courageous and dedicated women
and men of UNPROFOR for their devoted efforts in the
service of the United Nations and of peace in the former
Yugoslavia.

We share the Secretary-General's observation that
UNPROFOR's activities in the Republic of Croatia have
generally succeeded in establishing the cessation of
hostilities essential for initiating political dialogue.
Furthermore, my delegation would like to point out the
positive role played by UNPROFOR in the
implementation of the Cease-Fire Agreement of 29 March
1994 and in support of the implementation of the
Economic Agreement of 2 December 1994, which have

 

been positive steps towards confidence-building and
reconciliation.

However, we are also fully cognizant of the concern
expressed by the Government of the Republic of Croatia
regarding the lack of progress in the political dialogue,
which contributes to the perception that the UNPROFOR
presence has merely reinforced the status quo. The
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Croatia within its internationally recognized borders cannot
be compromised. This must also remain a guiding principle
for the United Nations presence in the Republic of Croatia
and in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In the context of the actual nature, size and function
of the new United Nations operation in the Republic of
Croatia - the United Nations Confidence Restoration
Operation (UNCRO) - we would like to stress several
points. Firstly, the importance of controlling the crossing of
military personnel, equipment, supplies and weapons over
the international borders between the Republic of Croatia
and the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and between
the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) cannot be overstated.
Secondly, we would like to re-emphasize that the strength
of the troops not only should be adequate for the
implementation of the Operation's mandate, but, most
important, should have a deterrent function. Lastly,
facilitating the delivery of international humanitarian
assistance to the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
through the territory of the Republic of Croatia is a crucial
element of UNCRO's mandate in the Republic of Croatia.

With regard to the operations in the Republic of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, we recognize UNPROFOR's past
achievements and setbacks as well as the extreme difficulty
it continues to face in attempting to stabilize the situation
on the ground, a stabilization which is necessary if an
atmosphere conducive to political negotiations is to be
established. In the light of these recent developments, which
have caused grave concern in the international community,
all parties are called upon to cooperate with UNPROFOR.

In this context, my delegation would also like to draw
attention to the past discrepancies between UNPROFOR's
mandate and its implementation, and would like to
emphasize the importance of effective implementation. In
this connection, my delegation wishes to emphasize the
importance of the tenth preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution contained in document S/ 1995/243, on the need
for Member States to take appropriate steps to enhance the
capacity of UNPROFOR in the Republic of Bosnia and

 

Herzegovina to execute its mandate as set out in the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council.

Undoubtedly, the political climate requires much
improvement, and the international community is called
upon to intensify its efforts to promote political progress.
In this context, my delegation would particularly like to
commend the efforts undertaken by the Contact Group.
We encourage the international community to continue its
support for these positive efforts in bringing about a
peaceful settlement to the conflict.

Furthermore, we would also like to express our
appreciation for the role of the preventive deployment
force in The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
The importance of the actions by UNPROFOR in this
area, for which both the Government and the ethnic
Albanian leaders have expressed their appreciation, should
be underscored. We support the continuation of these
positive efforts under the newly mandated United Nations
Preventive Deployment Force (UNPREDEP).

Let me conclude by expressing, on behalf of the
Non-Aligned caucus, our sincere appreciation to the
sponsors of the draft resolutions before us for their
cooperation and constructive approach during the
negotiations. On behalf of the caucus, I would also like to
express our deep gratitude to the Ambassador of Croatia,
the Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Ambassador of The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia for their contribution to the caucus's work.

