The President: I thank Mr. Spoerri for his briefing.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Trade of the Republic
of Korea.

Before I proceed to the main topic of today's
open debate, let me briefly touch upon the nuclear
test conducted by North Korea last night. That
country's nuclear test constitutes a flagrant violation of
resolutions 1718 (2006), 1874 (2009) and 2087 (2013).
It poses a direct challenge to the whole international
community, as well as an unacceptable threat to the
peace and security of the Korean peninsula and North-
East Asia.

Just an hour ago, the members of the Security
Council strongly condemned North Korea's nuclear
test with one voice and decided to begin working
immediately on adopting a Security Council resolution
to take necessary measures. The Government of the
Republic of Korea, as President of the Security Council
for the month of February, will cooperate closely with
the international community.

I would now like to deliver my statement on the
main topic of the open debate today.

It is a great honour for me to be here today and
preside over this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. I would like to express my
sincere appreciation to the Secretary-General, the High
Commissioner for Human Rights and the Director for
International Law and Cooperation of the International
Committee of the Red Cross for joining us today. I also
welcome the presence of Ms. Louise Mushikiwabo,
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
the Republic of Rwanda; Mr. Elmar Maharram oglu
Mammadyarov, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Azerbaijan; and Mr. Antonio de Aguiar
Patriota, Minister for External Relations of Brazil.

Despite significant normative progress in the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, civilians are
still suffering the direct effects of armed conflicts on
the ground. They have been killed, injured, kidnapped
and forced to leave their homes. It is deeply regrettable
that civilians continue to represent the majority of the
Victims of conflict in many parts of the world today. The
widespread violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law trouble us all. The Security
Council needs to remain ever vigilant to address that
situation.

The deteriorating situation in Syria is of particular
concern to us. It is alarming that, according to the
recent briefing by the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, more than 60,000 Syrian citizens have been
killed. While it is hard to know the exact number of
non-combatant casualties, it is clear that civilians are
bearing the brunt of the continuing Violence. They are
also subject to humanitarian tragedy.

Against that backdrop, I would like to emphasize
the following three points. First, I would like to
underline the need to bolster accountability for
violations of international humanitarian and human
rights law, which I believe is crucial for the protection of
civilians. Countering impunity is not only a significant
tool in preventing further violations against civilians,
but also an essential factor in ensuring an effective
reconciliation process.

While national authorities have the primary
responsibility to provide accountability, the Security
Council should be able to play a more active role where
national authorities fail to do so. The Council needs
to contribute towards ensuring accountability at the
international level, including through the referral of
relevant situations to the International Criminal Court.

In order to ensure accountability, it is also
important to investigate and document violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law in
armed conflicts. That is a significant prerequisite
for bringing perpetrators of crimes to justice. In that
regard, we support the continued efforts of the entire
United Nations system, including the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Human Rights Council, which has established
several commissions ofinquiry and special procedures.

Secondly, there is an urgent need to ensure
timely and unhindered humanitarian access, as well
as the safety and security of humanitarian workers.
Impediments to humanitarian access in Violation of
applicable humanitarian law should be condemned
and removed immediately. It is of particular concern
that Violence against humanitarian workers, including
their abduction and killing, continues to threaten
humanitarian activities in many armed conflict
situations.

Resolution 1894 (2009) invited the Secretary-
General to continue the systematic monitoring and
analysis of constraints on humanitarian access. I am
pleased that a detailed analysis of the problem was
provided in the Secretary-General's report of last year
on the issue (S/2012/376). As the report rightly pointed
out, constraints on humanitarian access are varied in
nature. States and other parties to conflict need to work
closely with humanitarian organizations to identify
appropriate, context-specific solutions and strategies to
allow humanitarian assistance and reduce the security
risks of humanitarian workers.

Thirdly, particular attention needs to be paid to
the various forms of violence against women and
children in armed conflict. It is deeply regrettable that
sexual Violence, including rape, remains a prominent
feature of armed conflict, affecting women and girls
in many parts of the world. While all civilians need to
be protected, we need to remain concerned about the
particular vulnerabilities of women and girls. I believe
that ending violence against women should be pursued
during the entire process of conflict resolution and
peacebuilding. I would like to underline once again
the significance of ensuring accountability for those
responsible for violence against women. In addition,
as Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) recognized,
we need to enhance women's empowerment, including
their participation in peacekeeping operations and
post-conflict reconstruction processes.
Before concluding, I would like to pay tribute to
the United Nations peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers, who are working hard to protect civilians
around the world and to ease their hardship.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

