Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We too would
like to thank Mr. Vieira de Mello for his informative
briefing, but especially also for everything he and his
people are doing in East Timor.

Later in the debate the representative of Portugal
will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union; it goes without saying that my delegation fully
subscribes to that statement. I will therefore raise only
a few matters that are not dealt with in the European
Union intervention. We subscribe to Mr. Vieira de
Mello's positive assessment of the Lisbon conference.
It was in Lisbon that Xanana Gusmao observed that
participation by the East Timorese was increasing. The
Netherlands welcomes that development. We have
consistently emphasized that this was essential both as
a way to give the East Timorese people a sense of
ownership of the reconstruction process and as a
necessary ingredient of the preparation for
independence.

We are also pleased about the broadening of
participation in the National Consultative Council with
the inclusion of women, youth representatives and
others. It is important to do what we can so that no
important group will feel it has been left out. In that
respect, Mr. Vieira de Mello mentioned one important
group with a strong and acute feeling of frustration; the
same group was also referred to at Lisbon by Mr.
Gusmao: the Falintil fighters. Mr. Gusmao said that
they were living under difficult circumstances and were
"almost in a state of revolt". Mr. Vieira de Mello said
in his statement that some short-term provisional
measures were required to address this problem, but it
goes without saying that if the dissatisfaction of the
Falintil fighters should ever boil over, we would
experience a radical change of scenery in East Timor. It
is clear that everything should be done to keep that
from happening.

This brings me to the question of a self-defence
force for East Timor. We have stated before that the
establishment of such a force cannot be the only
measure to strengthen the security of East Timor; but it
is a necessary one, if only because the United Nations
cannot indefinitely provide for East Timor's security.
Moreover, it is clear that such a force will be
established whether we like it or not. East Timor wants
it, and has the right of self-defence under the United
Nations Charter. We should not resist this; we should
manage it. United Nations involvement will provide the
opportunity to ensure that an East Timorese force will
conform to the standards of civilian oversight,
democratic accountability and international human
rights norms and standards.

It would also go a long way towards solving the
Falintil issue. Their participation in such a force should
be possible. Their background points in the direction of
a military career. I would like to point out that,
obviously, it is not our idea that we would establish a
self-defence force precisely in order to solve the
problem of the Falintil; these are two separate
problems. But we do not see any reason why it should
not be possible to make the solution of one problem
coincide with the solution of the other. It is clear that if
we manage to absorb the Falintil into a self-defence
force it would considerably lessen the risk of some of
them taking a different path. And considering that we
are dealing with frustrated armed men, anyone can
imagine what path I have in mind.

Finally, the security situation: we believe that it
still gives rise to concern. The suspension by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) of activities in three camps is worrisome.
Incidents in Noelbaki, Tua Pukan and Naibonat
probably involved militia members. The question is,
what are the effects of these incidents on the return of
refugees? We would be grateful to have information on
that.

Also, the armed attack on a post of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) last week, reportedly with rifles and hand
grenades, is a matter for concern. We understand that
UNTAET has conducted an investigation, and we are
interested in the latest information.

Our question is, what does this mean for
UNTAET's analysis of the security situation in East
Timor? We agree with what was said by Ambassador
Fowler and Ambassador Greenstock, implicitly in reply
to Ambassador Holbrooke, when they said that any
downsizing of UNTAET's military component must
take account of the risks inherent in the West Timor
situation. There should be no pressure on UNTAET to
downsize its military component on account of the
many other crises in the world. There are few instances
in the world where the United Nations has assumed
such total responsibility for a territory. We should not
withdraw prematurely.

Mr. Vieira de Mello described East Timor as a
"country at peace". But how safe is East Timor?
Because the question may be asked, how safe is West
Timor? It cannot be denied that in the vast territory of
the Republic of Indonesia there are instances where the
authority appear unable to check spontaneous - or less
than spontaneous - violence. Ambassador Holbrooke
has elaborated enough on this matter, so I will simply
state that I agree with everything he has said.

As Ambassador Fowler supported my request, I
will now support Ambassador Fowler by stating that
the Netherlands expects a serious briefing to the
Council on the security situation in East Timor before
final decisions on downsizing the military component
of UNTAET are taken.

I have one more question, concerning the
elections. If the period of August to December 2001 is
meant to be the period for elections, I would like to ask
Mr. Vieira de Mello if that also means that
independence will then immediately have to follow. Let
me put it this way: does Mr. Vieira de Mello feel that
the elections are the final stage to be followed
immediately by independence?

