Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ijoin other colleagues
in thanking Special Representative David Shearer for
his insightful briefing.

I want to highlight three points: the security
situation, the political process and the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).

First, Ukraine strongly condemns the violence
in South Sudan, which continues to result in civilian
casualties, massive displacement and severe food
shortages. It is shocking that this violence highlights a
startling level of impunity, as the perpetrators of gross
human rights violation generally remain unpunished.

We have taken note of the unilateral ceasefire
declared by President Salva Kiir last Monday. It is
important that this announcement be translated into
concrete deeds, which requires ensuring that those on
the ground follow instructions from the top and that
there is a mechanism for holding those breaching the
ceasefire to account. It goes without saying that a long-
lasting peace can be achieved only through a genuine
commitment of two parties. In this vein, we urge the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement in Opposition
to cease hostilities and join the ceasefire declared by
President Kiir. Any delay in doing so will only lead to
more suffering for the South Sudanese people.

Secondly, we continue to believe that a
comprehensive political dialogue is the only way to
settle the conflict in South Sudan. In this regard, we
look forward with cautious optimism to the work of
the National Dialogue Committee, the inauguration
of which took place earlier this week. It is crucial to
ensure that all major groups of South Sudanese society
are represented in the Committee. Otherwise, it will
be impossible to achieve an inclusive political process
aimed at healing the wounds of the war and paving the
way to long-awaited peace and stability. My delegation
welcomes the active engagement of regional actors
in advancing peace in South Sudan. It is important
to keep all regional initiatives as well as those of
the broader international community coordinated
and synchronized.

My third and last point is on UNMISS. We regret
that, due to a number of impediments, the ability of
UNMISS to implement its mandate remains extremely
limited. The Mission and humanitarian actors must
have unhindered access to affected areas to be able to
help those in need, in particular in the areas affected
by armed clashes. We cannot stress enough that the
freedom of movement of UNMISS and humanitarian
organizations is not some kind of privilege to be
granted or taken away on a whim, but their right,
respect of which defines the ability to carry out their
mandated tasks.

Given the deteriorating security situation in South
Sudan, UNMISS should be ready to respond to any
further scenarios. In this vein, Ukraine, as one of the
countries contributing troops and police to the Mission,
welcomes the significant work undertaken to enhance
the ability of UNMISS to protect civilians, better
plan its response to crisis situations and increase staff
safety and security. Ukraine also looks forward to the
early commencement of operations of the Regional
Protection Force in South Sudan, as envisaged in
resolution 2304 (2016). We call on the Government to
provide all necessary assistance, including granting
customs clearances and visas for participating units.
