Mr. Mufamadi: Allow me to congratulate
Mexico, both for its assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council and for creating this opportunity
for the Council to engage in dialogue with regional
representatives on a theme of such great importance.

As President of the Council, Sir, you succeed
Guinea, which presided over the Council at a defining
moment in the life of the Council. The theme of our
dialogue assumes that we are dealing with a situation
in which new factors have emerged, mandating that we
rethink the propriety of current strategies for the
maintenance of peace and security in the world. As
members of the Council and members of regional
organizations, we must approach this task as one that
goes to the heart of our shared raison d'etre: the
unshakable responsibility we bear for peace and
security in the world - especially the Security
Council, which has the mandate for international peace
and security.

As participants are aware, one of the challenges
for post-colonial Africa has been the occasional
outbreak of violent conflicts in various parts of the
continent - so much so that many are unable to
imagine an Africa without serious problems. Moral
exhortations have often failed to dissuade the
perpetrators of this scourge of violent conflicts. This is
because such conflicts are caused by lack of access to
resources. Indeed, warlords at the head of belligerent
organizations have tended to use the disorder which
ensues from such conflicts to gain disproportionate
access to the limited resources of their respective
countries.

In recent times, we have seen the African Union
working in earnest to bring to fruition the vision of its
predecessor, the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
In 1993, the OAU, at a meeting of heads of State and
Government held in Egypt, adopted the Cairo
Declaration on the Establishment of a Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution. In
2002, the African Union agreed to establish a Peace
and Security Council. Increasingly we are seeing the
deliberate mobilization of African resources for use in
dousing the flames of conflict which afflict such
countries as Burundi, the Sudan, Chad, Cote d'Ivoire
and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
As the Security Council is aware, the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - whom the
opportunity for nation-building, much needed since the
1960s, had eluded - have finally, through dialogue,
agreed on a vision of the kind of society they want to
build for themselves. They have also agreed on the
modalities to be used in the building of such a society.

The agreements signed recently have only started
the country on what will prove to be a long journey
towards lasting peace and sustainable development.
The signatories to these agreements understand that the
burden will become lighter only when shared. They
invited the international community to come and fulfil
what they see as an indispensable role in helping
implement their agreements. We hope that the Security
Council will support these agreements.

What we are seeing on the continent, therefore,
are developments that constitute a powerful counter-
argument against Afro-pessimism. Our optimism about
the future of the continent is based on what we are
prepared to do and are doing.

As we understand it, Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter enjoins the Security Council to support
these initiatives. The fact that these initiatives are
being taken in the spirit of Africans taking
responsibility for the stability of their own region is
itself an important development which must be
encouraged. Of course, the strategies used in these
initiatives are open to discussion and to critical
scrutiny. Only then will it be possible for these
experiences to add value to the already existing global
resources for conflict resolution and peacemaking.

Whatever the new factors which may have
emerged in recent times, one thing must be accepted as
a constant. We live in a world which requires
Governments to deal with one another in the context of
multilateral forums and organizations, as well as
through the traditional mechanisms of bilateral
diplomacy.

Although some of the African Union's
instruments for peacemaking, peace-building and
peacekeeping are still being finalized, recent
developments have proved that our region has immense
potential. Our position continues to be to work with the
Security Council to assume collective responsibility for
the identification of problems and the formulation of
appropriate strategies by which such problems can be
solved.

The manner in which the United Nations system
was structured was a direct response to the challenges
we faced in the immediate aftermath of the Second
World War. Since then, we have seen an unprecedented
move towards global interdependence, a move that
throws up new challenges and calls for new responses.
Among those responses is the need to develop
structural arrangements that allow all regions fully to
participate in the evolution and implementation of
solutions to the current problems related to the
maintenance of peace and security. We have seen the
strengthening of regional and subregional
organizations, which in turn leads to the strengthening
of our premier multilateral institution, the United
Nations.

We have had to collectively define the
relationship between regional organizations and the
United Nations. The African Union has always seen
itself as supporting and strengthening the efforts of the
United Nations. Any other approach would lead to
chaos and anarchy. For any region to be successful in
resolving conflicts, there will always be a need for a
strong multilateral system that can address the
collective security of all nations of the world. It is for
that reason that we are pleased that the Security
Council is engaged in this dialogue. We hope the
dialogue will help the Council to recapture the strategic
initiative with regard to the exercise of its duties and to
define for itself a niche that is faithful to its mandate.

