Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland joins with all other
speakers and wholeheartedly condemns the tragic
killing of schoolchildren and others in Pakistan today.
In the words of my minister, it was an attack of savage
brutality that targeted innocent children in their place
of study. I wish to express my heartfelt condolences and
those of the Irish people to the families of the victims
and to the people and the authorities of Pakistan.

Permit me to also thank the Chadian presidency
for organizing this important debate. Cooperation
between the United Nations and regional organizations
with regard to peace operations is a subject of key
importance, and I welcome the opportunity to provide
Ireland's perspective.

I would also like to align myself with the statement
delivered just moments ago on behalf of the European
Union (EU).

This subject is a significant one. Today, more than
half of the peacekeeping missions and just over 80 per
cent of peacekeeping troops are deployed in Africa. In
addition, almost 50 per cent of the more than 100,000
peacekeepers currently deployed by the United Nations
are from African countries. Furthermore, some of
the most challenging missions the United Nations is
currently undertaking are in Africa - in Mali and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such missions
highlight the changing nature ofpeacekeeping, and they
provide a serious test of how we carry out peacekeeping
missions. The contributions from African countries to
those demanding missions are also evident, including,
for example, from Tanzania, South Africa and Malawi
to the decisive Intervention Brigade of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We previously discussed United Nations-African
Union (AU) cooperation in July (see S/PV.7228). In
resolution 2167 (2014), adopted during that debate,
the Council requested the Secretariat and the African
Union to undertake a lessons learned exercise on the
transitions from AU to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in Mali and the Central African Republic.
We look forward to learning of its findings.

Looking more widely, Ireland welcomes the
establishment of the High-level Independent Panel to
Review Peacekeeping Operations, led by Jose' Ramos-
Horta, and looks forward to active engagement with it
in the coming months, especially when it considers the
question of cooperation with regional organizations. In
making our contribution to the review, we will draw
on our own considerable experience of peacekeeping
and our strong commitment to the United Nations in
addressing how peacekeeping needs to evolve to meet
the new demands. We will be conscious in particular of
the need to ensure that the protection of civilians is at
the heart of mandates for peacekeeping operations.

We also need more consistent and systematic
application of resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent
resolutions on the same subject and to address the root
causes of why women and girls are so disproportionately
affected by conflict. We need to ensure that peace
operations in Africa and elsewhere have the capabilities
to protect civilians and the participating troops
themselves. We also need to address issues such as rapid
deployment, improved intelligence and performance
assessment. We need to ensure effective command and
control arrangements, which underpin the success and
the credibility of operations.
The United Nations also needs to seek ways to
develop internal capacities - for example, in terms of
police, courts and local authorities - so that conflict-
affected countries, including in Africa, can build and
sustain peace themselves. Those are issues that apply
to all peacekeeping operations, but as I mentioned
already, the balance of operations in Africa means they
apply there in full.

The successful implementation of increasingly
complex mandates means that neither the United
Nations nor individual Member States can work
alone. Increasingly, the African Union and regional
organizations such as the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) are taking the lead in
maintaining peace and security in Africa and in meeting
the many security challenges that the continent faces.
That is a positive development. The generation of the
African Standby Force is another positive development,
and we look forward to seeing it fully operational
before long.

However, work remains to be done. Challenges
to be overcome include improving the transition of
missions, enhancing the logistical capacity of AU
forces, addressing long-standing issues in relation to
financing missions and ensuring complementarity
and coherence across regional and subregional peace
operations.

Joint planning of peacekeeping operations also
needs to improve. We welcome the cooperation
between the AU and the United Nations in Somalia,
the joint planning between ECOWAS and the AU on
Mali and the successful coordination between the AU
and the United Nations on the transfer of authority
in the Central African Republic from the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic. In addition, we strongly support all efforts
to enhance three-way cooperation between the African
Union, the European Union and the United Nations.
Effective triangular cooperation will be critical to

successful peacekeeping operations in the coming
years.

Nationally, Ireland makes a significant contribution
to the training of African security forces, both through
participation in EU training missions in Somalia and
Mali and on a bilateral basis. In September, at the
peacekeeping summit referred to by the representative
of Japan just now, which was co-hosted by Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon and United States Vice-President
Biden, we committed to further assisting the
development of peacekeeping capacities among our
key partner countries in Africa. We look forward to
establishing a programme drawing on the expertise of
Irish peacekeepers and reflecting United Nations best
practices.

Ireland, as a long-standing contributor to United
Nations peacekeeping and an active contributor to
EU-led missions, sees huge value in an ever-closer
relationship with the African Union in the areas I have
referred to. We support a holistic approach to preventing
and resolving conflict that draws on all available tools
and processes. We look forward to continuing to work
with all partners in that regard.

