Ms. Bokova: Allow me, first of all, to express
my deepest sympathy to the Government and the
people of the United Kingdom following the deadly
terrorist attack in London, which reminds us of our
responsibilities to fight extremism and terrorism.

(spoke in French)

Allow me to express my sincere emotion at the
adoption of historic resolution 2347 (2017), which
demonstrates a crucial recognition ofthe role of cultural
heritage in maintaining peace and security. Heritage is
our identity. As I look to the members of the Security

Council, I see images of the pyramids of Egypt, the
Island of Gore'e in Senegal, Mount Fuji in Japan, Red

Square in Moscow and Qhapaq Nan in Bolivia and sites
in other countries of Latin America.

Cultural heritage tells the story of peoples in all
their diversity. It embodies the points of reference and
values that define our shared humanity and ensure the
cohesion of our societies. Some have given their lives
to defend it. As German poet Heinrich Heine wrote,
everywhere men burn books and culture, they end up
burning other men. History has too often proved that
to be true.

The deliberate destruction of heritage is a war
crime. It is also a tactic of war to accelerate the long-
term degradation of societies, as part of a strategy
of cultural cleansing. That is why defending cultural
heritage is more than a cultural issue; it is a security
imperative that cannot be separated from the protection
of human lives.

Hidden behind the beauty of Palmyra is a story
of cultural exchange between Asia, Persia, Rome,
and the identity of the Syrian people. At the Shrine of
Jonah in Mosul we see the interaction among Judaism,
Christianity and Islam - a symbol of unity.

Cultural heritage demonstrates the existence of
cultural dialogue. It tells us our history and suggests a
shared future. Extremists know this, and that is why they
seek to destroy it. In adopting resolution 2199 (2015),
which prohibits trade in cultural property from Iraq
and Syria, the Security Council struck at the heart of
Violent extremism through its financing, and entrusted
to UNESCO, INTERPOL and the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) the responsibility to
lead the fight against trafficking in antiquities. That
resolution has already led to significant results.

In a global movement launched by UNESCO,
approximately 50 States have already strengthened their
legislation and are sharing information to dismantle
networks and to facilitate restoration. UNESCO,
INTERPOL and UNODC are working like never before
with customs services, the private sector and museums
to bolser cooperation against drug trafficking. The
resolution just adopted represents a huge step forward,
which reflects a new Vision of the links between peace
and heritage. I commend France and Italy and all the
other co-authors for this initiative.

Italy has created the world's first special unit to
protect cultural heritage in emergency situations, led
by the Italian Carabinieri under Commander Parrulli,
who I salute here today. France and the United Arab
Emirates have just launched a new fund, which already
has more than $75 million.

The UNESCO global strategy, adopted in 2015, is
based on a clear understanding of our responsibility
to coordinate international action. In our role as
custodian of international law on cultural heritage, we
are crafting common policies and standards through
the implementation of The Hague Convention of 1954
for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of
Armed Conflict, the 1970 Convention on the Means of
Prohibiting and Preventing the Illicit Import, Export
and Transfer of Ownership of Cultural Property, and
the 1972 World Heritage Convention.

As soon fighting ceased in Palmyra, Aleppo,
Nimrud and Ashur, UNESCO was on the ground to
take preliminary measures to secure sites and prevent
further damage. We have raised awareness among the
armed forces in Maly by distributing 8,000 heritage
passports, such as this one, so that each soldier knows
the location of sites and their cultural significance.

I commend the Security Council once again for
including the protection of cultural heritage in the
mandates of peacekeeping forces. Given that cultural
heritage is, as it were, on the front line of conflict, it
should also be at the forefront of peace.

UNESCO is working with the International
Criminal Court to end impunity for war crimes against
culture. Our cooperation has led to the conviction
of individuals responsible for the destruction of
Timbuktu's mausoleums, which are standing once again
today after being rebuilt by UNESCO in an effort to
speed up reconciliation and strengthen cohesion -just
as we did 12 years ago in rebuilding the Mostar Bridge,
destroyed by the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. For
everywhere culture rises anew, people rise with it.

Weapons are not enough to defeat Violent
extremism. Building peace requires culture as well, and
it requires education, prevention and the transmission
of heritage. That is the message - I hope - of this
historic resolution and its immense scope.

