Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Can I start by congratulating
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council. We feel that we are in very safe and steady
hands and look forward to supporting you in any way
possible. I would also ask the representative of the
United States to please convey our appreciation for
the effective way in which Nikki Haley and her team
conducted business in April.

I should like to begin by thanking Prosecutor
Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and extending our
appreciation to the Office of the Prosecutor for its
commendable and tireless efforts.

Since the onset of the conflict in Libya, the civilian
population has borne the brunt of the violence, as the
Prosecutor rightly said. They continue to pay a bitter
price for the military escalation and security vacuum
in the country. The breakdown of the rule of law has
resulted in widespread human rights violations and
abuses and breaches of international humanitarian law
by all parties to the conflict, including against children.
Those responsible must, of course, be held to account.
For this reason, the work of the Office of the Prosecutor
is essential, and I should like to make three brief points
in this regard.

First, the Office should be equipped to do the work
that is needed. Its call for adequate resources and for
the full backing of the Security Council and Member
States must be heeded. Let us not forget that the Council
decided to refer the Libya situation to the International
Criminal Court (ICC). We must enable the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Court to carry out its mission.

Secondly, Sweden commends the efforts of the
Office for its work on ongoing cases, despite the
security situation making it impossible for the Office
to carry out investigations in situ. In this context, it
is encouraging to hear of the substantial support and
cooperation being extended to the Office by the Libyan
Prosecutor-General's Office.

We take note of recent developments in a number of
cases. These include the Pre-Trial Chamber's decision
that the request for Mr. Al-Qadhafi's arrest should
be directed to the de jure Government. We appeal to
the Libyan authorities to facilitate the surrender and
transfer of Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court.

Regarding the case against Mr. Al-Senussi, we
would welcome the Prosecutor's assessment on the
findings in the report of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and her views on next steps, if any, for
the Office in relation to this file.

In relation to the case against Mr. Al-Tuhamy, we
note the recent decision to lift the seal on the arrest
warrant and the reclassification of the warrant as public.
We hope that this will facilitate his speedy arrest and
transfer to the Court.

Thirdly, Sweden supports the intention of the
Office of the Prosecutor to continue to monitor
human rights violations and abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law in Libya. This includes
incidents such as those that took place in the Ganfouda
neighbourhood of Benghazi in March, including
allegations of executions of detainees, other killings
and desecration of corpses. The repeated targeting of
medical facilities continues to be of grave concern.

We are also alarmed by reports of arbitrary
detentions, torture and of women facing sexual and
gender-based violence in migrant detention centres,
as well as in regular detention centres. We urge all
parties to provide for greater international access.
Sweden would also like to encourage the Office of the
Prosecutor to apply an integrated gender perspective
in its fourteenth report, including through the use of
gender-disaggregated data when possible.

We welcome the proposal of the Office of the
Prosecutor to assess whether crimes against refugees
and migrants fall within the jurisdiction of the Court.
We also welcome its initiative to explore possibilities to
investigate crimes related to networks engaged in the
trafficking of persons and the smuggling of migrants.

The situation in Libya remains one of concern.
Every effort must be made to find a political solution that
sets Libya on a path towards peace and reconciliation.
We are encouraged by signs of an increased willingness
by parties to engage in dialogue. All those who can
influence the situation must now engage constructively
to move the political process forward.

The United Nations has a key role to play and should
now urgently pursue a reinvigorated broad and long-
term approach to the country. Therefore we welcome
the continued commitment of the Secretary-General to
addressing the situation in Libya.

The work of the Office of the Prosecutor and the
ICC will continue to be important and can make an
important contribution to post-conflict reconciliation.
Therefore, in conclusion, let me convey the full support
of my Government to Ms. Bensouda as she continues
her very important work.

