Mr. Serage (Mozambique): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the Republic
of Korea's assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of May. I would also like to thank
you for inviting my delegation to participate in this
important meeting on behalf of the 18 member States
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
(CPLP).

We welcome the Secretary-General's report on
the situation in Guinea-Bissau and the activities of
the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Guinea-Bissau (S/2014/333), and we commend
the positive and very encouraging developments
registered so far. We also welcome the statement
of His Excellency Ambassador Antonio Patriota,
Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the
Guinea-Bissau country-specified configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. In that regard, we
greatly appreciate the immeasurable support of the
United Nations and other international actors in the
work of restoring the constitutional order in Guinea-
Bissau disrupted by the coup d'etat of 12 April 2012.
We would also like to commend the tireless efforts of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, who has encouraged the people
of Guinea-Bissau and mobilized international efforts to
find a sustainable solution to this crisis.

The Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries
has always supported the efforts on the ground aimed
at stabilizing Guinea-Bissau, and has assisted in
the electoral process by deploying its own electoral
observers, led by Mr. Leonardo Santos Simao, former
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Mozambique. We therefore commend the Guinean
people for their holding of free, credible and transparent
elections on 13 April. By maintaining an orderly and
peaceful atmosphere during the elections, the people
of Guinea-Bissau have proved to the world that they
wish to rebuild their country in a healthy, sustainable
environment. We share the view of the international
community that all the political actors, and Guinea-
Bissau society as a whole, should respect the results of
the parliamentary and presidential elections as a key
step in establishing legitimate authority and restoring
constitutional order. We encourage them to pursue an
inclusive national dialogue aimed at achieving long-
term political, economic and social stability.

The political situation in Guinea-Bissau is
nonetheless still a source of concern. Serious incidents
and continuing impunity for those who perpetrate
them demonstrate that Guinea-Bissau's rule-of-law
institutions must be strengthened and modernized.
Furthermore, issues such as food shortages, increasing
strikes about unpaid wages in various economic
and social sectors, and the irregular functioning
of a significant number of schools demonstrate the
seriousness of the situation. We call on the international
community to support the future legitimate and
democratic authorities of Guinea-Bissau in dealing
with the multiple challenges ahead, including that of
security sector reform. The CPLP also supports the
speedy holding of a donors' conference in order to
mobilize resouces immediately to deal with the urgent
need for emergency assistance and the longer-term
priorities for reconstructing various socioeconomic
sectors, which will pave the way for the country's
sustainable development.

In conclusion, we reaffirm the determination of
the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries to
work closely with the future legitimate authorities of
Guinea-Bissau, together with the United Nations and
the wider international community, in order to stabilize
the country effectively.

