Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express our gratitude to the
delegation of Colombia for having included in the
Security Council's programme of work for December
this public meeting to have a wrap-up of this body's
work during 2002 as well as to identify the challenges
and pending tasks of the Council for 2003. This
meeting has also been an ideal occasion to listen to the
assessment of the non-permanent Council members
who are leaving this body on the last day of December.

The Council is made up of 15 members who
represent their countries and regions. In carrying out
the Council's tasks, they try to reconcile their national
interests with the collective interest and the joint
responsibility of enabling this body to defend
international peace and security above particular or
specific national interests. This tension between
national interests and collective responsibility - which
we all have in the Council - has been a recurring
theme in the course of this year. We have to
acknowledge the valuable contributions made from
their national perspectives by the five countries leaving
the Council at the end of this month.

In this respect, I would like to state the gratitude
of my delegation for the sustained and persevering
work of the delegation of Colombia in several items
and for the leadership that has shown in some of them
and that has taken on a particular importance. We
would like to thank Colombia for the work in the area
of small arms and light weapons, which is a legacy that
cannot be abandoned by this Council.

In the year 2002, the Security Council stepped up
its meetings and important responsibilities and made its
working programme broader and more inclusive. This
is something that comes up year after year. The
Council assumes these responsibilities with the
experience and desire to participate actively in the
tasks of peace and the promotion of international
security. At the same the Council this year has perhaps
become much more visible than it has ever been in the
past. The attention of the world's mass media is sharper
and more sustained with regard to the Council's daily
work on the specific matter of Iraq.

This has given the Council an identity in
international public opinion which perhaps it did not
have before. But it has also placed the Council under
the scrutiny of the Members of the United Nations,
who today more than ever would like to see the
Council respond with a greater sense of responsibility
and with transparency to the tasks entrusted to it. The
members of the United Nations also hope that there
will be closer communications between the Security
Council, other United Nations bodies and the different
States that are not members of the Council but whose
concurrence is essential in carrying out our tasks.

In this respect, Mexico is firmly in support of
greater transparency in the Security Council's working
methods, particularly with regard to the deliberations
on substantive items of the programme of work. We
have not achieved the transparency in our working
methods that the United Nations community would
like. But we have made important progress this year in
having a large number of information meetings on
different items, at which the Secretariat shares its
points of view with the Council, become public. We
would also like the substantive deliberations to become
more public to the extent that that is possible and
desirable. With respect to working methods, the
Council has made progress in looking for formulas that
would make it possible to streamline its decision-
making process, to make it more democratic, and -
why not say it - more subject to controls and
responsibility.

In this respect we must note the work done by the
delegation of Singapore this year, and throughout its
two years on the Security Council. This was a special
contribution that leaves an important legacy: the
delegations that must continue the tasks of the Council
should maintain this intensive quest for more effective
working methods, to broaden the scope of our work,
ensuring that it more properly reflects the realities,
with better information systems for the Council, while
fostering a more flexible exchange of ideas and points
of View. Part of the ongoing concern of Ambassador
Kishore Mahbubani and his entire delegation during
the past year has been to ensure that the Security
Council would be able to responsibly comply with its
tasks.

To that end, they sought initiatives and working
methods that were different. There was also a central
concern that the Security Council have closer links
with the General Assembly through its reports and
through its ties with other United Nations bodies. We
have to continue working along these lines. We have to
go further in many of the initiatives which were
outlined and are on the table, and on which
Ambassador Mahbubani and his team provided
leadership that left a very important mark on the
Security Council.

This year the Security Council took decisions on
major conflict situations, maintaining the principle of
unity and consensus. This is perhaps one of the most
important achievements that we have to celebrate here.
There were very few occasions on which the Council's
votes were divided. The unity and consensus achieved
by the Council reflect the maturity with which States
shoulder their responsibilities, as well as the
introduction of working methods and formulas which
make it possible to achieve such consensus.

In this respect, Mexico has supported and
advocated the idea that the Middle East, including the
Palestinian situation, would be considered periodically
by all the members of the Security Council, both in
public briefings and in consultations. The presence of
the situation in the Middle East as an ongoing item on
our agenda undoubtedly represents important progress
in the search for agreement and consensus in that
region, which is afflicted by a conflict which
sometimes seems to be unresolvable. We hope the
Security Council, by keeping its finger on the pulse of
the Middle East and by holding monthly consultations,
will provide elements to increase peace and stability in
the area. Through these regular consultations, perhaps
we can make a contribution to the peace process which
is being promoted by the Quartet in the search for a
just and lasting solution which could be achieved
through the recognition of two States living side by
side within secure borders and in conditions of peace
and understanding.

We are also pleased with the fact that in the
course of the year the Security Council has given
timely follow-up to the situations of other countries or
regions in conflict, such as the Great Lakes region,
with an emphasis on the political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
region of West Africa.
The Security Council has had an important role in
the progress made in the peace process in Sierra Leone
as well as on considering the internal conflict in
Liberia and the emergence of new areas of tension in
Madagascar and in Cote d'Ivoire.

We would like to emphasize the importance of
mediation efforts, whether related to specific Member
countries or to regional or subregional organizations in
Africa, in finding solutions to crisis situations in the
region. Here, we would like to mention the work done
by the Ad Hoc Working Group on Conflict Prevention
and Resolution in Africa. We believe that the
leadership shown by Ambassador Koonjul of Mauritius
and his entire delegation fully justifies the
establishment of the Working Group and makes it
necessary that it continue its work in order to establish
the links between the Security Council, regional
organizations and the countries of the region, with a
View to anticipating events and to promote initiatives
and attitudes which would strengthen the capacity of
African organizations and countries to reach
agreements and to achieve peace and stability in the
region.

As it considered the various situations of
countries in conflict, in 2002, the Security Council
highlighted the need for greater cooperation and
coordination among the various actors in order to deal
with the dramatic repercussions of these conflicts, and,
in particular, in order to tackle the humanitarian
situation of the flow of refugees and internally
displaced persons and especially the situation of
women and of child soldiers.

In this context, Mexico would echo the
statements of those delegations who have said here that
we need greater coordination and cooperation between
United Nations agencies and regional and subregional
organizations. In the same vein, we should make
special mention of the fact that the international
community must continue to support programmes of
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-
combatants in post-conflict situations, in order to
prevent the re-emergence of tension and of factors
which would endanger progress in the peace processes.

In this respect my delegation would like to
acknowledge the tireless efforts carried out by the
delegation of Norway and by Ambassador Kolby in
dealing with specific situations and in stressing the use
of the Security Council's capacities in areas related to
peace in Africa, in particular with respect to Somalia,
Ethiopia and Eritrea. Ambassador Kolby's departure
will leave a leadership gap in this area which the other
members of the Security Council will have to make an
effort to fill.

With respect to promoting human rights and
humanitarian causes, we must make special mention of
the delegation of Ireland which made an ongoing
contribution to the Security Council's work in this area.
Here, we should also stress the Irish delegation's
important work in the Angola sanctions Committee,
which enabled the Committee successfully to conclude
its work recently.

One of the success stories of the United Nations
and of the Security Council in 2002 has been the
situation in Timor-Leste. Undeniably, the United
Nations has made a beneficial contribution to the
establishment of a new independent State and to the
formation of a Government and of administrative,
security and defence structures.

We regret the recent events that have taken place
in Timor-Leste, but we believe that the institutional
basis set up by the United Nations provides a guarantee
that those clashes and any subsequent ones can be dealt
with peacefully and with respect for the rule of law. We
must, however, keep the Council constantly involved in
that region.

Lastly, I would like to comment on the sanctions
regimes established by the Security Council. I, in my
capacity as Chairman of the sanctions Committee for
Sierra Leone, and my delegation visited the Mano
River Union region last June, when we had the
opportunity to speak with regional players in that
country and in Guinea and Liberia. As a result, we
gained a much greater understanding of the scope and
the functioning of the sanctions regimes, as well as the
conditions in which the sanctions are implemented and
the violations that they are subject to.

I would like to stress the importance of the
Chairmen of sanctions Committees becoming directly
involved in the work by visiting the region and
becoming familiar with the specific circumstances
there. As Ambassador Mahbubani said, there is
sometimes a great deal of confusion and ambivalence
in the public's perception of the work of those
Committees and of the meaning of sanctions. We must
bear that in mind and constantly review them in order
to keep those regimes active.

In this context, we support the statements made
by various members of the Council that the Secretariat
be provided with adequate human and budgetary
resources to enable it to support the work of the
sanctions Committees and monitor the sanctions
regimes, to draw upon lessons learned and to develop
an institutional memory - an archive based on the
research of expert groups and the work carried out by
various committees. In strengthening the institutional
tasks of the committees and setting up mechanisms to
ensure common understanding of responsibilities, my
delegation promoted the tripartite meetings between
the sanctions Committees related primarily to
diamonds.

One pending item for Security Council
consideration in 2003 is the validity and relevance of
the criteria and objectives of the sanctions regimes
imposed on Liberia and Sierra Leone in the light of the
political progress made in those countries.

The recent discussion that the Council held
following the lifting of sanctions on UNITA in Angola
should provide a model for other countries in West
Africa. We must prevent sanctions regimes from
becoming permanent or dysfunctional, and we must
therefore revise, taking timely and proper measures in
that respect.

In conclusion, I would like to express the support
of Mexico for the practice of holding wrap-up
meetings, which I hope will be continued in 2003. It is
also desirable for us to hold annual wrap-up meetings
such as this one in order to strengthen transparency,
which directly benefits the members of the Security
Council and strengthens our Organization and our ties
with the other States Members of the United Nations.

