Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): First of
all, my delegation would like to welcome the presence
of His Excellency Mr. Hoshyar Zebari, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Iraq. We would like also to thank
Special Adviser Ibrahim Gambari and Assistant
Secretary-General Warren Sach for their respective
presentations. Our thanks also go to you, Mr. President,
for your briefing on behalf of the Multinational Force
(MNF).

During the past few months, several meetings
have permitted Iraq's neighbours and the international
community as a whole to welcome two positive
developments. First, there is the significant
improvement of the security situation in Iraq and,
secondly, the intensification of efforts by Iraq,
beginning with its Government, to construct the stable,
democratic, united and prosperous country to which all
Iraqis aspire.

We cannot fail to welcome these positive trends,
but the violence that continues to strike the civilian
population and the still-precarious conditions of Iraqis
who have had to flee their homes reminds us of the
scope of the task that remains to be completed.

Belgium attended the first Review Conference of
the International Compact with Iraq in Stockholm and
was thus able to reiterate that the Iraqi authorities and
the international community must not weaken in their

efforts. First and foremost, these efforts must be
focused on improving the daily lives of Iraqi citizens,
through assistance that remains essential for refugees
in neighbouring countries and for internally displaced
persons, as well as in the broader context of economic
and social development.

Among the things that give us hope for a new
beginning, the annual progress report presented on
29 May in Stockholm stressed the advances already
made, as well as the challenges that Iraq, with its great
potential, must meet. The first of these challenges is to
ensure access for all to essential services such as food,
water and electricity supplies, health services and
education.

Next, in broader terms, the Iraqi leadership must
apply the principles of good governance, which must
guide them in the exercise of their functions for the
benefit of all of the country's citizens. In this context,
Belgium welcomes the observation by the International
Advisory and Monitoring Board (IAMB) that Iraq has
achieved some progress in the implementation of the
recommendations it received after the audits of the
Development Fund for Iraq. Belgium, however,
supports the encouragement that accompanies that
observation: for the Government of Iraq to intensify
and accelerate its efforts to eliminate the gaps that the
audit reports continue to note.

The efforts of the Iraqi Government to
re-establish its monopoly over legitimate force for
maintaining order and to advance the cause of national
reconciliation must, moreover, constitute the
foundation for building the State to which Iraqis
legitimately aspire.

With regard to security issues, these efforts must
be accompanied by a strengthening of the rule of law,
the impartiality of which will ensure the trust of all
Iraqis. We welcome the increased strength of the Iraqi
security forces. We have taken note of the wish of the
Iraqi Government not to put an end at this stage to the
mandate of the Multinational Force, which expires on
31 December 2008.

With respect to the political dimension, it is
important to finalize as quickly as possible the
preparations for credible elections in the governorates,
which will make it possible to enhance inclusiveness
and the democratic legitimacy of Iraqi institutions. It is
important also to continue legislative and constitutional
endeavours in order to ensure that every community
has the right to participate in deciding on a common
future.

In this context, we express our full support to the
step-by-step method proposed by the United Nations in
order to help the Iraqi authorities in addressing the
issue of disputed internal boundaries. The technical
analysis completed for four districts and the confidence
measures should facilitate the Iraqi Government's
crafting of a political agreement that would extend to
all these disputed cases and that would form a
necessary link with the future organization of the entire
country.

For Belgium, these United Nations proposals fall
within the framework of the implementation of the
mandate set out in resolution 1770 (2007). Indeed, this
mandate strengthened assistance to the Iraqi
Government in the political, humanitarian and
reconstruction spheres. We reiterate our appreciation
for the quality of the work that the United Nations has
carried out in Iraq.

However, the Security Council must continue to
ensure that the central role of the United Nations in
Iraq can be fulfilled in adequate security conditions. It
is in this light that we have taken note of the Iraqi
Government's intention not to seek future renewals of
the Multinational Force's mandate as well as its
announcement that negotiations are under way on
bilateral security agreements.

