Mr. Christmas (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Thank
you, Mr. President, for presiding over this session. The
issue of the illicit trafficking in small arms is of grave
concern and particular importance to my country. In
Saint Kitts and Nevis we have been experiencing for
some time now a significant increase in crime of all
types, in particular crime against persons and property
that has paralleled the increase in firearm crimes and
offences, as reflected in our national statistics. At the
end of the 1980s, such serious crimes as murder and
manslaughter averaged about 2 per year, but over the
last five years they have averaged over 10 per year - a
five-fold increase since 1990. Meanwhile, over the
same time period, there was an eighteen-fold increase
in firearm crimes and offences.

For us, these are not mere statistics. At this rate
of growth, in a few years' time the consequences would
be disastrous for our economy, in particular the tourism
sector even as we focus on developing that sector to
offset the closure of our 350-year-old sugar industry in
the face of trade liberalization measures and escalating
costs. It would also seriously undermine the long-
standing democratic structures of governance in the
country, threatening its very stability. I can say that this
would also be true for several of the other island States
in the Caribbean.

Not only is the illicit trafficking in small arms
having a negative effect in my country and other
islands of the Caribbean, but the world has watched in
horror as it has had and continues to have a devastating
effect in many parts of Africa, a continent so rich in
natural resources that it should easily be among the most
prosperous in the world. Instead, its resources have
attracted the wrong type of players, whose greed -
aided by the illicit trafficking in arms, among other
things - has helped to fuel conflicts and retard
development, making that continent probably the
poorest.
We have seen also a corresponding link with the
illicit trafficking in drugs, as well as illicit trafficking
in humans. We believe that these areas should be
addressed simultaneously.

If the concept of collective security, as
emphatically underscored by world leaders at the
September 2005 World Summit, is to have any real
meaning, then the international community must act to
help the less able countries to combat this scourge. It is
a just request. We do not manufacture arms in many of
these countries.

Saint Kitts and Nevis aligns itself with the urgent
necessity for international cooperation and assistance
in supporting the efforts of national Governments to
prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit trade in small
arms and light weapons in all its aspects.

