Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea): I
would like to start by welcoming you, Minister
Jayakumar, and congratulate Singapore for assuming
this year's first turn of the presidency. Taking this
opportunity, I also extend my delegation's
congratulations to the other new members of the
Council - namely, Colombia, Ireland, Mauritius and
Norway. I firmly believe that they will make fresh
contributions to the work of the Council.

The Republic of Korea has always been a strong
advocate for strengthening the cooperation between the
Council and troop-contributing countries (TCCs), both
as a troop-contributing country itself and as a strong
supporter of the reform process aimed at a more
transparent and accountable Security Council.
Currently we are witnessing a resurgence of United
Nations peacekeeping operations, in which the role of
the TCCs is increasingly gaining importance. Within
this context, strengthened cooperation between the
Council, the TCCs and the Secretariat will be an
important platform from which to strengthen the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations.

In this regard, my delegation particularly
appreciates Singapore's initiative in tabling this
important agenda item before us today. Today's debate
is all the more timely considering the strong political
will to enhance United Nations peacekeeping activities
that was manifested on the occasion of the Millennium
Summit, the submission of the Brahimi report and the
subsequent efforts of the Security Council working
group and of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations to review the report.

Against this backdrop my delegation wishes to
comment on some of the issues to which it attaches
particular importance.

When compared to the past, peacekeeping
operations have changed not only in size and scope, but
also in nature. As in the cases of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET), the character and mandate of
the peacekeeping missions are evolving in order to
adapt to the nature of crises and the current reality.
More recently, the experience in Sierra Leone
eloquently demonstrated the urgent need to upgrade the
level of consultations with TCCs. Such developments
call for a qualitative improvement in cooperation and
coordination between the Council and TCCs.

It is our belief that the TCCs are still largely
alienated from important stages of the decision-making
processes. Despite their contribution of soldiers,
equipment and much-needed resources, TCCs are
offered limited chances to voice their concerns over
important matters that directly affect the lives of their
nationals and their contributions.

Hence, my delegation fully acknowledges the
efforts of the Security Council, which in its resolution
1327 (2000) of 13 November 2000 underlined the
importance of an improved system of consultations
with TCCs and agreed to strengthen significantly the
existing system of consultations. We also welcome the
increasing recognition by the Council of the merits of
interacting more frequently with TCCs. And yet, what
matters is not the number of times TCCs are briefed or
allowed to speak in the Council, but the degree to
which they can substantially contribute to the decision-
making process of peacekeeping operations.

Although we appreciate the efforts made by the
Council and the Secretariat to continuously update
TCCs on the current status of field missions, our own
experience dictates that there is still room for the
current TCC meetings to become more effective and
interactive. TCC meetings should be more than a mere
forum for TCCs to be briefed on past occurrences in
the field. If, for instance, a structural change,
downsizing or expansion of a peacekeeping operation
is expected, the Council should provide the relevant
TCCs with the plan under consideration in a timely
manner, to enable TCCs to prepare well in advance.

In this context, a more institutionalized
mechanism should be considered to allow for genuine
participation by TCCs. While fully acknowledging that
peacekeeping missions are established by the sole
authority of the Security Council, my delegation
believes that the creation of such a mechanism would
be a meaningful step towards enhancing the overall
capabilities of peacekeeping operations.
We also believe that the Council and the
Secretary-General can collaborate more closely in the
initial stage of planning in finding ways to provide
prospective troop contributors with opportunities to
participate. The enhancement of early-stage
consultations will undoubtedly help remedy the
commitment gaps as well as minimize failures.

The Brahimi report contains a number of useful
recommendations and also covers the issue of
cooperation with TCCs. My delegation believes that
the impact of the report and the subsequent discussion
it generated should be maintained and furthered. In this
regard, we support the idea of establishing a subsidiary
organ of the Council in an appropriate form, as
provided for in Article 29 of the Charter. We also take
note that the Secretary-General, in his report on the
implementation of the Brahimi report, wholeheartedly
concurred with the Panel's assessment that closer
consultation between TCCs and the Security Council,
including through a new mechanism, is needed.

The Republic of Korea is currently contributing
476 peacekeepers to various peacekeeping operation
missions. My Government expects that its contribution
to peacekeeping activities will become more
substantial as its experiences grow. In financial terms,
as a result of the recent agreement on the scale of
assessments, Korea's increase in contribution in the
coming years will be one of the largest among Member
States.

My delegation reiterates its belief that the views
of the Member States that are willing and able to
contribute to peacekeeping should be respected and
accommodated by the Council through the
institutionalization of a consultation mechanism.

Several years have passed since the idea of the
establishment of new mechanisms for strengthening
cooperation between the Council and TCCs was
introduced. The time has come for the Council to
consider appropriate actions without further delay.

