I would like to thank Special Coordinator Mladenov for his briefing. First, I would like to state that Estonia aligns itself with the joint statement submitted on behalf of the European Union (annex 29). Estonia welcomes the signing of the agreements between the United Arab Emirates and Israel and between the Kingdom of Bahrain and Israel, as well as the recent announcement of the agreement between Israel and the Sudan. These are positive steps towards achieving peace and stability in the whole region. We acknowledge the constructive role that the United States has played in that regard. We encourage regional actors to embrace that spirit of compromise and continue to implement confidence-building measures to contribute to the long-term stability of the region. We believe that these historic developments can also give momentum to efforts to find a comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Israel's commitment to suspend the plan to extend its sovereignty over parts of the West Bank is a positive step. We urge both sides to re-engage in meaningful negotiations on all final- status issues in order to achieve a just and lasting peace. It is also important that all regional and international players, including the Middle East Quartet, continue efforts towards these negotiations. Our position regarding the Middle East conflict remains the same. A two- State solution and lasting peace can be achieved only through direct negotiations that take into account the legitimate aspirations of both parties and Israeli security concerns. In the light of the recent developments, we also urge Israelis and Palestinians to take further steps to build confidence, especially in the context of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We call upon the Palestinian Authority to resume cooperation with Israel based on previous agreements, and would like to wish the chief Palestinian negotiator, Mr. Saeb Erekat, a speedy recovery. We note positively that the Palestinian factions have reached consensus on holding elections. We hope that will soon translate into setting a date for said elections throughout the occupied Palestinian territories, as well as a commitment by all Palestinian factions to democratic principles. We call on all parties to refrain from any unilateral steps that might undermine the viability of the two-State solution. We call upon Israel to stop expanding settlements and end demolitions in the occupied Palestinian territories, including in East Jerusalem. We also condemn all acts of violence against civilians, including acts of terror and acts of provocation, incitement and destruction. The continued firing of rockets into Israel is not acceptable. In conclusion, I would like to once again urge both the Israelis and the Palestinians to generate positive regional dynamics, build trust and commitment to peace and re-engage in meaningful negotiations.
