Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I would like to reiterate the full support of
Luxembourg to the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Their work
shows that international criminal justice prevails
and that, sooner or later, the perpetrators of the most
serious crimes will be held accountable. I thank
Presidents Meron and Joensen, as well as Prosecutors
Brammertz and Jallow, for their comprehensive reports
(S/2013/308, S/2013/309, S/2013/310) and briefings.
I also thank Ambassador Rosenthal of Guatemala
and his team for the effective manner in which they
have presided over the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals.

I associate myselfwith the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.

This biannual debate on the activities of both
Tribunals is particularly significant, as we have
just celebrated the twentieth anniversary of the
establishment of the ICTY. By unanimously adopting
resolution 827 (1993), the Council clearly voiced its
commitment to an international order based on the rule
of law, including respect for international humanitarian
and human rights law. The ICTY has paved the way
for what is now an internationally recognized principle
for fostering conflict resolution and reconciliation in
war-torn regions. Those suspected of the most serious
crimes, which affect the entire international community,
must be brought to justice.
Today, the ICTY is nearing its ultimate goal of
completing its mandate by the deadline outlined in the
completion strategy for its work. In that regard, we
welcome the entry into force on 1 July of The Hague
branch of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. While the Tribunal will face a
heavy workload in the Seielj, Karadeie, Mladie and
Hadzie cases, we welcome the efforts under way to hold
the election of the sixteenth Appeals Chamber judge as
soon as possible.

The ICTY has played a key role in strengthening
the rule of law and promoting long-term stability
and reconciliation in the Western Balkans, but
its contribution goes beyond that. The ICTY's
jurisprudence has contributed to the development of
international criminal law in areas such as individual
criminal responsibility and crimes of sexual violence.
The Tribunal has given a voice to the victims, especially
women and children.

Like the ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda (ICTR) has made a significant contribution
to our common goal of putting an end to impunity
for the crime of genocide. We welcome the ongoing
transition from the ICTR to the Residual Mechanism
and the fact that the transfer of judicial functions will
soon be concluded. We commend the referral of cases
to the Rwandan jurisdiction, which is an important
element of the completion strategy for the Tribunal's
work.

However, as has already been noted this morning,
nine fugitives continue to evade justice. The Office of
the Prosecutor of the Arusha branch of the Residual
Mechanism is rightly focusing its efforts on the
search for the three high-level fugitives, Mr. Kabuga,
Mr. Mpiranya and Mr. Bizimana. Arresting the
fugitives is an urgent priority in order for justice to be
done. We therefore urge all Member States to intensify
their cooperation with the Tribunal and provide all
necessary assistance so that all fugitives can be arrested
and brought to justice.

We also call for a solution to be finally found for
the resettlement of the five persons acquitted by the
Tribunal who are still living in safe houses in Arusha
under the Tribunal's protection.

While the Tribunals are in the process of drawing
down their activities, the responsibility of States in
the region in the fight against impunity is growing,
in accordance with the principle of complementarity.
In the Western Balkans, as in the Great Lakes region,
the fight against impunity is essential to efforts to
promote national reconciliation, strengthen regional
cooperation and enable citizens to look to the future
with confidence.

At the international level, the mass atrocities
committed in the past few decades have shown that it
is imperative to create a permanent court to put an end
to impunity for the most serious crimes that affect the
international community. The two ad hoc Tribunals
have been a source of inspiration in that respect, and
their work set the stage for the establishment of the
International Criminal Court, a permanent court with
universal jurisdiction.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the
commitment of Luxembourg to supporting all efforts
aimed at strengthening the legacy of the ICTY and the
ICTR at the national, regional and international levels,
including through enhanced cooperation between the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.

