Mr. Rock (Canada) (spoke in French): I welcome
this opportunity to present the report of the Ad Hoc
Advisory Group of the Economic and Social Council
on its visit to Haiti, which took place in conjunction
with the Security Council mission from 13 to 16 April.

In recent months, within the Organization, we
have discussed the cause of larger freedom: how to
ensure freedom from want and fear and freedom to live
in dignity. I believe that the Ad Hoc Advisory Group's
mission to Haiti, together with that of the Security
Council, tangibly demonstrated the importance of that
debate. The nexus between development, security and
human rights is nowhere more evident than in Haiti.

(spoke in English)

Ultimately, of course, the chief responsibility for
the building of a stable and democratic Haiti rests in
the hands of the Haitian people themselves. However,
the international community must offer its commitment
and support over the long term. The Economic and
Social Council itself will have an important
contribution to make as the United Nations seeks to
play a positive role in the long, challenging work that
lies ahead.

Those involved in the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council visits returned, I believe,
with a deeper appreciation of the human reality behind
the four clusters of the Secretary General's report "In
larger freedom" (A/59/2005). We saw for ourselves the
need to better manage the continuum of support, from
relief to recovery to reconstruction to self-sustaining
growth development, in a close and mutually beneficial
partnership with local stakeholders and with a seamless
transition from one stage to another. While that process
needs to be sequenced, the planning for recovery
should start as relief work begins, and the planning for
long-term development should parallel reconstruction
activities.

That is the challenge that the current Government
of Haiti faces. With so many things to do, where and
how should one start? As we learned during our short
visit, there has been good progress in stabilizing the
macroeconomic framework, which is essential for
future progress. But for many reasons, there has been a
slower start on other urgent needs: on jobs, roads,
schools, health, water and sanitation.

Our Group's report to the Economic and Social
Council recognizes the immense challenges that will
face the incoming Government in February 2006. The
national report on Haiti's progress towards attaining
the Millennium Development Goals underlines how
much needs to be done at the most basic levels. We
will therefore propose that the new Government
consider anchoring its medium-term planning in a
poverty reduction strategy paper based on the
Millennium Development Goals.

The Group's report will make a series of concise
recommendations for consideration by the Economic
and Social Council, the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the United Nations
country team and the donor community. Let me briefly
touch upon some of its central recommendations.

We recommend that the Economic and Social
Council focus on mechanisms for capacity-building
support, playing a role in promoting the socio-
economic dimensions of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) programme,
developing a strong advocacy role on poverty and
promoting a smooth transition from the United Nations
integrated mission to sustained economic development
once MINUSTAH's mandate has been fulfilled.

With respect to the United Nations system, we
encourage considering the establishment of capacity
under the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to develop quick-impact projects, investing in
developing the capacity of key ministries and ensuring
that the DDR process is complemented by efforts in
support of political dialogue, a stronger judiciary,
reconciliation and security sector reform.

Looking to donors, we recommend that they
develop more flexible and accelerated disbursement
processes, align themselves to the maximum extent in
support of government-led strategies, harmonize their
activities closely and ensure that the DDR process is
sustained beyond the departure of MINUSTAH and the
end of the Interim Cooperation Framework.

As Haiti turns to the immense challenges it now
faces, it will be impossible to do everything at once.
There will be hard decisions about where to start and
how to sequence efforts. But it will be important to
communicate to the people of Haiti where the
Government intends to deliver and how it intends to
reach all parts of the country.

The international community will need to
maintain its engagement for the long term and to resist
the temptation to reduce funding when the elections are
over. In that respect, the past should be our teacher.

We therefore call on the international community
to increase its commitments to Haiti and to be more
flexible in doing so. Paperwork should not form a
barrier between a good idea and the financing
necessary to make it a reality. The Haitian Government
must be in a position to make rapid progress in the
quality-of-life improvements that Haitians expect.

Underlying ail of this must be a collective
decision by Haiti's people and its political class that
this is the time to move forward: to begin a national
dialogue around the building of a stable country in
which citizens enjoy the freedom and economic
security we are all committed to promote.

There is one more dimension of the visits by the
Economic and Social Council and the Security Council
that I should mention before closing. Our simultaneous
presence in Haiti - members of both Councils and
representatives of international financial institutions
and of troop-contributing countries - was a prototype
of what has been recommended by the Secretary-
General as the Peacebuilding Commission. I believe
that the unique integrated perspective that the visit
afforded, the constructive working relationship among
all those who took part and the significance of the
recommendations that emerged from the trip all
demonstrate the value of a Peacebuilding Commission.
This approach makes sense, and I very much hope that
Member States will examine our work when they
assess that reform proposal.

Let me conclude by expressing gratitude for the
support that the Advisory Group received from the
Government of Haiti, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH, the
Deputy Special Representative and Humanitarian and
Resident Coordinator, the entire United Nations
country team and the men and women of MINUSTAH
who ensured the security of the Group during its visit,
as well as from officials of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, the United Nations
Development Programme, the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the Inter-American
Development Bank. The Group also wishes to thank
the Department of Economic and Social Affairs for its
excellent support in facilitating our work.

