Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Once
again the Council is obliged to meet because of a tragic
worsening of the situation in the Middle East. France
and the European Union have strongly condemned the
Israeli military action taken on 22 July in a densely
populated area of the Gaza Strip. That attack resulted
in a large number of deaths and injuries, including a
number of children. France once again takes this
opportunity to reaffirm, before the Security Council,
this condemnation in the strongest possible terms.
France wishes also to convey its profound distress and
sympathy to the injured and to the families of the
innocent victims.

While Israel has a legitimate right to defend itself
against terrorism, such a deliberate act is unjustifiable
and can in no way contribute to resolving the current
crisis. As the Secretary-General has said, Israel has a
legal and moral responsibility to avoid the loss of
innocent lives. In its response to terrorism, it must
refrain from having recourse to this kind of
indiscriminate operation. More generally, Israel must
put an end to extra-judicial executions, of which
civilians are all too often the Victims. France recalls the
need to respect in all circumstances the norms of
international humanitarian law.

At a time when certain signs, such as the
reopening of Al-Quds University in East Jerusalem or
the resumption of direct contacts between Israeli and
Palestinian officials, had given us some grounds for
hope that tensions would ease and that there would be a
return to dialogue, the action undertaken in Gaza
threatens to restart the cycle of violence. France has
constantly pressed this point: violence will not lead to a
solution. It cannot be an option for those Palestinians
and Israelis who wish to establish a just and lasting
peace between their two peoples. It is only through
dialogue that the two parties will succeed in providing
decent living conditions for their peoples, while
realizing their legitimate aspirations to live in two
States - Israel and Palestine - coexisting side by side
within secure and recognized borders.

France once again calls on both parties to refrain
from any further act of violence, the sole effect of
which would be to provoke further ones. It calls on
each party to continue efforts to bring about a lasting
resumption of dialogue. This is the objective that the
main actors concerned aim to achieve within the
"quartet". Its encouraging work has underscored the
need to work hand in hand on all the issues - political,
institutional, security-related, economic and
humanitarian. This is the only possible path to a just
and lasting settlement. It is today essential for the
Israelis and the Palestinians to renounce violence once
and for all and to commit themselves to that path with
the assistance of the whole of the international
community.

