Mr. Inzko: Before I start, I would like to take a
moment to remember Lord Paddy Ashdown, who
passed away in December. As High Representative,
Lord Ashdown led the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina through a critical period,
implementing key provisions of the General Framework
Agreement for Peace and building and strengthening
the institutions crucial to reintegrating the country and
its people. Lord Ashdown was quoted as saying about
Bosnia and Herzegovina when he left, "It is a place
we cannot leave behind". He showed that to be true
until the very end of his life: even just days before his
passing, Lord Ashdown remained a vocal advocate for
the country and a champion of multilateralism in an
increasingly complex world.

Last November (see S/PV.8392), I reported to the
Security Council on how the 7 October general elections
had defined the political events of the previous months.
Now, seven months on from those elections, the process
of building coalitions and appointing Governments
continue to dominate the political dynamic in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. While the Republika Srpska
and some Federation cantons moved swiftly to
form Governments, regrettably there has been no
appointment of a State-level Council of Ministers or
a Federation Government. Nevertheless, concrete
discussions among parties on a state-level coalition
appear to be more advanced now, as confirmed in my
contacts with key political players before my departure.
The international community expects a new Council of
Ministers to be formed as quickly as possible, focused
on a forward-looking agenda of reforms.

Over the past six months, we have continued to
see a positive consensus across the political spectrum
on the need for the further integration of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the European Union. This was
reflected in February, when the Council of Ministers
finalized the follow-up responses to the European
Commission questionnaire, and in March when the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency Chair Milorad
Dodik personally delivered the answers to Brussels.
As Council members know, there were almost 4,000
questions and, accordingly, 4,000 answers.

Despite this positive political step, we have also
seen a continuation of divisive and destabilizing
rhetoric, sometimes from the very same leaders who
profess a commitment to the country's European Union
(EU) path. This inconsistency poses a serious challenge
to Bosnia and Herzegovina. While Presidency Chair
Dodik has worked with his fellow Presidency members
to find agreement on several important issues, he
continues to speak against the statehood of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, to threaten the future secession of
Republika Srpska and to assert that Republika Srpska
is a State, for example most recently saying that "we are
already separated. It just has not been proclaimed yet."
He has also stated that if Kosovo becomes a Member
of the United Nations, Republika Srpska would declare
independence. To illustrate his intentions, he has on
more than one occasion displayed a map of Serbia
joined with Republika Srpska and a part of Montenegro
as a single State.

It is my duty to warn the Council of potential
developments, but I would also ask its members
how they might react if a regional representative in
their own country made such explicit statements and
declared part of their country an independent State?
The secessionist rhetoric and the long-standing policy
of challenging the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina has
unfortunately become a constant over the past several
years. I therefore believe that we should push back on
these negative trends more decisively.

In addition to separatist statements from some
Republika Srpska political representatives, the
main Croat parties persistently reject the judgments
of international courts concerning their wartime
leadership and seek to revive the structures of that
period's para-State. To be clear, they are rejecting the
judgments of an international court, the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which was
created by this very body, the Security Council, in a
unanimous vote in 1993.

Also, earlier this year the main Bosniak party
announced its intention to launch an initiative to
challenge the name of Republika Srpska before the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitutional Court, which
predictably led to further threats of secession. In this
context, I must stress that the Constitution of Bosnia
and Herzegovina establishes that the State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina consists of two entities, the Federation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Republika Srpska. The
international community remains unwavering in its
commitment to the territorial integrity and fundamental
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am grateful to
Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron for organizing
the recent Berlin meeting of Balkan leaders affirming
the international community's resolve in this regard.

In contrast to statements from the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Presidency Chair challenging the
statehood of Bosnia and Herzegovina and supporting
the independence of Republika Srpska, I must
acknowledge with pleasure that President Vueie of
Serbia has continued to express respect for Bosnia and
Herzegovina's territorial integrity and sovereignty,
most recently at the opening of the Mostar fair on
9 April and following the recent Berlin conference.

Another issue that recently emerged and has raised
tensions is the possibility of reserve police forces being
created in the entities. In April, the Republika Srpska
National Assembly moved forward with legislation to
create a reserve police force, whose purpose has been
variously explained as a response to public security
challenges associated with migration or to respond to
natural disasters. This move, interpreted by some as
an attempt to build an alternative military force, raised
grave concerns in the Federation. In response, the
competent parliamentary committee in the Federation
has said it would do the same.

The issue has also been seen in the light of
the previous controversy over the disproportionate
purchases of long-barrel weapons by the Republika
Srpska police. Recently, a member of the main board
of the ruling party in the Republika Srpska wrote
that the reserve police is "a replacement for the army
of Republika Srpska". The current political discourse
related to reserve police forces in the entities, which
began with the unilateral steps taken by the Republika
Srpska, does not contribute to peace and stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. On the contrary, it has
generated a negative spiral of mistrust and unhealthy
competition. If the current dynamic escalates further,
it could create tensions and divisions, destabilizing
the country.

Bosnia needs fewer weapons and fewer people in
police uniforms, not more. We must do all we can to
prevent a police arms race. Instead, authorities at all
levels should work towards better cooperation in order
to maximize public security and a safe environment for
all citizens. Immigration, refugee and asylum policy are
the constitutional responsibilities of state institutions,
and their capacities should be reinforced. This would
be an appropriate example of better cooperation, and
I have made that clear in my public statements. Given
the region's recent past, these matters deserve the
continued attention of the Council.

All that I have described today is occurring against
a backdrop in which the political leaders continue to
shirk their obligations with respect to the rule of law,
particularly and persistently failing to respect binding
decisions of the State judiciary. I have previously
mentioned the unimplemented decisions of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina Constitutional Court in the Ljubie case
and on the electoral system of the city of Mostar, the
latter of which has prevented the organization of local
elections since 2008. It is inconceivable that a major
city in any country that aspires to join the European
Union and to be the cultural capital of Europe has not
held local elections for over a decade!
On the other side, the Republika Srpska authorities
continue to refuse to respect judgments of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina State Court and Constitutional
Court concerning the registration of defence property
and the 9 January "Republika Srpska Day" holiday.
Additionally, the authorities of several Federation
cantons have failed to take necessary steps to ensure
the equality of Serbs in those cantons. According to
the cantonal constitutions, Serbs do not exist in those
cantons. The Constitutional Court has therefore said
that this must change.

I must also highlight the failure of the authorities to
implement decisions of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdic' and Finci and related cases, which
leaves in place a system that discriminates against a
significant number of citizens to exercise their right to
stand for public office. They can all vote but they cannot
be elected. This is a group of some 300,000 people.

It is now 24 years since Dayton and almost 10 years
since the European Court of Human Rights first ruled
on this issue, and representatives of minority groups
still cannot run for the state Presidency or the House
of Peoples. For this group of citizens, one of the most
sacred principles of civilization, egalite, has not existed
for a quarter of a century. This is unacceptable, and
the authorities must act without delay to remedy
the situation.

In the context of the rule of law, I must also report
that, following the recent decision to increase the
sentence imposed on Karadzie, we have again heard
denials of the genocide committed in Srebrenica, even
though it has been confirmed by two international
tribunals, one being the ICTY, established by this organ.

We have also witnessed efforts over the past six
months to curb freedom of expression and dissent. In
December, the Republika Srpska authorities broke up
the months-long daily protests in Banja Luka over what
activists alleged was a cover-up in the suspicious death
ofa young man and have impeded attempts to organize
new protests. As the authorities have expressed
intentions to amend legislation related to public
gatherings and the work of journalists, the international
and non-governmental organization communities have
spoken out against actions that would limit democratic
rights and freedoms. In this context, I welcome the
fact that the Republika Srpska authorities have taken
steps to reflect such concerns with regard to the Law
on Public Peace and Order, and I encourage continued
dialogue on related initiatives.
My intention today is to illustrate that Bosnia and
Herzegovina still requires the attention and unified
approach of the international community. We have long
taken it for granted that the great progress the country
has made since 1995 is somehow irreversible, but it is
important that we recognize backsliding when it occurs
and acknowledge that our mission is not yet complete.

The Office of the High Representative is in Bosnia
and Herzegovina to ensure that the Dayton Peace
Agreement, including the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution, is respected and that the substantial
reforms enacted to implement it are not only maintained
but completed. That functionality is a logical
precondition for the country to meet the challenges
ahead, including the integration aspirations supported
by all major political parties.

For my part, I continue to focus on fulfilling my
mandate in accordance with annex 10 of the General
Framework Agreement for Peace and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. It is imperative to insist
that the authorities remain focused on full compliance;
otherwise we risk encouraging further rollback of the
reforms. At the same time, I cannot govern in place
of the elected leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Only they can take the steps necessary to move to the
country forward.

I therefore invite the political leaders of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to make sincere efforts to overcome
their differences and finally move forward with the
appointment of the state and Federation executive
authorities, and work with the authorities of the
Republika Srpska and the cantons to fully implement
the Dayton Peace Agreement. Additionally, I implore
the leaders to abandon the destabilizing and divisive
rhetoric rooted in the past and to take strides to keep the
country moving forward on the path to the European
Union, in the interest of all the citizens who they
represent. It is of particular importance to establish a
positive socioeconomic environment and ensure the
rule oflaw in order to curb the exodus ofbrilliant young
people, the country's most important natural resource.

Citizens of Bosnian and Herzegovinian origin are
now sitting in the Parliament of Austria, in the House
of Lords in the United Kingdom and in at least one
state legislature in the United States. Outstanding
young people like them who have remained in Bosnia
and Herzegovina represent hope for change and the
future of the country. That is why I am ending with an
optimistic tone, and also with Lord Ashdown's quote
that I mentioned at the outset: "Bosnia and Herzegovina
is a place you cannot leave behind."

