I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General La Lime and Mr. Letang for their briefings. We welcome the Secretary-General's second report on the activities of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) (S/2020/537). The United Kingdom acknowledges the extraordinary difficulties faced by Haiti since the Security Council last met to discuss BINUH (see S/PV.8729). I wish to start by expressing our appreciation for the hard work of the mission leadership and staff amid increasingly challenging circumstances. I will make three brief points. First, the United Kingdom believes that a coordinated and holistic response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is critical. Secondly, urgent steps should now be taken to bolster human rights and accountability. Thirdly, a road map out of Haiti's interminable political impasse is more essential than ever. First, with regard to COVID-19, it is clear that the pandemic presents a grave risk to Haiti, in terms of both the impact of the disease itself and its second-order effects. As the health, humanitarian and economic effects of the crisis take hold, a coordinated and holistic response by the Haitian authorities and the international community is critical. The United Kingdom is encouraged by the United Nations system's quick adaptation to the situation on the ground, and we call upon the Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General in particular, also serving as the Resident Coordinator and Humanitarian Coordinator, to work closely with the Haitian authorities to help guide a coordinated approach. Secondly, with regard to human rights and accountability, the United Kingdom remains concerned about the lack of progress. That the perpetrators of massacres at La Saline and Bel Air continue to evade justice profoundly undermines efforts to build confidence and trust in the rule of law. We also regret that the Haitian Government has yet to honour the commitment it made to appointing a Minister for Human Rights. This appointment would be a valuable demonstration of Haiti's political will to safeguard human rights. Finally, with regard to the ongoing political impasse, in meeting after meeting, the Security Council and the United Nations leadership have sought to encourage the parties in Haiti to come up with a road map to overcome political deadlock and institutional paralysis. As the Secretary-General notes in his report, the collapse in February of dialogue efforts to reach an agreement on the road map needed for constitutional, institutional and structural reforms is yet another missed opportunity. COVID-19 has aggravated the existing risks to stability Haiti. The economy is faltering. Elections loom. Now more than ever, all parties should come together in the national interest. Broad, inclusive dialogue is essential.
