Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Hanna Tetteh, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General to the African
Union, and Ms. Fatima Mohammed, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations,
for their detailed briefings.

We have thoroughly studied the latest report of the
Secretary-General, issued in September, on cooperation
between the United Nations and the African Union
and the activities of the United Nations Office to the
African Union (S/2019/759). We fully support the
report's declared intention to further strengthen the
organizations' strategic partnership on questions of
peace and security in Africa. There is no question
that the challenges facing Africa and the international
community as a whole require that we pool our efforts
and harness the comparative advantages of regional
organizations. We welcome the visible intensification
of the African stakeholders' initiatives in this area,
including through the creation of the African Peace and
Security Architecture. We believe that an approach that
emphasizes African solutions to African problems is an
effective way to overcome security challenges.

We believe that cooperation between the United
Nations and African regional organizations should be
based on the provisions of Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations. It is important to ensure that for
each concrete case we develop a solution for settling
the crisis that is tailored to local specifics. We believe
that in most instances it is regional actors that are best
informed about situations in their areas ofresponsibility.
At the same time, in the light of the role played by the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security, we do not think that the Council
can remove itself from the work of resolving problems
in that area on the African continent.

We understand our African partners' concerns about
the provision of resources for African peace-support
operations. It will be important to further enhance
predictability, reliability and flexibility in financing
African operations and joint missions. We are ready to
continue to engage in constructive dialogue in drafting
Security Council resolutions on African peacekeeping.

We have noted the significant focus in the
Secretary-General's report on the Silencing the Guns
by 2020 initiative, which we fully support, and we
welcome the decision of the African Union Assembly
to proclaim 2020 the year of that African initiative.

We see serious potential in expanding the
cooperation between the Security Council and the
African Union Peace and Security Council. The
annual meeting of the two Councils, the most recent of
which was held in Addis Ababa last week, represents
a good opportunity for them to synchronize watches,
so to speak, and harmonize their agendas. I want to
take this opportunity to thank the African Union for
its warm hospitality. We also appreciated the value of
the visit to Juba organized on the eve of the meeting
in the Ethiopian capital. We hope that the discussions
that took place will help all the parties implement
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in South Sudan.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that one of
the priorities of Russia's foreign policy is developing
relations with African countries and their regional
organizations. Our positions on many regional and
global issues are close or fully coincide. This was
convincingly demonstrated during last week's first-
ever Russia-Africa Summit, held in Sochi. We are
firmly focused on implementing the outcomes of the
summit, including with regard to creating a permanent
mechanism for partnership through dialogue and
partnership and the intensification of mutually
beneficial cooperation with African States and regional
organizations, for which we hope to have their support.

