Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for having convened this open debate on
issues of importance to the majority of Member States.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

To ensure that the Security Council is fully enabled
to carry out its responsibilities and that its actions are
owned by the wider Member States, robust cooperation,
communication, genuine consultation and support
vis-a-vis all States Members of the United Nations
is crucial. In that regard, allow me to emphasize six
important points.

First, the Security Council should conduct the
process of dialogue and interaction with States that are
non-members of the Security Council in the context of a
more meaningful and genuine conversation. In addition,
Articles 31 and 32 of the Charter should be implemented
fully by taking seriously into consideration the views
of the non-member countries affected in dealing with
conflict situations under the purview of the Council.

Secondly, it is my delegation's View that the
Council should focus more strongly on Chapters VI
and VIII of the Charter. Therefore, there should be
a strengthened mechanism for consultations with
regional and subregional organizations in resolving
regional security issues of global concern.

Indonesia therefore underscores that the Council,
in this regard, should pay greater attention to conflict
prevention and to the quest for political solutions to
global conflicts.

Thirdly, strengthened, balanced and harmonious
cooperation between the Security Council and the
General Assembly is equally critical. The Council
should also take into account the recommendations of the
General Assembly on matters relating to international
peace and security, consistent with Article 11, paragraph

2, of the Charter. A comprehensive and analytical
monthly assessment of the work of the Council would
greatly facilitate the provision of relevant inputs to the
Council by the wider membership, including through
the General Assembly, on peace and security issues of
common concern. Indonesia attaches great importance
to the implementation of General Assembly resolution
69/321 on the revitalization of the General Assembly,
in particular closer collaboration between the Security
Council and the General Assembly on the selection and
appointment of the Secretary-General.

Fourthly, because of the exercise of the veto and
the threat to exercise the veto, the Council has too often
taken no action in the face of mass atrocities and serious
threats to international peace and security. Indonesia
supports the abolishment of the veto. However,
considering the entrenched realities, we welcome any
steps that would strictly regulate the use of the veto.
The Council should determine a workable mechanism
to ensure that the veto will not impede the cause of
humankind and justice.

Fifthly, Indonesia underscores the importance of
enhanced and regular consultations with troop- and
police-contributing countries throughout all stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Finally, it is worth recalling that merely improving
the working methods is not a solution to the larger
problem. Our efforts cannot be limited to procedures.
The global citizenry looks to the Council to be
responsive, effective, fair andjust in resolving conflicts
in accordance with international law. Regrettably,
lingering cases, such as those of Palestine and Syria,
illustrate all the ways in which the Council has failed.
Indonesia will therefore continue to be relentless
in calling for and contributing to efforts to realize
a democratic, judicious, transparent, accountable
and effective Council that reflects the plurality and
concerns of all people.

