Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): Iwish to express appreciation
to Under-Secretary-General Mr. Stephen O'Brien for
his briefing. As usual, it was very exhaustive and clear.

We also express our appreciation to the United
Nations and its partners for their sustained efforts
in trying to deliver the much needed humanitarian
assistance to those in need, under extremely
difficult circumstances.

As described in detail by the Under-Secretary-
General, the humanitarian situation in Syria remains a
source of serious concern. The fighting has continued
unabated, leaving many civilians killed, injured and
displaced, and destroying civilian institutions and
infrastructure. Nevertheless, we note that since the
signing of the de-escalation memorandum by the three
guarantors, Russia, Turkey and Iran, violence has
decreased in the de-escalation zones. Any effort that
reduces violence in Syria should be welcomed and we
appreciate the efforts of the guarantors to implement
the ceasefire agreement. As Under-Secretary-General
O'Brien has said, it has to succeed. It is vital that the
reduction of violence translate into safe, sustained and
rapid humanitarian access, which will help to address
the continued challenge of reaching out to those in need
of urgent assistance.

Only seven inter-agency convoys have been
allowed in April and May and their capacity to deliver
aid is underutilized. That should certainly change and
implementing a simplified facilitation procedure will
be instrumental in enhancing aid delivery. In that
regard, the cooperation of the Syrian Government is
indeed critical in addressing administrative challenges
in order to improve humanitarian access. Ultimately,
the long-term solution to the humanitarian situation
depends on the Syrian-led political process, under the
auspices of the United Nations. In that connection, we
continue to support the Astana process and the Geneva
talks, which complement each other.

No doubt, as we discussed last week, a political
solution may not be easy to achieve over the short term,
but it is the only sane option. That is why we believe
that even small and incremental progress should be
welcomed. That is also why it behoves all the Syrian
stakeholders to be fully committed to stopping the war
and ending the suffering of the people. Let me say that
we align ourselves with what the representative of Egypt
said regarding the danger that terrorism represents
in Syria. It bears responsibility for complicating the
situation in the country. Third parties have played a
big role in the development of those complications.
As memebrs of the Council know, the success of the
political track in Syria hinges on the concerted efforts
of countries of the region, along with major Powers with
influence on the parties. Most importantly, it hinges on
the unity of this Council. If we succeed here, then we
will be taking a huge step forward in addressing the
humanitarian crisis in Syria.

