Mr. Ngongi: I wish to thank you, Mr. President,
and the members of the Security Council for the warm
reception I have received during my first appearance in
the Council. It is very much appreciated, and I will
convey your commendations to my colleagues in the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) and to
my predecessor, Ambassador Morjane.

The Security Council's support for the Secretary-
General's recommendations will enable MONUC to
pursue its mandate and also to contribute to
maintaining the momentum of the peace process. We
deeply appreciate the advice, especially the advice to
proceed cautiously in the phase III deployment.

I will touch on three concerns: the issue of
Kamina, as raised by the Ambassador of the United
Kingdom; on the Political Committee's criticism of the
slow deployment, raised by the representative of
Bangladesh; and on Kisangani, which has been touched
on by all of the members of the Council.

With respect to Kamina and the next steps to be
taken there, first we have to ascertain that we can
commence and actually complete the interview process
that started today, as also stated by the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Once that is ascertained, we then have to work with our
colleagues in the agencies of the United Nations
system - the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the United
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United
Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the World Food
Programme - and human rights groups to see what
support we will have to provide to this group of people
while they are still on the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We will then also have to hold early consultations
with the Government of Rwanda on the modalities for
the early repatriation of the Bembas. We hope the vast
majority will wish to go back to Rwanda. We also will
have to hold discussions with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo about those who
wish to remain in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and those who wish to go to third countries. But
any progress in this area will be reported to the
Security Council at the meeting it intends to hold with
the members of the Political Committee.

On the criticisms regarding the slow deployment,
it was made abundantly clear to the Political
Committee 4 especially after the Secretary-General's
visit to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to
the region - that MONUC was planning to deploy its
forces in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
that this was not really to be used as an excuse. I
reminded the Committee that redeployment or the
status of MONUC was not a condition for the
withdrawal of foreign forces from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; it is something that is totally
separate.

On Kisangani, I can only assure the Council that
on my return I will take up this matter once again with
the leadership of the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
democratie (RCD), and I hope that progress can be
reported when the Council meets with the members of
the Political Committee.

