Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate the Argentine
Republic and you, Madam President, on having taken
up the important task of presiding over the Security
Council in this month of October.

To save time, I will read out only a part of my
statement. My full text will be distributed in the
Chamber.

(spoke in English)

The Gaza reconstruction Conference held in Cairo
on 12 October proved to be a significant catalyst for
renewing the international community's commitment
towards the reconstruction of Gaza. We congratulate
Egypt and Norway on their role in organizing that
important conference. I would also like to pay tribute
to the personal efforts of the Secretary-General, who
just travelled to the region to re-energize the peace
process. In Cairo, Japan pledged to provide more
than $20 million in aid towards the reconstruction
and development process, which is in addition to
the $7.8 million in emergency aid already disbursed
in August. These contributions are part of Japan's
$200 million aid package announced by our Foreign
Minister Kishida in Jakarta in March.

It is essential that we build on the commitments
made by the international community for attaining a
sustainable ceasefire and reconstruction of Gaza. In that
regard, the establishment of an international mechanism
that addresses the issues of security, humanitarian aid and
good governance is indispensable. Japan, in cooperation
with Israel, Palestine and the United Nations among
others, is ready to work towards that goal.

The recent crisis in Gaza demonstrates the urgent
need for ajust, durable and comprehensive peace based
on a two-State solution. Efforts for the reconstruction of
Gaza must also target the resumption ofpeace talks and
the stabilization of the Middle East region. Regrettably,
we have yet to see the resumption of direct negotiations
since its interruption in April and the Gaza crisis in
July. It is imperative that both Israel and Palestine work
towards fostering mutual confidence and dialogue.

Japan stands ready to assist the parties in building
mutual confidence. At every opportunity, Japan has
called on leaders from both sides to work towards the
resumption of peace negotiations, including, inter alia,
during the visit by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
to Japan in May and through the participation of
Foreign Minister Kishida at the meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee held in New York last month. Our
Parliamentary Vice-Minister, Mr. Sonoura, is currently
on a visit to Palestine and Israel to reiterate our message
to both sides.

We call on Israel to completely freeze its settlement
activities, which are illegal under international law.
Israel's recent land seizures, which risk paving the
way for further settlement activities, run counter
to international efforts for the pursuit of a two-State
solution.

Correspondingly, we look to the Palestinian
National Unity Government, under the leadership of
President Abbas, to remain committed to renouncing
violence, the recognition of Israel and adherence to
previous diplomatic agreements, on the path towards
achieving national reconciliation and peace in the
Middle East. Japan welcomes the convening of their
first-ever cabinet meeting in Gaza, on 9 October, as a
positive step. Japan also calls on Palestine to refrain from
any unilateral action that may hinder the resumption
of peace negotiations. From this perspective, we will
closely follow discussions in the Council on this matter.

Japan is of the View that assistance for Palestine's
nation-building efforts also strengthens the foundations
ofthe political process towards a two-State solution. To
this end, we have been making distinct contributions
to this effort by mobilizing private investments in
Palestine. One such initiative is the Jericho agro-
industrial park project. It is a flagship project of the
"Corridor for Peace and Prosperity" initiative that
Japan has been implementing since 2006 in cooperation
with Israel, Jordan and Palestine. Six companies have
already signed tenant contracts. It is expected that the
industrial park will lead to the creation of 7,000 jobs,
with expected annual economic benefits totalling more
than $40 million.

Another initiative of Japan is the Conference
on the Cooperation among East Asian Countries for
Palestinian Development. This is a process aimed
at mobilizing East Asian resources for the sake of
Palestinian development. During its second ministerial
meeting, held in Jakarta last March, participants
committed to carrying out numerous capacity-building
projects. We have steadily been doing our part, for
example, by conducting tourism-sector cooperation
with Thailand as well as human-resource training for
Islamic finance with Malaysia.

In the interest of saving time, I will stop here.
Please refer to the full text distributed, which covers
our stance on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant,
and Syria.

