Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank the Kuwaiti
presidency ofthe Councilfor organizing today's meeting.
I would also like to express our gratitude to Mr. Gustavo
Mesa-Cuadra Velasquez, Permanent Representative of
Peru and Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), for his briefing on implementing resolution 2341
(2017), on the protection of critical infrastructure from
terrorist attacks. We have full confidence that under his
leadership, the CTC and its Executive Directorate will
have a far-reaching impact.
As a result of the serious damage done in 2017 to
the terrorist organization of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, that structure and its affiliated groups
are currently changing their strategy and tactics for
conducting criminal activities. It is expected that there
will be a transition from open armed confrontations to
covert targeted terrorist attacks, including on critical
infrastructure facilities, in the form of both physical
and cyberattacks. Such threats are becoming more
dangerous as we consider the increasing digitalization
of national economies and the fact that many critical
infrastructure facilities and bodies are linked to a
single information network.

Close interaction is essential between public
and private entities in the protection of critical
infrastructure. Likewise, the role of international and
regional organizations - including the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), INTERPOL, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the Conference on
Interaction and Confidence-building Measures in
Asia, the Collective Security Treaty Organization,
the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
and NATO - is just as important.

Nuclear security is currently one of the most
important responsibilities of Member States at the
national, regional and global levels. Kazakhstan, as
a staunch supporter of the movement for a nuclear-
free world, attaches special importance to ensuring
reliable control over the use, storage and trafficking
of nuclear materials, the physical protection of nuclear
facilities and preventing nuclear materials and related
technologies from falling into the hands of terrorists.
We also underscore the importance of improving
the legal framework. As an active signatory to all
international conventions in that field, we urge other
countries to also observe them in good faith and with
strong political will. In addition, the President of
Kazakhstan, Mr. Nursultan Nazarbayev, at the opening
ceremony of the IAEA Low Enriched Uranium Bank,
held in Kazakhstan in August 2017, proposed to resume
the Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security by holding
such a high-level meeting in Astana, our capital.

With the start of the functioning of the Astana
International Financial Centre, preventive measures
are being taken to protect financial and banking system
infrastructure from cyberterrorism. Every effort
is being made to rigorously prevent the theft of data
and money, as well as any disruption of the normal
operations of information and communication systems.

Kazakhstan is implementing large-scale measures
to neutralize incitement and risks by strengthening
its national security, thereby preventing all forms
of extremism and terrorism. The legislative norms
regarding arms turnovers and security and migration
have been updated. At the same time, measures on
criminal punishment for terrorists and extremists have
been made more stringent.

Taking into account the recommendations of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
the decisions and resolutions of the Council, including
resolution 2341 (2017), as well as the positive
experience of foreign countries, we have accordingly
developed the draft State programme to counter
religious extremism and terrorism in Kazakhstan for
the period 2018 to 2022, which is presently awaiting
approval. The new programme envisages measures for
the active involvement of the non-governmental sector
in the prevention of religious extremism and terrorism.

With that in mind, Kazakhstan strongly supports
the following important steps; first, the implementation
of the provisions of the International Convention
for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism,
adopted by the General Assembly on 13 April 2005
through resolution 59/290; secondly, enhanced
coordination of State policies and actions aimed at
countering cyberterrorism as one of the threats to the
security of critical infrastructure; thirdly, a greater
exchange of best practices for the physical protection
of critical infrastructure; and the development of an
effective mechanism for mutual early warning and
information-sharing on possible criminal plans by
terrorists to commit attacks.

In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Kazakhstan's
commitment to the fight against international terrorism,
including by implementing relevant United Nations
resolutions, particularly resolution 2341 (2017).

