Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me start by thanking
the Secretary-General for his report (S/2018/539) and
Special Representative Tadamichi Yamamoto for his
very insightful briefing this morning.

The Secretary-General's report notes that
Afghanistan continues to face multiple political
economic and security challenges in an uncertain
and fraught environment in which the humanitarian
situation continues to deteriorate. It also underscores
the risks posed to the forthcoming elections by declining
public confidence in a fragmented political landscape.
But despite that bleak picture, this month has seen a ray
of hope emerge for peace in the country. A three-day
see a ceasefire between Afghan security forces and
the Taliban on Eid al-Fitr resulted in an unprecedented
pause in a war that has raged for almost 17 years. Even
if the ceasefire lasted only a few days, it marked a
moment of hope and opportunity. Eid saw extraordinary
and moving scenes of reconciliation in some places
between those who for years had fought a bloody war
against each other. The comprehensive observance of
the ceasefire by the Taliban also demonstrated that its
leadership has control of the movement and is cohesive
enough to negotiate a political settlement.

It is also significant that both President Ashraf
Ghani and the United States Secretary of State
have indicated that foreign forces can be a topic of
negotiations in any talks with the Taliban. This could
open the door for real dialogue.

My country has consistently advocated over the years
that a negotiated settlement is the only viable solution
to the decades of conflict and suffering in Afghanistan.
We have therefore welcome President Ashraf Ghani's
offer to talk to the Taliban without preconditions and
the United States support for a negotiated settlement.
The ceasefire earlier this month has demonstrated that
negotiations are not only possible, but can actually
produce a positive outcome. The opportunity that has
opened up by recent developments must now be seized
and translated into serious and sustained efforts to
promote a political settlement and durable peace and
stability in Afghanistan.

While the onus for seizing the moment rests on the
parties directly involved in the Afghan conflict, Pakistan
for its part will continue to do what it can to support all
efforts to launch a credible peace process. My country's

participation in all regional and international forums on
peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan, including the
Moscow format, is a reflection of our commitment and
unflinching support for the peace process that brings
all the parties together to work for a political settlement.
Pakistan can support any agreed format for
negotiations that enables all directly engaged parties
to talk to each other. We feel that the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, consisting of Pakistan,
Afghanistan, China and the United States, remains
a useful format to pursue a negotiated settlement. A
Quadrilateral Coordination Group+ format can also be
considered that brings all of Afghanistan's neighbours
into the process.

A negotiated peace and national reconciliation
are all the more vital to preventing the threat posed to
Afghanistan, its neighbours and the global community
by the presence of Da'esh and a conglomerate of
terrorists, including the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan,
the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement, the Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan and other groups that have
adopted the umbrella of Da'esh. They need to be
defeated decisively and urgently. We must not allow
those groups to drive Afghanistan into another vortex
of violence and instability, which would compound the
threat to the region's stability.

Pakistan has extended all assistance at the political
level, as well as through our robust counter-terrorism
operations, to help promote peace and stability in
Afghanistan. Pakistan's security is inextricably linked
to peace and stability in Afghanistan. Pakistan has a
vital interest in a peaceful, stable, united and prosperous
Afghanistan. We stand ready to support Afghanistan in
addressing the multiple challenges it faces, and in that
spirit, Pakistan is engaged with the Afghan Government
in a comprehensive manner in all political, economic
and military spheres. A series of high-level visits by
both our political and military leadership have taken
place in recent months. Those exchanges have helped
to create an environment of trust and inject a positive
impetus in our bilateral relations.

The recently concluded Afghanistan-Pakistan
Action Plan for Peace and Solidarity will provide
a structured platform for engagement between our
two countries. Its five working groups on political,
economic, refugee, military and intelligence issues
envision a abroad and sustained dialogue between
our two nations. To strengthen defence cooperation,
Pakistan has offered support, including to equip Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, gratis training
in Pakistan, as well as financing and supporting the
construction of the border management infrastructure.
For my country border management remains the highest
priority, we are working with the Afghan Government
on modalities to deploy military liaison officers on
either side to coordinate counter-terrorism efforts and
complement action against terrorist outfits on our side
of the border. We must secure our border to prevent
the cross-border movement of militants and terrorists.
That can be achieved only through constant vigilance,
effective management and real-time communications.
Terrorists should not be allowed to provoke clashes
between our border security forces.

Earlier this year, the ulema - our religious
leaders in Pakistan - issued a religious edict, or
fatwa, entitled "Message of peace from Pakistan",
which unequivocally denounced terrorism and suicide
bombings throughout the world. Religious leaders from
my country also participated in the ulema conference
that was held this past month in Indonesia, and we will
participate in ulema conference of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation this coming month.

In conclusion, let me say that the international
community has long been unanimous in its view
that sustainable peace is achievable only through a
negotiated end to this long-running war. Almost 17
years of the conflict waged by the world's most powerful
military forces have not yielded a military solution. The
path to peace in Afghanistan will be arduous, but it is
achievable. As a first step, all the parties concerned
must commit to a negotiated solution to the conflict,
which offers the best chance to end the suffering of
the Afghan people and restore peace to Afghanistan
and stability to the region. We hope that the search for
peace through a dialogue process will be the highest
priority for the Afghan Government, the Taliban, the
coalition forces, Afghanistan's neighbours and the
international community.

