Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Do you know what just came to mind,
Mr. President? I recall that when I have heard briefings
delivered by Mr. Mark Lowcock on the situation
in Yemen or in Libya, the tone and submission of
information on those issues was very different from
what we hear when Mr. Lowcock delivers briefings on
Syria. Do members not think so? I think so, and not for
the first time.

As usual, today we heard another series of
invectives against Syria and the Russian Federation.
Colleagues spouted statistics, quotes and emotional
testimony. Incidentally, we are well aware of the value
of such emotionally charged testimony. We remember
when leading Western media outlets, including the New
York Times, inflated the tragedy of Omran Daqneesh, a
Syrian boy from Aleppo. However, after the liberation
of eastern Aleppo, it turned out that the images were
staged - a fact that was subsequently confirmed by
Omran's parents.

Today, my British colleague accused the Russian
Federation of making a mockery of the Security
Council. I do not wish to turn today's meeting into a
competition. I do not know where she sees the mockery,
but let us recall the mockery of the Security Council by
countries that have become accustomed to blaming the
Russian Federation for everything.

The goal of all those calls "to immediately stop"
and invectives is absolutely clear to us - it is to sustain
a terrorist presence in Idlib for the future purpose of
combating the legitimate Syrian authorities. That has
happened each time another terrorist enclave in Syria
has almost been shut down. It happened in eastern
Aleppo and eastern Ghouta, and now the propaganda
machine is firing its full arsenal at the situation in
Idlib. What is happening is fully clear to us. And those
who yield to that provocation should not be so naive as
not to understand the reality behind the appeals we hear
today. The main goal is to sustain a terrorist enclave
in Idlib. That is the main goal being pursued by our
Western colleagues. Today's meeting is being held at a
complicated time and affords us another opportunity to
shed light on the real humanitarian situation in Syria.

The real humanitarian situation in Syria was the
subject of a briefing delivered by the Russian Ministry
of Defence yesterday, 29 July. In a spirit of openness,
our Defence Ministry always invites accredited foreign
colleagues to Moscow to attend such briefings. But
since again there was no show ofinterest in learning the
truth and members did not attend, today we will give
the Council a brief overview of the content it covered.

I believe that part of what has been set out in
this briefing is a response to the questions raised by
my British colleague, who enjoys asking questions
in this Chamber and frequently takes the tone of a
prosecutor. As previous speakers said, the situation in
and around Idlib is cause for real concern, although
not in the context presented in fake reports, but rather
because of the scaled-up attacks by the Hayat Tahrir
Al-Sham terrorists, who attack civilians and use
them as victims of their criminal provocations. At the
same time, we note that jihadists are stepping up their
military capacity by increasing the number of foreign-
made weapons, including aircraft and multiple rocket
launchers. Mr. Lowcock modestly failed to mention
how many civilians have died in the attacks perpetrated
by terrorists.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains a
subject of speculation. One of the most egregious
examples is the latest information about the alleged
attacks by the Russian Aerospace Forces on the market
and adjacent areas of the city of Maarat Al-Numan, in
Idlib province, on 22 July. Allow me to share some of
the Defence Ministry briefing.

"On 22 July, the British-based Syrian
Observatory for Human Rights, citing the so-called
White Helmets, reported attacks by the Russian
Federation's Aerospace Forces attacks on the Al-Hol
market and adjacent residential areas of the city of
Maarat Al-Numan in Idlib province, resulting in the
death of dozens of civilians. The accusations were
cited by some European media outlets and even
the leadership of Western countries and certain
international organizations. The market in question
can easily be located on the Maarat Al-Numan city
map, and it is also been indicated on the geographic
maps of the corresponding Internet services.

"Russian air assets were not used or flying
over that area on 22 July. To verify reports on the
destruction of the market in Maarat Al-Numan,
Russian unmanned aerial vehicles photographed the
site of the area and its adjacent territory twice, on
24 and 26 July, that is, after the alleged air strikes.
The briefer invited us to look at the monitor. As
we can see, the imagery obtained by the objective
monitoring shows no signs of destruction, which
would have been inevitable if the area had actually
been subjected to an air strike using six bombs.

"That was further confirmed by the images
taken by a Russian spacecraft on 25 July, as well
as by video footage taken directly at the Al-Hol
market in Maarat Al-Numan, which we received the
day before yesterday. As we can see, the allegedly
destroyed market remains operational. We regret
the fact that representatives of eminent international
bodies and organizations are once again falling
victim to easily verifiable deception disseminated
by terrorists, propagating fake news and unverified
reports to corroborate unverified accusations."

That lie, however, is becoming the leitmotif of our
meeting today. Our colleagues also had the opportunity
to read the information circulated by the Government
of Syria about a video recording obtained from one of
the eliminated terrorist, which shows White Helmets
practicing a staged chemical attack on the town of
Murak. Fortunately, that duplicitous attempt was foiled
after the information was published. In that regard, we
once again call on the Secretariat and the specialized
agencies of the Organization to be less hasty in
publishing unverified information and to accept data
from only reliable and apolitical sources, which must
also be cross-checked.

Today, it was said that Russia deliberately bombed
hospitals and schools. That is a lie. I repeat that once
again. In Syria, the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic is open
24/7. We have repeatedly proposed that Mark Lowcock
should liaise with it in order to verify information about
the facilities that have been deconflicted and that we
have allegedly attacked. Such attacks are also a lie.
That step must be taken, rather than spouting so-called
facts here in the Council that are based on dubious and
unverified sources, not the so-called directly verified
sources that are being cited.

Moreover, as we have often repeated, I cannot
recall the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights or the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs making a statement on the
principles of precaution and distinction when the
coalition razed the cities of Raqqa, Hajin or Mosul to
the ground. Why is it that no one said anything about
that at that time? I raise that question all the time, but I
have still not received an answer. We have long talked
of the need to stop the use of double standards regarding
developments in Syria. Attempts to shield terrorists in
Idlib, whether for a hidden agenda or engagement in a
political process as a local authority, no longer stand up
to scrutiny.

In case anyone has forgotten, I will recall that
Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham is the terrorist organization
Jabhat Al-Nusra under a different name. Its so-called
good fighters, whom Mark Lowcock referred to when
quoting Idlib residents, are intimidating local civilians
and using civilian and medical infrastructure for
military purposes. They are using civilians as human
shields. At the same time, the need to combat terrorism
is justified by the continued illegal military presence
beyond the Euphrates. That directly contravenes the
proclaimed respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria and again constitutes a flagrant
example of double standards.

A great deal has been said today about hospitals
and figures have been invoked. For example, Ms. Sirkin
said that out of 46 attacks on medical facilities, only
15 could be confirmed. How the Organization is
able to confirm attacks without being on the ground
is a separate issue. It turns out that two-thirds of the
reports that the Council received have been fake. We
are very troubled by the fact that a United Nations
mechanism should be involved in the circulation of
such fake information.

Prior to military operations in Syria, there were
only 12 hospitals in Idlib. Where did the statistics on
the number of allegedly destroyed hospitals come from
that United Nations representatives, Member States
and representatives of non-governmental organizations
have cited earlier and today? I have said this before and
repeat it now. There were not as many hospitals in all
of pre-conflict Syria as are now being claimed to have
been destroyed. Is any tent where wounded fighters are
treated considered to be a hospital?

We believe it vital not to remain silent about the
situation in the territories not under Government control.
Such areas are blank spots on the maps of humanitarian
organizations. That is not because everything is fine
there. On the contrary, the area beyond the Euphrates
lies in ruins, without electricity or access to water or
medical care for residents. According to our military
figures, there were over 300 terrorist attacks in June
and July.

The situation remains difficult in the Rukban
internally displaced persons camp. However, thanks to
the efforts of the Russian Centre for the Reconciliation
of Opposing Sides in the Syrian Arab Republic, more
than 17,000 people have been relocated from Rukban.
We intend to continue to work with the United Nations
and the International Committee of the Red Cross to
ensure the return of refugees and provide them with
everything that they need.

Turning to the Al-Hol camp, the situation there
is truly catastrophic due to the limited access of
humanitarian agencies and funding. Half of the camp's
inhabitants are women and children. That is what people
should be truly worried about when we talk about the
humanitarian situation in Syria.

We remain troubled by the situation on the eastern
bank of the Euphrates, where the Al-Tanf area is illegally
occupied by the United States. Since the Geneva
Conventions have been mentioned today, I recall once
again that the occupying Power is responsible for the
population in the occupied territory in accordance with
the Geneva Conventions. However, for some reason, the
United States is in no hurry to prove the Rukban camp
with what it needs. We are also deeply concerned over
information about major armed units being prepared
and deployed to Al-Suwayda, Palmyra and Abu Kamal.

In conclusion, I stress that the position of the
Russian Federation remains unchanged. We will
continue to spare no effort to restore peace in Syria both
in our national capacity and as a permanent member
of the Security Council and participant in the Astana
troika, through which - I recall once again - more
was accomplished than in any other format in terms of
de-escalation, the elimination of the terrorist threat,
broadening the humanitarian response and moving
forward the political process. We will continue to
work together with Turkey in accordance with the
17 September 2018 memorandum on the stabilization
of the situation in the Idlib de-escalation area (see S/2018/852).

We make the appeal that our efforts not be obstructed
by the provision of political cover to terrorists or by
provocative actions.

