Mr. Laassel (Morocco) (spoke in French): At
the outset I wish to thank Nigeria for its initiative in
organizing a public debate on the relevant topic of
regional organizations and contemporary challenges of
global security.

Currently the international community faces an
unimaginable number of challenges to international
peace and security through an unprecedented
exacerbation of terrorism, intra-State conflicts and
threats to peace posed by climate change, pandemics
and poverty. Terrorist groups, including Daesh, Boko
Haram, Al-Qaida and their affiliates, control vast
territories. Meeting those challenges requires the united
efforts and cooperation on all sides, which highlights
the relevance of the topic of today's debate.

The authors ofthe Charter ofSan Francisco assigned
the primary role for the maintenance of international
peace and security on the United Nations, but they
also called for cooperation between the Organization
and regional and subregional organizations. The
strengthening of partnerships to meet global challenges
to peace and security, in particular the peaceful dispute
settlement and the resolution of multiform crises that
threaten to destabilize entire regions and affect millions
of people, complements the efforts made in recent years
by regional and subregional organizations, provided
that the measures taken by these organizations are
consistent with the goals and principles of the United
Nations Charter. That means that all action undertaken
must respect the provisions set forth in resolutions
and be consistent with the mandates of the Security
Council, and that the Council should be fully informed
of activities undertaken or planned by these agreements
or regional entities in maintaining international peace
and security.

The Kingdom of Morocco sets great store by
bolstering multilateralism and the expansion and
enhancement of cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional institutions in
line with the Charter and pursuant to the parameters
established by Security Council resolutions. Morocco
therefore confirms the principles set out in the Charter
of the United Nations regarding the peaceful dispute
settlement as set out in Chapter VI, and firmly supports
the ongoing role played by the United Nations as the
universal Organization responsible for resolving
and ruling on issues pertaining to the maintenance
of international peace and security, the promotion of
human rights and sustainable development.

Similarly, Morocco reiterates its commitment to
multilateralism that respects the rules and principles of
international law within the framework of the United
Nations with a view to creating an international society
that is based on equality and legality, enjoys peace and
security, and respects human rights and sustainable
development. Those goals must be achieved through
the adoption of a comprehensive multidimensional
approach based on the rule of law in all aspects of
international relations, especially through respect
for the United Nations Charter, the peaceful dispute
settlement, respect for the sovereignty, national unity
and territorial integrity of States, and non-interference
in their internal affairs.

While the main role falls with the United Nations
in this field, close cooperation based on effective
communication and coordination between the Security
Council and regional and subregional organizations can
be a major asset in our collective efforts to maintain
international peace and security. Over the years and with
the experience that they have gained, the subregional
organizations have demonstrated their ability to make
a key contribution to international peace and security
with their enhanced knowledge of the sensibilities of
their subregion and social cultural aspects that can add
value to the peaceful conflict settlement. Regional and
subregional organizations have profound knowledge,
original ideas and solid local networks in place. These
elements are essential to mediation and planning for
peacekeeping operations and to helping countries to
establish lasting peace.

Some of these organizations even have a proven
capacity for rapid reaction to crises by drawing on a
whole set of instruments in the short or long term in
the fields of development, humanitarian assistance,
security or politics. In Africa, which faces serious
security, humanitarian and socioeconomic challenges,
subregional organizations are best placed in terms of
geographic proximity, political and cultural knowledge
of local situations, and common experience in order to
act most effectively for peace and security.

To that end, we welcome the scale and diversity
that are increasingly a hallmark of the role played
by the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) in its subregion. In addition to its
contribution to maintaining the stability and unity of
countries in the region, as was the case in Mali and
Burkina Faso, or through the deployment oftroops or the
election of observers, as in Nigeria and Togo, ECOWAS
continues to expand the scope of its interventions to
cover areas as varied as they are complex, as reflected
by its contribution to the recent successes made in the
struggle against the terror group Boko Haram, or its
participation in eradicating the Ebola virus in Liberia
and the disease's overall regression in Guinea and
Sierra Leone.

Other subregional organizations stand out for their
capacities to mobilize to combat the destabilizing effects
of terrorism and the degradation of the humanitarian
situation in their respective subregions. That is the case
with the Lake Chad Basin Commission, which seeks
to operationalize as soon as possible the Multinational
Joint Task Force to take on the Boko Haram terrorist
group, which continues to rage in the subregion. In the
Central African Republic, the efforts of the Economic
Community of Central African States to ensure a
peaceful political transition through its support for
the holding of credible and transparent legislative and
presidential elections have been admirable.

At this point, we note that while subregional
African organizations have worked actively to settle
conflicts in Africa, they face huge obstacles, such as
the absence of lasting and flexible financial support, as
well as a lack of military expertise and equipment and
appropriate civilian competence.

Finally, despite the growing proliferation of threats
and challenges to international peace and security, which
could justify closer cooperation between the United
Nations and regional and subregional organizations
with a view to improving the international collective
security system, the central role of the Security Council
in matters of international peace and security remains
unchanged, as defined in the United Nations Charter.

