Mr. Gorelik (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): Today the Security Council is considering a very
important question, which has a number of closely
interrelated aspects. Many of these have recently become
the focus of particular attention by the international
community.

We are facing a problem: how to ensure in practice
the proper observance and integration of the principles of
humanity, national security, State sovereignty in the flying
of civil aircraft. To strike an optimum balance between
these principles is an extremely complex task, but it cannot
be deferred.

As a result of long and painstaking efforts, the
international community has established an international
legal framework for an approach to this set of issues. As
we know, these efforts were enshrined in article 3 bis of
the Convention on International Civil Aviation.
Unfortunately, not all States have yet ratified that article.

Turning to specifics, the Security Council is
endeavouring to come to grips with all the circumstances
of the tragic incidents of 24 February of this year, which
resulted in loss of life. We would like to reiterate that we
profoundly regret this loss of life and to express our
condolences to the bereaved families.

The main lesson here is that all States without
exception should fully comply with the requirements of
article 3 bis in their entirety. This is precisely how we
view the essence of the consideration of the tragedy of 24
February, both in the Security Council and in the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). As for
the results of the work of ICAO, we are in a position to
say that this most authoritative body in the field of civil
aviation opted for a constructive approach on the basis of
an expert analysis of this incident, to focus its attention
mainly on the prevention of similar incidents in the
future.

The draft resolution before the Security Council
reaffirms the conclusion of the Council of ICAO, that
States must refrain from the use of weapons against civil
aircraft in flight and that, when civil aircraft are
intercepted, the lives of persons on board must not be
endangered. This is a very important reaffirmation.

The draft resolution condemns the use of weapons
against civil aircraft in flight as incompatible with
considerations of humanity, the rules of customary
international law, standards and recommended practices.
It is our conviction that this applies to all States.

In this, however, the Security Council bears a great
responsibility in terms of effective and timely measures
to ensure compliance with international law, which
includes not allowing violations of the sovereignty of
Member States or of the standards and rules of
international civil aviation.

Unfortunately, the draft resolution before us, despite
real improvements over the initial text - and we note
with satisfaction the efforts of the United States
delegation to that end - continues to deviate from the
general direction consistent with the interests of all

 

members of the international community. This text remains
unbalanced from the political and international legal
standpoints. It clearly does not strike a balance between two
fundamental principles: the non-use of weapons against
civil aircraft and the non-use of such aircraft for illegal
purposes. In our view, this establishes an unfortunate
precedent for the future. International law must be complied
with by all and in all its aspects. In insisting on unswerving
compliance with one of its principles, laid down in article
3 bis of the Chicago Convention, it is important to ensure
complete compliance with the other, no less significant
principle of the same article.

It has come about that the draft resolution skirts over
the underlying reasons for the incident and places its main
emphasis to the consequences. And yet it is common
knowledge that the nature of the flights undertaken by
Brothers to the Rescue, as well as the aims pursued through
them, are hardly compatible with the aims laid down for the
use of civil aviation by the Chicago Convention. The task,
however, is for the Security Council, through its
authoritative decision, to encourage the adoption of timely
and all-encompassing measures to prevent such tragedies
from occurring in the future.

As to certain professional questions in connection with
the investigation of the incident, the Security Council has
actually bypassed the opinions of the ICAO Council. We
are also unhappy that the draft resolution emphasizes the
report of the Secretary General of ICAO over the resolution
of the ICAO Council. We feel that the report is essentially
a technical ICAO document, which was, however, not given
an unequivocal assessment when it was considered. The
resolution of the ICAO Council expresses the political
position of the States members of that organization.
In our view, today's draft resolution also falls short of
the resolution of the ICAO Council in terms of the balance
of its formulations. We do not feel that the Security
Council should take it upon itself to make a legal
qualification of the tragic events of 24 February, not taking
duly into account the views of the specialized agency
competent in these matters.

In other words, we regret that accuracy and
thoroughness were sacrificed in the draft resolution to a
desire to force a decision. Unfortunately, the repeated
appeals of the Russian and other delegations to continue
constructive work towards an agreed text that would fully
reflect all aspects of this multifaceted problem went
unheeded.

We are convinced that there was a real opportunity
to arrive at a generally acceptable text - and hence a
correct interpretation for future incidents of this kind -
and our delegation tried up to the very last minute to
work towards that end. It is not our fault if this did not
succeed.

In view of these considerations, the Russian
delegation cannot support the draft resolution in its
present form and will abstain in the voting.

