Mr. Chergui: Allow me from the outset to express
the appreciation of the African Union Commission
to the members of the Council for inviting me and
Mr. Kaberuka to address the Council with the aim of
discussing options for further cooperation and support
to African Union peace support operations pursuant to
resolution 2320 (2016).

Enhancing the financing of the Africa Union,
including its peace support operations, is a central
priority for African Union member States. It should be
recalled that at the 15 January Addis Ababa Summit,
the African Union Assembly of Heads of State and
Government decided that member States would fund
25 per cent of the peace support operations budget.
During the July 2016 Kigali Summit, the African Union
Assembly decided to institute a universal levy of 0.2 per
cent on eligible imports to finance the African Union.
The 0.2 per cent levy will endow the Peace Fund with a
total of $400 million by 2020.

I wish to underline that, with respect to peace
support operations, the fundamental problem that
the African Union Assembly's financial decision
intended to address is the lack of predictable and
sustainable financing for African Union-mandated
or authorized peace support operations. The African
Union has demonstrated its political will in deploying
peace support operations in the most challenging
environments. Thirteen missions have been deployed
since the establishment of the African Union. In all
these cases, the financing arrangements were ad hoc
and highly unpredictable. Tremendous sacrifices have
been made and, in many cases, the ultimate price has
been paid by our troops.

Donations in kind made by all member States
have also played an important role in the deployment
of peace support operations and have often not always
been reflected in the overall accounting ofcontributions
to have been made. In taking these financial decisions,
the Assembly sought to address three key issues: first,
the lack of a dedicated African Union operational
peace and security budget; secondly, overreliance on
external, ad hoc and unpredictable sources of funding;
and thirdly, the absence of a credible African Union
instrument that could provide the right accountability
framework for managing African Union member State
and external financing.

Resolution 2320 (2016) was a major milestone
in enhancing United Nations cooperation with and
support to African Union peace support operations.
It expressed the United Nations willingness to
consider African Union proposals for funding its
peace support operations, consistent with applicable
international obligations, accountability, transparency
and compliance frameworks for African Union peace
support operations.

I would like to make four key observations on
the progress being made on the Peace Fund for the
Council's consideration.

First, the African Union Peace and Security
Council, at its 689th meeting, held on 13 May, endorsed
the report of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on the Peace Fund. The report contained
proposals on the scope of African Union operations, the
implementation of an enhanced governance structure
and accountability framework, and the status of
implementation of relevant provisions of resolution
2320 (2016). This endorsement by the Peace and
Security Council was a milestone and an expression
of the political commitment of African Union member
States to the realization and effectiveness of the Peace
Fund. The Security Council may wish to consider this
report and communique of the Peace and Security
Council, which has now been officially transmitted to
the Secretary-General, especially in current and future
discussions of options for possible predictable and
sustainable United Nations support to African Union
peace support operations.

Secondly, questions have been repeatedly raised
on the envisaged scope of operations that will require
possible United Nations assess contributions. This
question has been partly addressed by the Peace and
Security Council in its decision to adopt a case-by-case
approach based on the scope ofthe operations in meeting
the new demands of the evolving nature of security
challenges in Africa. At the same time, the African
Union Commission has developed a common-costs
document that clearly articulates the viable operational
requirements that could form the basis of burden-
sharing between the African Union and the United
Nations in future Africa Union support operations.
That document is consistent with the African Union's
strategic priority of financing the African Standby
Force and its rapid-deployment capability in three
phases, namely, predeployment, deployment and post-
deployment. The Commission will remain seized of the
matter and will continue to inform the Security Council
on the areas of support that can be addressed within the
resources in the Peace Fund.

Thirdly, the most central issue confronting the
Africa Union at this stage is the need to mobilize
resources from AU member States. I am happy to report
that, currently, almost 30 per cent of African Union
member States have made contributions to the Fund.
Some member States expressed their willingness to
make their statutory contributions during the recently
held meeting of the Peace and Security Council. In
addition, the Chairperson of the African Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, recently extended and
expanded the mandate of Mr. Donald Kaberuka as
the African Union High Representative for the Peace
Fund and for the financing of the Union. We are
certain that those significant steps will sustain the
political momentum, which will lead to the accelerated
operationalization of the Peace Fund.

Fourthly, let me state, in the clearest terms possible,
the unflinching resolve of the African Commission to
strictly observe and promote transparency and good
governance, not only in the daily management of the
Peace Fund but on all resources devoted to African
Union-led peace support operations. The Chairperson
of the Commission will appoint the members of the
board of trustees of the Peace Fund in the coming days.

Finally, the African Union remains confident that
this discussion on the Peace Fund and the possibility
of predictable funding, including through United
Nations assessed contributions, is consolidating the
strategic partnership that has emerged between the
African Union and the United Nations. It should be
recalled that, on 19 April, during the annual African
Union-United Nations conference in New York,
Secretary-General Guterres and the African Union
Commission Chairperson signed a Joint United Nations-
African Union Framework for an Enhanced Partnership
in Peace and Security. That was an important step
towards ensuring more institutionalized cooperation
between both organizations in addressing the security
challenges that Africa continues to face. The African
Union remains committed to that partnership. The
success achieved in ourjoint efforts to enhance support
to African peace support operations will no doubt be a
litmus test.

