I would like to thank the Estonian presidency for organizing this annual open debate. Italy aligns itself with the statements delivered by the observer of the European Union and the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians. This debate comes at a really challenging time for the protection of civilians. Several conflicts are currently raging throughout the world, and violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law have been widespread in the past year. As pointed out by the Secretary-General in this year's report (S/2020/366), civilians continue to account for the vast majority of casualties in armed conflicts, including as a consequence of targeted attacks, and are disproportionately affected by gross violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. Furthermore, the outbreak of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated the suffering of people living in conflict settings. The most vulnerable, who account for many of the civilians adversely affected by armed conflict, are also more exposed to the effects of the pandemic. It is therefore crucial to ensure unimpeded, fast and safe access to people in need in order to provide them with adequate medical assistance and ensure the effective delivery of humanitarian aid. In this perspective, Italy supports the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire, which invited the conflict parties to lay down their weapons and comply with their obligations deriving from the international humanitarian law. We commend the launch of the Global Humanitarian Response Plan by the Secretary-General, which will contribute to addressing the risks of the COVID-19 pandemic for, and its impact on, the most vulnerable people in countries affected by humanitarian crises. Italy is very concerned by the ever-growing number of deliberate breaches of international humanitarian law, resulting in attacks against humanitarian and medical personnel and facilities, which are especially heinous in the context of the pandemic, the arbitrary denial of humanitarian access, attacks against schools, the use of starvation as a method of war, genocide and sexual and gender-based violence. We strongly condemn the fact that sexual and gender-based violence continues to be widely employed as a tactic of war. It is imperative to ensure respect for international humanitarian law, in all circumstances, in international and non-international armed conflicts, as contemporary warfare poses new significant challenges. Parties to armed conflicts continue to bear the primary obligation to respect the right of civilians and to meet their needs, guaranteeing that the principles established by the Geneva Conventions and their Protocols Additional are fully respected. In this regard, the national implementation of international humanitarian law remains key. Italy commends the first resolution adopted by the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, "Bringing IHL home", and will continue to work with determination, also in collaboration with the International Red Cross Committee, to disseminate knowledge of international humanitarian law and to promote respect for such law, which today remains as relevant as ever. The most effective way to ensure the full implementation of the protection of civilians agenda is to prevent the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence of armed conflicts, thereby avoiding the occurrence of human rights violations and atrocity crimes. We believe that conflict prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes must be a political priority of each Member State and of the United Nations, and we have always underlined the need to focus more on mediation and peacebuilding. At the same time, when political dialogue does not pay off and conflict occurs, it is crucial to ensure the protection of civilians on the ground. Peacekeeping operations can play a key role in this regard, in particular when it comes to protecting the most vulnerable segments of the population, through their engagement with national authorities, security and military forces and capacity-building activities. We should enhance our efforts to strengthen the impact of peacekeeping operations on the protection of civilians, fulfilling the commitments we took in the framework of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which provides a comprehensive and whole-of-mission approach to the protection of civilians. In this perspective, we consider that peacekeepers should be adequately trained and equipped in order to fully implement their protection of civilians mandate, and we commend the launch of the updated Protection of Civilians in United Nations Peacekeeping Handbook. Promoting stronger accountability for serious international humanitarian law and international human rights law violations is another fundamental element of the protection of civilians. In the past, the Security Council has taken significant steps to enhance accountability for serious violations of international humanitarian and human rights law. However, Member States have the primary responsibility for promoting and ensuring accountability and should take concrete, credible and practical actions to this end. We must fight against impunity for the most serious international crimes, and to continue supporting international justice and accountability mechanisms. It is paramount to conduct credible investigations and prosecutions wherever and whenever international crimes occur in order to prevent the recurrence of these violations and to provide justice to victims, who must be at the centre of our efforts. Italy has traditionally been at the forefront of the efforts to ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict. During our term on the Security Council, in 2017 we promoted the systematic inclusion of provisions on the protection of civilians in the mandates of peacekeeping operations, where necessary, and we submitted resolution 2382 (2017), on an enhanced role for police components in peacekeeping operations, in order to step up the protection of civilians. We are committed to protecting and promoting international humanitarian law and to implementing the principle of accountability for violations of international humanitarian law and international human rights law in situations of armed conflict. In this perspective, Italy ensures its firm support for international justice and accountability mechanisms, including the work and independence of the International Criminal Court as an important actor in the global fight against impunity, and urges all Member States to do the same. Moreover, Italy shares the deep concern of the international community on the extremely serious humanitarian impact of explosive weapons with wide-area effects in populated areas. Such impacts are extensive and include both direct damage, in the form of death and injury, and indirect and long-term effects relating to the destruction of essential infrastructure, cultural heritage, loss of services, obstacles to humanitarian intervention, high costs of reconstruction and recovery, displacement and denial of return. Italy considers that the legal framework applicable to the use of explosive weapons in populated areas is clear and that the crux of the matter is to implement it in the changing dynamics of current conflicts. In particular, in the context of the increasing relevance of population-centric warfare, it becomes necessary for States and their armed forces to adapt their policies, doctrines and military tactics to the challenges posed by military operations in populated areas so as to properly take into account civilian vulnerabilities. We therefore support the ongoing process to develop a political declaration aimed at strengthening the protection of civilians from risks arising from the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. It is extremely important to reinforce the collective commitment to addressing civilian harm in urban warfare, reaffirming that the cardinal rules and principles of international humanitarian law must be complied with in all circumstances and by all parties to a conflict and promoting best practices and the highest standards of conduct. In the context of the protection of civilians, we have to pay special attention to the most vulnerable. First and foremost, it is a moral imperative to put an end to the worst forms of violations of the rights of children in armed conflict, which not only endanger their lives but also undermine the stability and welfare of societies as a whole, depriving the new generations of their fundamental right to hope for a future after the war. Italy presented an open pledge on the occasion of the thirty-third International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent to ensure that children can live safely and enjoy their rights, even in conflict situations. It is fundamental to guarantee that education is provided also in times of war, on the basis of the principles established by the Safe Schools Declaration. Our commitment to the issue encompasses not only political initiatives and programmes but also specific cooperation projects. On the occasion of the twentieth anniversary of the two Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, which we celebrate this year, Italy will continue to work with determination, in collaboration with Save the Children and other relevant civil society organizations, to allow children to enjoy their childhood and to hope for a better future, even in times of war. We planned a high-level side event at the last session of the Commission on the Status of Women on violence against girl children in armed conflicts and the role of international criminal justice, in particular the International Criminal Court, which could not take place due to the COVID-19 emergency. It will be rescheduled as soon as possible. Italy has long supported a policy of zero tolerance against sexual exploitation and abuse committed by United Nations peacekeepers and civilian personnel. We are acommitted member of the circle of leadership on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations operations, and we have signed the related voluntary pact. We are also very proud to be the main contributor to the United Nations trust fund in support of victims of sexual exploitation and abuse. Finally, to protect the rights of persons with disabilities, we call for the full implementation of the Charter on Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in Humanitarian Action, and we co-sponsored resolution 2475 (2019), on disabled persons and armed conflicts. To conclude, in order to strengthen the protection of civilians on the ground, which is a cornerstone of the activity of the Security Council and a fundamental duty and responsibility of the international community as a whole, we must keep the protection of civilians high on the Council's agenda, as the spread of the pandemic has further highlighted.
