Mr. Wittig (Germany): I also thank Ambassador
Osorio for his briefing.

The Iranian nuclear programme remains one of the
most serious threats to international peace and security.
The E3+3 group of countries continue to strive for a
diplomatic solution to the issues revolving around Iran's
nuclear programme. We have engaged in new rounds of
negotiations in Istanbul and Baghdad. We have reached
an agreement with Iran regarding the next round of talks,
which are to take place in Moscow on 18 and 19 June.
In our view, the Moscow meeting should bring about
substantial progress.

Meetings for the sake of meetings are not what
we are aiming at. We call on Iran to engage seriously
in meaningful discussions on concrete steps aimed at
restoring confidence in the exclusively peaceful nature
of its nuclear programme. It is now up to Iran to seize
the moment and take the negotiations forward in a
constructive spirit.

We are seriously concerned about Iran's lack of
cooperation to date, despite the many efforts made by
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
latest round of talks between the IAEA and Iran failed to
produce any concrete results. Granting the IAEA access
to Parchin is still an outstanding issue. We also regret
that, according to IAEA reports, Iran is continuing to
step up its uranium enrichment activities at the Fordow
and Natanz facilities. It remains imperative that Iran
intensify its cooperation with the Agency with a view to
resolving all outstanding substantive issues.
Against that background, it is crucial that the
existing sanctions regime be properly implemented by
all Member States. The Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006) and its Panel of Experts have
an important role to play in that regard. Last week,
the Security Council voted unanimously to extend
the Panel's mandate for another year. The fact that all
15 members supported the extension demonstrates their
wholehearted backing for the Panel's work.

We welcome the latest report of the Panel of
Experts (S/2012/395). We consider it a useful and
well-researched document that should help Member
States in their implementation efforts. The Council
has released that final report to a broader membership.
That is an important step - not only for reasons of
transparency but also in the interests of providing the
United Nations membership with appropriate guidance
on sanctions implementation. We welcome the planned
open briefing in July, at which the Committee Chairman
will explain to the broader United Nations membership
how to implement the Iran resolutions most effectively.

Germany stands ready to engage in a serious
dialogue on the valuable recommendations made in
the report. One important recommendation has been
particularly highlighted. We strongly support the
listing of sanctions violators, since that demonstrates
that anyone who disregards the Council's resolution
will face consequences. As the Committee Chairman
reported today, the Committee has agreed to the listing
of two individuals and one entity involved in sanctions
violations. We are keen to see the Committee continue
to operate effectively in such a manner.

It is deplorable that Iran continues to be in violation
of its international obligations. We reiterate our concern
over the weapons exports from Iran to other countries,
especially to Syria, but also to Hizbullah. The Panel
must continue to investigate incidents wherever and
whenever deemed necessary.

Let me reiterate our determination to find a
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. We
remain ready to pursue a dialogue with Iran aimed at
restoring international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme. It is
in that spirit that we will approach the negotiations in
Moscow next week.

