Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke inFrench): Togo welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2118 (2013) with its many
eminently innovative provisions. We welcome the spirit
of compromise that prevailed between the negotiators of
the text, namely, the permanent members, in particular,
the United States and the Russian Federation.

There is no doubt that the framework for elimination
of Syrian chemical weapons (S/2013/565, annex)
between the Russian Federation and the United States
of America, dated 14 September 2013, paved the way
for that compromise, and I would like to reiterate our
gratitude to the United States Secretary of State and the
Russian Minister for Foreign Affairs who have laboured
to achieve the agreement. By co-sponsoring and voting
in favour of the text, Togo wishes to underscore the need
not only for the destruction of Syrian chemical weapons
but especially to rid our world of that type of weapons
and other types of weapons of mass destruction.

This evening, the Council was able to speak in a
unified voice on Syria. This sends a strong message
to all parties to the conflict in Syria. The adoption of
resolution 2118 (2013) therefore marks a decisive step in
the process of resolving the Syrian crisis. As a result,
the Security Council must step up its work to bring
about a better future for Syria by sparing no effort to
convene as soon as possible the "Geneva II" conference.
We welcome the announcement made in that regard by
the Secretary-General that the conference could take
place in mid-November.

The sacred union between the permanent members
of the Council that led to the adoption of the resolution
must be sustained in order to bring all parties in
Syria - the Government and the opposition - to
engage in constructive dialogue aimed at launching a
political transition in that country. The road map that
a transitional Government could adopt must set out the
urgent tasks to be undertaken, in particular securing
the safety of the population, launching a reconciliation
process and rebuilding Syria on new foundations.

The Council should also continue to pay attention to
the terrorist currents threatening Syria. As the terrorists
grow in resolve and creativity, seizing new areas and
sowing terror among the population, building a secular,
multi-faith Syria would contribute to rebuilding the
social fabric so sorely tested by the current conflict.

In conclusion, I take this opportunity to express
once again country's concern over the growing
humanitarian situation and the ongoing human rights
violations in Syria. In that regard, Togo aligns itself
with the initiatives seeking to have the Council adopt
a resolution with a view to mobilizing donors to help
refugees and internally displaced persons within the
country.

