The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has the honour to participate in this quarterly open debate of the Security Council to express its position on a matter of particular importance for international peace and security - the situation in the Middle East, including the question of Palestine. In that context, allow us, at the very outset, to express our appreciation to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov, Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his valuable briefing. Similarly, the Venezuelan delegation associates itself with the statement delivered by the representative of the Republic of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela notes with concern that, despite the appeal made by the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire in order to devote our collective energy to the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic that is ravaging humankind, the State of Israel continues to advance its colonial plans against the Palestinian people and territory through violence and terror. We note Israel's recent accelerated progress in its policy of demolishing and confiscating Palestinian buildings. In the past month alone, at least 47 Palestinian structures were demolished, while the expansion of the Wall and the increasing appropriation of Palestinian land for the construction of illegal settlements pushes the international community - day by day - further and further from the realization of a two-State solution and long-awaited peace, pursuant to the relevant resolutions adopted by the Council and within the framework of international law. The same is true of human rights violations and the rise in Palestinian detentions without any sort of due process. In March alone, 250 Palestinians, including 54 children, were detained. Moreover, during that period, 238 incursions were carried out, leaving three Palestinians dead and 52 injured. Given that the non-compliance with international provisions, relevant United Nations resolutions and the Charter of the United Nations represents a major obstacle to international peace and security, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela believes that the international community should focus on addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. A disturbing example of this arbitrary policy of increasing non-compliance with international law is the United States of America's recognition of Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel, a measure that we consider to be null and void, out of order and unilateral, and one that has had catastrophic effects on regional peace and security due to its illegal character. The only viable path to peace is a two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders, as set out in resolution 2334 (2016). Similarly, the Madrid principles, including the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, are essential instruments aimed at guaranteeing the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to self-determination and the safeguarding of their territorial integrity, for the consolidation of an independent State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital. In that regard, we believe that it is essential to strengthen the work of the Council, in order to ensure the maintenance of international peace and security through compliance with its own resolutions on this subject - in furtherance of its capacity and power to enforce the relevant provisions of the United Nations Charter and its own jurisprudence - with a view to guaranteeing the feasibility of a structured, just, peaceful and lasting solution to this protracted conflict. The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns the increase in violent and supremacist inflammatory rhetoric as a means of securing political gains, seeking to justify non-compliance with the relevant international provisions, ignoring the right to self-determination of the Palestinian people and the territorial integrity of the State of Palestine, encouraging the growth of Israeli settlements in occupied territories, increasing the confiscation of land and the demolition of buildings, expanding the construction of the wall and flagrantly violating the inalienable right of the Palestinian people to exist. We are gravely concerned about the inhumane Israeli blockade of the Gaza Strip, which causes untold humanitarian, social and economic suffering to the Palestinian people. This appalling policy has created a severe humanitarian crisis by impeding the delivery of needed hospital, medical and other resources to address the COVID-19 pandemic and putting the Palestinian population at imminent risk. Recognizing the difficult global situation generated by this global pandemic and the risks that it entails for the most vulnerable populations obligates us to denounce what - as a result of the Israeli blockade - could be one of the worst tragedies for the Palestinian people, in one of the most densely populated areas of the world. In that connection, we must recall that unilateral coercive measures and blockades of any sort are a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law. They may also constitute a form of aggression, pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3314 (X XIX). For that reason, Venezuela urges the State of Israel to completely and immediately lift the blockade imposed on Gaza and to refrain from promoting any type of unilateral, illegal or arbitrary coercive measures that undermine the possibility of building the much-desired peace. The international community must act in a responsible, effective, coordinated and decisive manner in defence of international law and the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. To that end, it is important to strengthen our support for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East in order to address the serious humanitarian crisis on the ground and to provide a timely response to the needs of the Palestinian people and refugees. In conclusion, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joins the call of those countries that, like Palestine, urge the international community to put an end to the impunity of the State of Israel in its deliberate failure to comply with the provisions of the relevant Council resolutions, the United Nations Charter and the norms of international law, including international humanitarian and human rights law. We must do so before it is too late and the colonial war, together with the excessive human suffering caused by those blatant violations, transcends the borders of this conflict and extends beyond the Middle East region.
