Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish):
Bolivia expresses its deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Burkina Faso for the tragic
events last Sunday, We extend our condolences to
France, Turkey, the Niger, Kuwait and Ethiopia, which
lost countrymen in the attack.

We likewise deplore the attack on the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali that took place yesterday in Mali,
which resulted in the death of a Togolese humanitarian
worker. Bolivia strongly condemns all terrorist acts
as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, committed wherever, whenever and by
whomsoever. We reaffirm the need for all States to
fight it, pursuant the Charter of United Nations and
other obligations under international law.

We welcome Assistant Secretary-General Wane's
briefing on peace operations and the situation in the
Sahel and thank the Egyptian presidency for having
convened this session on such an important sub-region
of the African continent. Bolivia highlights the
commendable efforts of the regional bodies led by the
Peace and Security Council of the African Union. We
are confident that the strategic concept of the joint force
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and the
deployment of the forces in order to address the impact
of terrorism and transnational organized crime through
multidimensional operations in border areas is a suitable
tool that complements the work of United Nations
peacekeeping forces in the region. We commend the
efforts ofBurkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania and the
Niger in the deployment and operationalization of their
forces in the field. We believe that it is the obligation
of the Council to actively contribute to this initiative,
which benefits the stabilization process in the region.
We would also highlight the efforts of the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel in
implementing the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel, which is in line with the African Union's
Nouakchott Process on the enhancement of security
cooperation and the operationalization of the African
Peace and Security Architecture in the Sahelo-Saharan
region. The G-5 Sahel is the clearest example of the
contribution of African countries to strengthening
security capacities in the region.

Currently, the Sahel poses major challenges both for
local Governments and for the international community.
The issues of peace, security and development, the
exploitation of natural resources and climate change
are determining factors that seriously endanger the
institutional structure of the countries of the area and,
consequently, their population, which counts some
150 million inhabitants.

One of the countries of the Sahel, Mali - which,
after a peaceful transfer of power in 2002, maintained
political stability and economic growth, and is a country
rich in history and natural resources - is now suffering
from a volatile and complex situation that includes
asymmetrical threats that endanger the political peace
process, the civilian population and members of the
United Nations peacekeeping mission. Mali not only
faces the consequences of armed group violence, but
must also repel the threat of terrorist groups such as
Al-Qaida, Ansar Eddine and Jama'at Nusrat, as well as
the threat of transnational delinquency and organized
crime, which rely on the crimes of trafficking in
persons and migrants, and drug and arms trafficking
networks, among others.

Furthermore, according to the latest report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2017/478),
published in June, the humanitarian situation in central
and northern Mali has continued to deteriorate. A total
of 3.8 million people are at risk of food insecurity as
a result of drought and persistent violence. Moreover,
about 1.2 million people have been identified as having
limited access to water and basic services. Insecurity
has led to an increase in the number of displaced
persons in the latest reporting period of the Secretary-
General, from approximately 45,000 to 59,000 people.

It is also important to analyse the causes of the
conflict, which have influenced the volatile security
situation in the subregion. We highlight with great
concern the consequences of interventionism and
regime change policies since, after the 2011 conflict in
Libya, one of the side effects was the destabilization
of the Sahel, bringing with it chaos, terrorism and
militarization, with regrettable consequences that
continue to this day. The movement of armed groups
from Libya to the countries of the Sahel has also
made possible the transfer of large-calibre weapons,
such as portable air-defence systems, anti-tank
missiles, mortars, heavy machine guns, assault rifles,
improvised explosive devices, antipersonnel mines
and others, which were used in the Libyan civil war
and which are now being used now to carry out attacks
against national security forces, civilians and members
of peacekeeping missions on the ground.

Moreover, we cannot ignore the issue of exploitation
of natural resources. The countries of the subregion,
such as Mauritania, Mali and the Niger, are considerably
rich in minerals, while Chad is rich in hydrocarbons.
In the case of the Sahel and Africa in general, illegal
exploitation by armed groups and the growing presence
of transnational corporations that take most of the wealth
and profits, leaving minimal income for the countries
where they operate, make the situation more difficult
and hinders socioeconomic development. Controlling
areas that are rich in natural resources and effective
border surveillance initiatives are tasks that should be
based on an institutional strategy and framework, with
the support of the international community. Bolivia
firmly believes in the need to establish the future basis
for peace and coexistence, joining efforts and means
for the proper management of natural resources, with
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of all States.

In addition, my delegation wishes to highlight once
again that it is the duty of the Security Council not only
to analyse the state of affairs in conflict zones, but also
to address the causes that triggered or caused them, and
keep them current.

In conclusion, we encourage the African Union
and the international community to continue to
provide technical support, economic and humanitarian
cooperation to all efforts aimed at achieving stability
and lasting peace in the Sahel subregion.

