Mr. Gillerman (Israel): At the outset, allow me,
Sir, on this, your last day - for the moment - as
President of the Security Council, to congratulate you
and to thank you for your able stewardship of the
Council during this month and for convening this
important debate. I also wish to thank Ms. Hoppe for
her informative briefing.

More than 640 million small arms and light
weapons whenever we talk about "SALW", I think
that the "L" could also stand for "lethal", and not just
"light", weapons - and 16 billion rounds of
ammunition are in circulation today across the globe,
with an additional 8 million new weapons entering the
market each year. Most present-day conflicts are fought
primarily with these weapons, and they are used in
civil wars, terrorism, organized crime and gang
warfare. Moreover, civilians are often those most
affected and endangered by them.

 

Israel views the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons, and in particular the transfer of those
weapons to terrorists, as an imminent threat to
international peace and security. Therefore, my
delegation welcomes the report submitted by the
Secretary-General on small arms (S/2008/258) and
wishes to express its support in particular for the
Secretary-General's proposal that the Coordinating
Action on Small Arms be revived as one of the
priorities in the field of disarmament for this year.

Israel has consistently placed high on its agenda
the issue of preventing the illicit proliferation of small
arms and light weapons. We strongly believe that
harmonized cooperation and coordination at the global,
regional, subregional and bilateral levels would
enhance the ongoing international efforts to prevent
proliferation and combat terrorism. In our opinion, the
best way to curb illicit arms proliferation is through
strong national commitment and determination. In that
regard, Israel's small arms and light weapons export
control policy includes tight controls aimed at, inter
alia, the prohibition of exports to regions or States
under Security Council arms sales embargoes,
non-State entities, subversive and underground
movements, terrorist or guerrilla groups, criminal
organizations and areas of ongoing internal armed
conflict.

In our region, the illicit transfer of small arms
and light weapons presents a growing danger, owing to
the role of terrorist organizations. The terrorism and
violence carried out by extremists against Israel, and
against Israeli civilians in particular, is enabled by the
illicit transfer of small arms and light weapons to
terrorist organizations such as Hamas and Islamic Jihad
in the Palestinian areas and Hizbullah in Lebanon.
While State sponsorship of terrorism is not a new
challenge for the international community per se, the
increase in size, operational capacity and military
technology of non-State actors reminds us time and
time again that terrorist organizations cannot exist
without the support of States.

Two extremist States in our region, Syria and
Iran, are heavily invested in transferring a variety of
weapons to Hizbullah in Lebanon, among them small
arms and light weapons. In addition to providing
weapons, Iran also trains terrorists in operational
methods. Scores of Hizbullah and Hamas terrorists
have been sent for training in Iran in recent months
alone. The international community must press for an
end to State sponsorship of terrorism.

The security situation has therefore required my
Government to spare no effort in combating and
preventing terrorist organizations from acquiring small
arms and light weapons, especially man-portable air
defence systems, mines and improvised explosive
devices, ammunition and explosives. Those arms are
used by all terrorist organizations in our region to
launch attacks targeting, both indiscriminately and
intentionally, innocent civilians. The daily attempts to
smuggle small arms and light weapons by land Via
underground tunnels and through abusing humanitarian
convoys underscores the significance of the threat.

Let us not forget that small arms and light
weapons pose a threat not only to States and their
civilians, but also to the peacekeepers who are often
deployed to areas where the illicit transfer of weapons
takes place. The Council is aware of numerous
incidents over the past few years. I wish to point to one
in particular, which occurred in southern Lebanon just
last month - as detailed in paragraph 24 of the most
recent report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 1559 (2004), contained in
document S/2008/264 - in which a patrol of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon encountered
unidentified armed elements in its area of operation. In
that case, Hizbullah and its supporters who enable the
small arms and light weapons to reach the terrorists
both posed a grave danger to peacekeepers and the
fulfilment of their mandate, as indicated by this very
Council.

Israel welcomed the adoption of the Programme
of Action at the United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in 2001.
The Programme of Action has contributed significantly
to international arms control efforts in the past few
years by raising the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons to a higher priority. The 2006 Review
Conference reiterated the key role of the Programme of
Action. However, Israel, like other delegations, regrets
that the Conference was not able to achieve a
consensus document.

Israel actively participated in the negotiations
leading to the successful conclusion of the
International Instrument to Enable States to Identify
and Trace, in a Timely and Reliable Manner, Illicit
Small Arms and Light Weapons. The implementation
of the Instrument, as well as the Programme of Action,
would contribute to reducing human suffering if
carried out by all States. For Israel, as well as for other
States in our region and around the world, the
implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action has become more relevant than ever. As such,
we look forward to the coming Biennial Meeting on the
Programme of Action in New York in July, and we
support the Secretary-General's call for an operational
and action-oriented meeting. We hope that the Security
Council will be very vigilant in not allowing that vital
issue to be politicized, as seems to be the aim of at
least one member of the Council. We consider it to be a
fundamental and crucial step towards progress in the
peace process.

Due to that commitment, Israel is ready to
continue the efforts to identify standards for transfer
control to reduce the illicit trade in small arms and
light weapons. Such standards could include the
implementation of the marking and tracing instrument,
full compliance with the Security Council's arms
embargos, the assessment of the risk of diversion to
illicit end users, a ban on the transfer of man-portable
air defence systems to non-State actors, satisfactory
management and control of stockpiles, as well as other
similar measures.

When addressing the relationship between illicit
arms and maintaining international peace and security,
we tend to focus on statistics and figures to bolster our
call for action, but we must remember that behind each
victim affected by the illicit trade of small arms and
light weapons - be it in armed conflict, civil strife or
terrorism - is the face and name of a loved one, now
lost to his or her dear family and friends forever. While
the discussions on small arms and light weapons are
largely technical, their consequences are
overwhelmingly humanitarian. Hence, the lesson for
the international community is clear. Whatever
disagreements exist on technical matters, dragging our
feet on regulation - and worse, continuing to allow
the illicit trade of small arms and lethal light weapons
and State sponsorship of terrorism - will only
exacerbate the threats posed to civilians.

For States to fulfil their obligations to their
citizens and ensure their safety and security, there must
be a collective resolve to prevent the emergence of
situations in which small arms and light weapons and
other weapons aggressively threaten civilian
populations. Israel, for its part, is prepared to engage
with the international community in promoting
appropriately robust arms regimes and in ensuring the
safety and security of all citizens of the world.

