Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): I will
surely limit my statement to four minutes.

At the outset, I would like express my
appreciation to you, Madame President, for organizing
this meaningful open debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution- building.

The scourge of armed conflict causes massive
loss of life and unquantifiable societal loss. At the
same time, it also severely destroys the key institutions
of the nation and, eventually, the Government cannot
function properly in support of the daily life of the
people. Sixty years ago, the Republic of Korea suffered
a devastating and sustained conflict. Therefore, we
recognize that fact all too well.

After the cessation of conflict, the building of
institutions should commence at the earliest possible
juncture. Indeed, post-conflict institution-building
should be part of a holistic peacebuilding approach.
Working side by side with humanitarian relief and
long-term development assistance are important
features. The window of opportunity in post-conflict
situations is short-lived. Therefore, it must be seized
upon to prevent a relapse into violence, which happens
mostly within the first decade following a conflict.

To harness the synergy and increase the
possibility of success on the ground, peacekeeping,
peacebuilding and sustainable development should be
pursued in parallel. In addition, both entry and exit
strategies need to be planned from the initial stages, as
well.

Peacebuilding operations should be executed in a
way to further strengthen and respect national
ownership and the priorities of the recipient countries.
The ultimate goal of peacebuilding is to stabilize the
post-conflict situation and to establish a basis for long-
term sustainable development. Institution-building is
inherent in that formula for success. To that end,
international organizations, financial institutions and
civil society also have an integral role to play.

In that regard, partnership among all stakeholders
should be strengthened, with the Peacebuilding
Commission playing the role of facilitator. Within the
United Nations system, relations among the
Commission, the Security Council and the General
Assembly need to be further defined in a more strategic
and coordinated manner. Outside the United Nations
system, we need to make further efforts to establish
constructive relations with the Bretton Woods
institutions, including the World Bank and the
International Monetary Fund, as well as regional and
non-governmental organizations. Considering the
increasing role of the private sector in the
peacebuilding arena, we also need to continuously
engage civil society and other players in the private
sector.

Institution-building must ensure that the basic
capacity of a nation is restored at the earliest possible
time in order to stabilize the fragile post-conflict
situation. The rule of law, effective governance and
security-sector reform are the areas that require the
highest priority. Our efforts in any new peacebuilding
area of responsibility need to be focused on restoring
those basic functions of a country for both short-term
and longer-term sustainable success.

Once again, closer linkage and coordination
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission is crucial in carrying out peacebuilding
mandates and helping countries to meet multifaceted
post-conflict demands in the field. The challenges
identified during the first few years of the
Commission's operation only reinforce the importance
and critical value of this linkage. Consolidating and
bolstering this relationship will help rebuild lasting
institutions in post-conflict areas.

An essential goal of peacebuilding is to present a
blueprint of political and socio-economic development
for the recipient country, with due consideration to
both its potentials and limits. In this process, the
building of sustainable institutions is the fundamental
groundwork for a country to effectively recover from
conflict. In conjunction with effective institution-
building, we believe that particular emphasis should be
placed in the areas of vocational training and education
for youth in order to ensure a more prosperous future
for all.

In bringing my remarks to a close, I would like to
highlight that just half century ago, the Republic of
Korea was a country striving to recover from a
devastating war. With the timely and efficient
assistance of the international community and the
United Nations, we were able to attain stability and
development in a relatively short period. From our own
experience, we understand and value the importance of
institution-building activities.

Against that backdrop, Korea has been
contributing to the Peacebuilding Fund on a regular
basis and has been a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission during
the past few years. We hope that Korea's peacebuilding
activities within the United Nations will offer a
valuable opportunity for us to utilize our past
experiences. We want to help facilitate the efforts of
post-conflict countries to rebuild and develop their
institutions and societies and, in turn, the dreams of
future generations.

