Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic ): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May and to express our full confidence in
your ability to guide the Council's work. I should also like
to take this opportunity to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Kovanda, the Permanent Representative of the
Czech Republic to the United Nations, for his successful
leadership of the Council last month.

The Security Council is meeting today to address a
dangerous Israeli action: the recent ordering by the Israeli
authorities of the confiscation of 53 hectares of land located
in the area of occupied East Jerusalem. This is an action
which constitutes a flagrant violation of the relevant
Security Council resolutions and of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, as well as of the Declaration of
Principles of 13 September 1993. Moreover, this action was
taken in the city of Al-Quds AI-Sharif, which is of central
importance to the Arab and Islamic worlds and lies at the
heart of the Palestinian cause, which is the crux of the
Arab-Israeli conflict.

Arab and Islamic anger in response to the action has
taken shape clearly in the reaction by the general public and
in the official Arab position taken in the emergency
meeting of the Arab Foreign Ministers and in the common
Arab stance here within the United Nations, as well as in
the action taken by the Organization of the Islamic
Conference (OIC) and the Al-Quds Committee. We are
pressing forward at the United Nations because this
international Organization has been dealing with the issue
of Jerusalem from the very beginning and has been giving
it special attention since it first took up the question of
Palestine.

Allow me now quickly to review the stages through
which this central issue has gone, both within the United
Nations and outside.

On 29 November 1947, the General Assembly, in
the exercise of its authority towards Palestine as one of
the areas under the Mandate System of the League of
Nations, adopted resolution 181 (II), commonly referred
to as the "partition resolution". This resolution partitioned
mandated Palestine into two states, one Arab and one
Jewish, and designated a demilitarized Jerusalem as a
corpus separatum under the aegis of the Trusteeship
Council of the United Nations. The following year the
General Assembly reaffirmed this principle with regard to
Jerusalem in its well-known resolution 194 (III), of
11 December 1948.

As a result of the 1948 war, the city, as is known,
was the subject of a de facto division. Nevertheless, by
1950 the General Assembly reaffirmed the principle of a
corpus separatum, a principle which was repeated in its
later resolutions despite the de facto division. In
implementation of resolution 181 (II), the Trusteeship
Council effectively adopted the statute of Jerusalem on
4 April 1950, but, unfortunately, it was not implemented.

At the time during which Israel was applying for
membership in the United Nations, and in the course of
the tense discussions which occurred regarding this
request, Israel gave assurances with regard to its
commitment to implementing General Assembly
resolutions 181 (II) and 194 (III). These assurances were
actually referred to in General Assembly resolution 273
(III), of 11 May 1949, which granted membership to
Israel. However, despite the commitment made, Israel
almost immediately violated these assurances when the
Israeli Parliament - the Knesset - declared Jerusalem
the capital of Israel on 23 January 1950; and in 1951 the
Israeli ministries moved to the city. The reaction of
Member States to this illegal and unfortunate action was,
correctly, in line with international law and relevant
United Nations resolutions. No nation recognized Israeli
sovereignty over the part of Jerusalem under its control at

 

the time, which is known as Western Jerusalem. Further, no
countries established their embassies in Western Jerusalem
or transferred them there.

With the outbreak of the 1967 war, Israel occupied the
other part of Jerusalem, including the walled city, with its
religious sites, along with its occupation of the rest of the
West Bank, the Gaza Strip, the Syrian Golan and the
Egyptian Sinai. The Israeli Government immediately
annexed East Jerusalem and, with the authorization of the
Knesset, it expanded the municipal border of the city to
approximately 7,005 hectares, which is equivalent to almost
10 times the original area of the city, and imposed Israeli
law, jurisdiction and administration upon it.

The Israeli Government then began fervently
implementing a comprehensive and integrated policy aimed
at achieving the highest degree of settler colonization in the
occupied city through the confiscation of land and the
intensification of construction for settlers on this confiscated
land and, in turn, at decreasing the size of the population of
the Palestinians of the city by making life harsher for them
by all means and in all areas. In summary, it was a policy
which aimed at the judaization of the city and the
achievement of a Jewish majority in it.

Through the years - and to this day - the area of
land confiscated by Israel in the expanded East Jerusalem
adds up to 2,400 hectares, which represents 33 per cent of
the area of East Jerusalem, upon which 35,000 units for
settlements have been built. These units have all been
allocated to Jewish settlers. Also, Israel has confiscated
other land, totalling 3,100 hectares and referred to as a
"green area", upon which there has been no construction.
The net result of such measures is that the Palestinians have
been left with a minimal area of land, equal to only about
14 per cent of East Jerusalem in its expanded municipal
boundaries.

On 30 July 1980, the Israeli Knesset adopted the basic
law of Jerusalem, reaffirming the de facto annexation of
1967 and declaring "the complete and united Jerusalem" as
the capital of Israel. It is also worth mentioning that all this
colonial expansion differs from what some Israeli circles
refer to as "Greater Jerusalem", a goal for which many
more annexations and confiscations are projected.

With regard to the illegal settlers, the first settlers to
inhabit occupied East Jerusalem arrived in 1969, and their
numbers continued to grow over the years, reaching 50,000
by 1979 and totalling approximately 150,000 in 1993, a
figure almost equivalent to the total Arab population of
the city.

In addition to all of the above, Israel, the occupying
Power, alongside the armed settlers, has many times
attacked the sanctity of Islamic holy places. The most
dangerous of those actions was the attempt to burn Al
Masjid Al Aqsa Al Mubarak in 1969.

All of this has been done in spite of the clear
positions taken by the international community, in total
defiance of the United Nations and in violation of a series
of Security Council resolutions regarding the situation in
Jerusalem, such as resolutions 250 (1968), 252 (1968),
267 (1969), 271 (1969), 298 (1971), 476 (1980),
478 (1980) and 672 (1990).

Those resolutions declared, inter alia, that all of the
measures and arrangements taken by Israel, including the
legislative and administrative ones, aimed at changing the
legal status of the city, are null and void and without any
legal validity. Those resolutions also condemned Israel's
attempts to change the character of the city and its
demographic composition and pronounced that the basic
law of Jerusalem constituted a violation of international
law and should be rescinded. They further called upon
Member States to abide by that position; all of this in
addition to a large number of Security Council resolutions
which repeatedly affirm the applicability of the Fourth
Geneva Convention to all the occupied territories,
including Jerusalem, as well as those demanding that
Israel, the occupying Power, cease its settlement activities
and comply with the provisions of the Convention.

Once again the position of the Member States of the
United Nations was clear and in line with international
law and the Council's resolutions. Not one single country
recognized the annexation or the sovereignty of Israel
over East Jerusalem and, with the unfortunate exception
of two countries, no country moved its embassy to
Jerusalem. Nevertheless, and in spite of what has been
previously mentioned, Israel persists with such plans,
policies and practices, imposing their power in a show of
force above and beyond the law, totally ignoring Security
Council resolutions.

Recently, we became convinced that a new era had
dawned in the Middle East and in the history of the
Israeli-Palestinian relationship as a result of the important
and fundamental development of the signing of the
Declaration of Principles between the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) and the Government of Israel. In the

 

Declaration, the two parties agreed on a transitional period
and they also agreed to postpone the negotiations on several
difficult and complex issues, including Jerusalem, until the
second phase, which is to commence as soon as possible
but not later than the beginning of the third year. As such,
the two parties agreed to negotiate the issue of Jerusalem
and they agreed on a specific time frame within which to
conduct these negotiations. Also, the Israeli side made a
commitment with regard to the Palestinian institutions in
East Jerusalem, recognizing their great importance and
stating that they would be preserved during the transitional
period.

The minimum level of compliance with the contractual
obligations of the parties, and negotiation in good faith,
requires that the parties do not make changes on the ground
that prejudge the results of the negotiations or influence it.
Neither one of the parties should undertake hostile actions
which cause extreme damage to the other side: that is
considered one of the basic symptoms of occupation. Such
acts violate the Hague Regulations of 1907 and its Annexed
Regulations and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.
This is exactly what Israel has recently done with its
announcement of new confiscation orders of 53 hectares of
East Jerusalem land and the announcement of plans for the
construction of residential units for settlers and another unit
for police use. In addition, many Israeli officials reiterated
the intention of the government to confiscate more lands for
the establishment of more new settlements.

We cannot speak about Israeli policies and practices
in Jerusalem without speaking about their horrible practices
with regard to the closure of the city in the face of the
Palestinian people, preventing them from entering it despite
the importance of Jerusalem as a religious, cultural,
economic centre for the whole population. So the whole
thing did not stop at the expansion of the municipal
boundaries of Jerusalem and the confiscation of its land, as
now the city is also closed in the face of its people and its
real owners, with all the consequential harm to them.

Then there are the illegal excavations in the vicinity of
Al Haram Al Sharif, which recently reached to areas very
close to Al Masjid Al Aqsa Al Mubarak, threatening the
integrity and foundation of the mosque, something which
could cause a real upheaval in the Arab and Islamic worlds.

All of the above issues concern only Israeli policies
and practices in Jerusalem. We can add to that list many
other practices, some of which relate to it as an occupying
Power, such as the continuation of its plans of colonial
settlement in other areas of the occupied territory, and
others which relate to it as a partner in the peace process,
such as delaying the implementation of the second phase
of the Declaration of Principles, which calls for the
redeployment of the Israeli forces in the rest of the West
Bank and the holding of the general Palestinian election,
and also the breaching of the economic agreement and the
adoption of specific steps that have led to the choking of
the Palestinian economy and an increase in the suffering
of our people in the occupied territory and in the territory
of the Palestinian National Authority.

If we look at the whole picture, we can see the
dangers of the situation before us and the destructive
impact of Israeli practices on the peace process,
particularly those related to Jerusalem, including - and
foremost - the confiscation orders. Israel must
understand that it cannot continue to go on with its
occupation mentality and it must understand that the
Declaration of Principles was reached between two parties
representing two equal peoples and therefore the rights
and aspirations of both of them should be respected, not
only those of one side at the expense of the other.

Israel must also understand that it cannot achieve
peace while continuing to hold the land, that it is not
possible to maintain its grip on Jerusalem while
demanding normal relations with its neighbours and their
friends. Finally, Israel must choose: either there is
agreement with the Palestinian side or there is no
agreement, because the status of half-agreement is
unacceptable and absolutely untenable. We on our side
are committed to the agreement and the peace process,
and we are ready to go forward on the basis of
implementing what was agreed upon, with complete
respect for international law.

What about the co-sponsors of the peace process and
their respective roles in this regard? We believe that the
co-sponsors have to intensify their efforts to rescue the
process and to guarantee its progress by persuading Israel
not to continue to pursue these policies and practices and
by pushing for the parties' implementation of their
contractual obligations. The American co-sponsors carry
a larger responsibility in this regard because of their
special relationship with Israel and because of the letters
of assurance they provided to the parties participating in
the process, including the letter of assurance to the
Palestinian side, which was an integral component of the
basis for Palestinian participation in the whole process.
That letter of assurance, dated 24 October 1991, states the
following about the issue of Jerusalem:

 

"The United States is opposed to the Israeli
annexation of East Jerusalem and the extension of
Israeli law on it and the extension of Jerusalem's
municipal boundaries. We encourage all sides to avoid
unilateral acts that would exacerbate local tensions or
make negotiations more difficult or pre-empt their
outcome".

We are now witnessing precisely such actions, and we hope
that the United States will take a clear position in keeping
with its assurances in this regard.

We would like to say a word here regarding attempts
currently under way in the United States Congress to move
the American Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, which
constitutes an attempt to cancel the United States policy
that has prevailed over 40 years. Under normal
circumstances, we would not be taking up proceedings of
the parliaments of Member States, but this case has gone
beyond the merely hypothetical, touching the vital interests
of our people and representing a violation of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We
appreciate the current Administration's position with regard
to these new attempts, as well as the positions of previous
Administrations. But, at the same time we want to warn of
the possible catastrophic consequences of these attempts if
they are successful.

If such attempts actually materialize, we will work to
build an Arab-Islamic position on the issue and will be
obliged to fight the move, despite our limited capabilities.
In part, our response will be within the framework of the
United Nations system, including the Security Council -
under Article 27, paragraph 3, of the Charter - and the
International Court of Justice, to which we will turn for an
advisory opinion or some other form of involvement.

What is now required from the Council with regard to
this issue? What is required is that the Council assume its
duty to guarantee the rescinding of the Israeli confiscation
orders through the adoption of a clear resolution. What is
also required is that the Council make the Israelis
understand the importance of not repeating such acts in the
future. This, of course, falls within the framework of what
is required in general from the Council: guaranteeing
respect for international law and providing the necessary
support for the peace process.

It is truly our hope that the Council will succeed this
time in assuming its responsibilities, in contrast with what
happened recently, when the Council did not shoulder its
task again after the debate on 28 February. Had we
succeeded then, we probably would not have had to come
before the Council today. We hope to succeed this time,
so that we will not have to come before the Council again
in the future on the same issue.

Jerusalem, the Holy City for the three monotheistic
religions, was and will remain the key to war and peace.
It is the first kiblah for Muslims, the home of the third of
Islam's sacred mosques, the destination of the Prophet's
divine journey and the burial place of Jesus Christ.
Throughout history it has been a setting for both conflict
and peace. It is unlike any other city. It has always
maintained an Islamic and Arab identity, and it will
continue to do so. All Israeli attempts to change its
character, falsify its history and deny the rights of the
Palestinians in it is extremely dangerous and touch the
dignity and the convictions of the Islamic and Arab
worlds.

The Palestinian people, under the leadership of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, will continue their
struggle to achieve their legitimate rights, including the
right to establish their independent State, with Jerusalem
as its capital.
