Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his assessment of the
current state of United Nations peacekeeping. We also
thank the Force Commanders of the military components
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations in
Darfur, Mali and South Sudan for the updated briefings
on the state of affairs in their missions. We greatly
value the efforts of peacekeepers working in difficult
conditions and we would like to pay tribute to all who
have given their lives for peace and stability.

The security of peacekeeping contingents is an
extremely important issue that we should focus on
not only during the preparation of peacekeeping
operations but throughout the work of the United
Nations presence in a country. The type and nature
of the problems in contemporary crises are constantly
changing. Peacekeeping operations are more often
encountering terrorist attacks on civilian populations
and peacekeepers and dealing with the effects of
organized crime and the illegal trade in arms and
drugs. The situations in the countries where missions
are deployed and every theatre of operations have their
own characteristics. The proliferation of such threats
naturally causes experts and scientists to think seriously
about the very concept of the work of the Blue Helmets,
and the logic of their actions when it is impossible to
distinguish civilians from militants or, for example,
when a host country is unable to adequately protect
civilians from new threats. That way of thinking often
gives rise to the same call, urging that all peacekeepers
be given so-called robust mandates and additional
intelligence-gathering and use-of-force capacities.
We have already heard echoes of that thinking today.
For our part, we believe, on the contrary, that in such
circumstances peacekeepers should act extremely
cautiously. After all, peacekeeping operations
embody the ideals of the United Nations. Any mistake
can have tragic consequences and undermine the
Organization's authority.

The Security Council, troop-contributing countries
and host States need an objective assessment of the
extent to which expanded mandates for the use of force
enable real breakthroughs to be made in fulfilling
mandates, and that is especially urgent in the light of
the increase in casualties among peacekeepers in the
worst trouble spots. Let us be blunt. The experience
of missions with robust mandates in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali is not very convincing
so far. It has also raised a number of serious legal,
technical, logistical and staffing issues that should
be resolved in an intergovernmental format by the
specialized agencies of the United Nations and with the
direct participation of troop contributors.

We have to be realistic about this. An inability to
find a workable response to the root causes of conflicts
and the threat of terrorism should not automatically
lead to strengthening peacekeepers' mandates on
the pretext that there are no other options. There are
options. First, our approach to planning the mandates
and peacekeepers' operational work should be more
intelligent and painstaking. We should not burden
missions with irrelevant tasks that should be handled
by specialized United Nations structures. They should
focus on the priority issues - supporting the political
process, strengthening host countries' national capacity
and ensuring security. I would like to hear about how
that planning is being done in current conditions.

Furthermore, when preparing and conducting
operations, it is important to take into account the
views of troop-contributing countries and not to neglect
the views and preferences of the local population,
some of whom may be supporting armed groups, as
in fact happened in the Central African Republic. We
should not forget that such cases threaten the security
of peacekeepers, civilians, humanitarian workers
and country-team staff. Another important factor is
ensuring that Blue Helmets are properly trained and
have the appropriate equipment. It is unforgivable to
create a situation for which there is a robust mandate
but where it takes too long to create the conditions in
which it can be fulfilled.

At this point I would like to touch on the active
security of contingents and the collection and analysis
ofintelligence, which my British colleague spoke about.
We believe that this kind of activity can be carried
out only within the limits that have been agreed to by
States - in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, with the consent of the host Government, and
only for the specific purpose of ensuring the security
ofpeacekeepers and the civilian population. We cannot
permit the use of intelligence-gathering means for
any other purpose, including achieving the so-called
political aims of the mandate.

I want to particularly emphasize the importance
of strict adherence to the basic principles of
peacekeeping - the consent of the parties, impartiality
and the non-use of force except in self-defence and in
implementing the mandate of the Security Council. If
these are not upheld in robust efforts or, especially, in
preventive responses to virtual threats, peacekeepers
could become directly drawn into conflicts. We noted in
particular that some of today's briefers made references
to the Cruz report. As far as I remember, Member States
discussed it in the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in March, but it was not approved. Some
of its positions are contentious and arguable, and we
see no reason to implement its recommendations. We
hope that Mr. Lacroix shares that point of view, and we
would be grateful if he could clarify the situation.

We also consider unacceptable the attempts by
various countries to promote initiatives for United
Nations peacekeeping that a small group of States have
agreed on outside the United Nations. The non-United
Nations Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians,
which permit the use offorce against a host Government,
are one such initiative. That would immediately make
Blue Helmets a party to a conflict. One condition for the
success of any peacekeeping operation is constructive
and effective cooperation with the host country, which
bears the primary responsibility both for the political
process and for addressing the root causes of conflict,
as well as for ensuring the security of its population,
including protecting it from terrorist attacks.

