Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to welcome you, Mr. President, to the
Security Council and to thank you for presiding over
this meeting. I would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing, as well His Excellency Mr. Ron Prosor,
Permanent Representative of Israel, and His
Excellency Mr. Riyad Mansour, Permanent Observer of
Palestine, for their statements.

Today's open debate is taking place at a crucial
time when the international community is engaged with
Israel and Palestine to restart direct peace talks. On
23 September - the day when President Mahmoud
Abbas filed an application with the Secretary-General
for Palestine's for membership in the United
Nations - the Quartet issued a statement proposing a
series of steps to restart the peace process (see SG/2178). The steps included a preparatory meeting
between the parties within a month and a commitment
of the parties to submit their preliminary proposals on
territory and security within three months, to make
substantive progress within six months, and to hold a
donor conference and to reach an agreement on the
final status issues by the end of 2012.

During the last four months, the Quartet engaged
with the parties separately, met with them several times
and sought proposals on security and the border. Those
actions were followed by a series of meetings in
Amman this month under the auspices of King
Abdullah II. While the prospect of direct talks has
remained elusive, it is encouraging that the parties
have remained engaged in those processes. We believe
that such engagements need to become more serious
and purposeful with a view to resolving the issues in a
time-bound manner.

To realize the Quartet's time frame for reaching
an agreement by the end of the year, it is necessary for
Israel to completely stop settlement activities.
Continuing settlement activities in the occupied
Palestinian territories, besides being illegal under
international law, are undermining the efforts of the
international community to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict on the basis of the two-State
solution. Several reports, including those of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, clearly
indicate that the increasing trend of settlement
activities in Palestinian lands is not compatible with
the two-State solution.

Settlement activities have also exacerbated the
humanitarian problems of the Palestinian people in the
West Bank and East Jerusalem. Because more than
43 per cent of the West Bank is outside the control of
the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian people have
been deprived of access to their natural resources and
prevented from undertaking their rightful economic,
social and cultural activities. The situation has resulted
in a large number of Palestinian people losing their
homes and access to their farms and their livelihoods.
Settlement activities have also led to violence and have
aggravated social tension between settlers and the
Palestinian population. We therefore reiterate our call
for Israel to stop all settlement activities.

In Gaza, the blockade and restrictions on exports
continue to have far-reaching consequences. Poverty
and aid dependency have increased, and demands for
emergency services like health, water, sanitation,
education and temporary shelter have overstretched the
resources of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA). There is an urgent need to further ease
restrictions on humanitarian supplies to the Gaza Strip.
Established channels for such supplies should be used
even as the capacity of such channels is improved.

Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is an important
issue that needs no emphasis. We support the efforts of
the Palestinian leadership to expedite implementation
of the reconciliation agreement reached last year
between the Palestinian factions.

It is also necessary that all violence come to an
end. We condemn all attacks that cause harm to the
civilian population and damage civilian infrastructure.

For a comprehensive and durable peace in the
region, other issues relating to the Arab lands
remaining under occupation are also important. For the
Middle East peace process to succeed, progress must
also be made on the Lebanese and Syrian tracks. Those
critical issues must not be lost sight of amid the
unprecedented social and political upheaval that the
region is witnessing.

In fact, developments in the region call for
consolidation of the collective efforts of the
international community to assist the countries in
undertaking inclusive political processes and
implementing reforms to meet the legitimate
aspirations of their people. In such collective efforts,
we must respect the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of all countries. It is important that
the grievances of the people be addressed through
dialogue and negotiations rather than through resort to
arms. No action should be taken from outside that
might exacerbate the problems and give rise to
extremism.

India has been steadfast in its support for the
Palestinian people's struggle for a sovereign,
independent, viable and united State of Palestine with
East Jerusalem as its capital, living within secure and
recognized borders side by side and at peace with
Israel, pursuant to the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations, the Arab Peace Initiative and the
Quartet Road Map. That support was reiterated to the
Palestinian leadership last week when our Minister for
External Affairs visited Ramallah.

India also remains committed to continuing its
development cooperation with Palestine through direct
budgetary support, training of personnel in various
areas, annual contributions to UNRWA and projects
under the India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA) Fund.

Palestine is recognized by more than two thirds
of the membership of the United Nations. That was
clearly demonstrated by the overwhelming vote in
Paris on 31 October 2011 in favour of Palestine's
membership in UNESCO. As the first non-Arab
country to have recognized Palestine, in 1988, India
remains convinced that Palestine meets all criteria for
United Nations membership, as set out in the United
Nations Charter, and deserves to become a full-fledged
member of the Organization. We hope that the Security
Council will support Palestine's application for
membership in the United Nations sooner than later.

In conclusion, let me reiterate India's support for
the Quartet's efforts to find a lasting resolution for the
Israel-Palestinian issues, based on the two-State
solution. India stands ready to play its role in the
Council's collective endeavour to achieve a just and
comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
