Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Bosnia and Herzegovina for taking the initiative
to convene this thematic debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding and institution-building. We welcome
the attendance of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
Deputy Prime Minister Guterres of Timor-Leste. I also
thank Ambassador Wittig, Chairperson of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his statement.

Peacebuilding is the common challenge facing
post-conflict countries. It is also one of important
means through which the international community
helps prevent relapse into conflicts.

In the peacebuilding process, there are questions
that are not new but that have not yet been effectively
addressed, such as the following. In post-conflict
countries, how can peacebuilding work evolve at an
early stage so that a transition from stability to

ll-2l268
sustainable peace and development can be achieved?
How can coherence and coordination between the
United Nations and other relevant parties be
strengthened so that effective partnership can be
established? In what ways should the United Nations
and the international community provide support and
help to post-conflict countries in peacebuilding,
especially institution-building? In that context, China
would like to raise the following four points.

First, it is imperative that the post-conflict
countries bear the primary responsibility for
peacebuilding in their own countries. All sides must
fully respect the sovereignty and will of the countries
concerned. National ownership and national capacity
must be enhanced so as to lay the foundation for
sustainable peace and development. The role of the
international community is to provide assistance rather
than substitution.

Secondly, national capacity-building is the key to
success in peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. The
United Nations and the international community must
prioritize peacebuilding tasks, including institution-
building, in the light of the specificities and
circumstances of post-conflict countries and must
provide timely and tailored technical support and
assistance. In that regard, it is important to deploy
competent international civil servants with the right
skills to the post-conflict countries in a timely manner
and to vigorously help countries concerned to provide
training in the talents needed.

Thirdly, prioritization is important in helping
peacebuilding in post-conflict countries. In such
countries a myriad of tasks must be restarted from
scratch, in a complex environment with fragile political
and security bases. The international community's first
task is to help the countries concerned ensure basic
security, promote the political process, provide basic
services, support core government functions and
reinvigorate the economy and development. The
primary goal of the international community's support
in institution-building is to consolidate peace,
safeguard stability, revive the economy and enhance
the rule of law. In that process, full consideration must
be given to the priority needs of the countries
concerned and full attention must be paid to their views
in formulating peacebuilding strategies.

Fourthly, the United Nations and the international
community need to enhance coordination so that
conflict prevention, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
promoting development can advance in tandem and in
an orderly manner. That entails setting up
comprehensive strategies for peacebuilding so that
experiences and lessons can be drawn quickly and
overlapping and waste of resources can be avoided.

