Mr. Amorim (Brazil): Kosovo has become the focus
of the same pattern of ethnic violence that has already
shattered countless lives throughout the region. Once again,
outrage bred by ethnically induced aggression is fuelling
radicalism. Once again, the responsibility for having
allowed violence to be disseminated falls heavily, although
not exclusively, on the leadership of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia. The Security Council has been trying to
articulate a consensus capable of preventing localized
clashes from degenerating into a more serious and
widespread conflict, even as thousands of civilians are the
Victims of harassment and dislocation. Resolutions 1160
(1998) and 1199 (1998) were clear signals. The agreements
laboriously achieved through diplomacy have now set the
stage for a process of reconciliation that should lead to
greater autonomy for Albanian Kosovars.

Brazil supports those agreements and remains
committed to a peaceful solution to the Kosovo crisis.
Our repudiation of all forms of sectarian intolerance
requires no elaboration; neither does our adherence to
democratic pluralism, with full protection for the rights of
minorities. We sincerely hope that a new chapter is being
opened in the history of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia which will allow its social fabric to heal from
the traumas of a decade. In order to ensure compliance
with the terms and conditions that have been formally
accepted, the international community must remain
vigilant. In order for the first positive indications to be
consolidated into a stable process of confidence-building,
adequate pressure remains necessary.

A difficult negotiating process has prevented the
Security Council from moving more rapidly on Kosovo
after the agreements reached between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia on the one hand, and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO) on the other. In its attempt to reach a consensus,
the Security Council has often been caught between two
opposing tendencies. Some have argued that the Council' s
role at this stage should not go beyond a mere
endorsement of those agreements; others argued in favour
of exerting as much pressure as possible, if need be
without a clear reference to the Council's prerogatives
under the Charter. Of particular concern was the
possibility that the Council might be transferring to other
organizations its essential role in making the
determination on whether or not its resolutions are being
complied with.

We believe that before it becomes sufficiently clear
that the trend of the past few months has been reversed
in Kosovo, the Council cannot allow itself to be seen as
showing complacency about non-compliance or even
incomplete compliance with its resolutions.

But another important issue is also at stake here, one
that transcends the confined limits of Kosovo. We do not
wish to raise the question of how regional groups define
themselves - which is something for them to decide. As
a Member State of the United Nations, however, it is our
right - and, indeed, our duty - to defend the Charter.
According to the Charter, non-universal organisms may
resort to force only on the basis either of the right to
legitimate self-defence, as stipulated in Article 51, or
through the procedures of Chapter VIII, in particular
Article 53, which imposes on them the obligation of
seeking Security Council authorization beforehand and

 

abiding by the Council's decision. Tertius non date. There
is no third way.

The integration of non-universal organizations into the
wider collective security concept enshrined in the Charter
is a serious matter. After having witnessed the rebirth of
multilateralism at the end of the cold war, it would be
regrettable if we were to slide into a two-tiered international
system - a system in which the Security Council would
continue to bear primary responsibility for the maintenance
of peace and security in most of the world, while it would
bear only secondary responsibility in regions covered by
special defence arrangements.

After having witnessed certain disturbing signs which
would point to a weakening of the Security Council's
authority and after long discussions, we note with
reassurance that the primary responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of international peace and
security is reaffirmed. We are glad - and, indeed, grateful
to the sponsors - that our suggestions to have a
preambular paragraph on this matter was taken on board.

In the light of this reaffirmation and of other changes
which satisfied our basic concerns, we will be voting in
favour of the draft resolution before us. We would also like
to note the helpful assurances given by the sponsors during
the informal consultations.

We have finally come to what can be considered an
acceptable text. It reconciles a strong political message in
accordance with moral and ethical imperatives with what
we view as the necessary regard for international law and
the United Nations Charter. There can be no more
auspicious date than 24 October, when we celebrate the
anniversary of the entry into force of the United Nations
Charter, to join in the reaffirmation of our respect for its
provisions.
