Mr. Kamal (Pakistan): It is my pleasure to address
the Security Council for the second time this month under
your distinguished presidency, Sir.

We have before us today an issue of far-reaching
international legal significance. By its two Judgments
issued on 27 February 1998, the International Court of
Justice has decided that it has the necessary jurisdiction
to deal with the merits of two cases brought by Libya
against the United Kingdom and United States under the
1971 Montreal Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation.

The background of this dispute, involving Libya on
the one side and France, the United Kingdom and the
United States on the other, lies in the destruction of Pan
Am flight 103 over Lockerbie on 21 December 1988, in
which 270 innocent people were killed. The Lockerbie
tragedy shocked the entire world. We deeply mourn the
death of those who lost their lives in this tragic disaster.
We also deeply sympathize with the bereaved families
who lost their near and dear ones as a result of the
incident. That dispute now affects the entire international
community following the imposition of sanctions against
one of the parties to the dispute on the behest of the other
three parties.

In this connection, Chapter VI, Article 33 of the
United Nations Charter is relevant. This Article states that
disputes between States must be resolved

"first of all, [by] seek[ing] a solution by negotiation,
enquiry, mediation, conciliation, arbitration, judicial

 

settlement, resort to regional agencies or arrangements,
or other peaceful means of their own choice".

It would be legitimate to ask if all these options had been
exhausted before sanctions were imposed on Libya.

Under Chapter III, Article 7, of the Charter, the
International Court of Justice has been established as one of
the principal organs of the United Nations. In Article 92 of
the Charter, the International Court of Justice is described
as "the principal judicial organ of the United Nations". It is
obvious that disputes of a legal kind must be presented to
and decided by this Court alone. In fact, Article 96 of the
Charter states that when the United Nations itself is faced
with a legal problem, either the General Assembly or the
Security Council may also request an advisory opinion of
the International Court of Justice. This shows the
significance which the authors of the United Nations
Charter attached to the International Court of Justice in the
arbitration of legal issues.

Under Article 7 of the 1971 Montreal Convention for
the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of
Civil Aviation, States have been empowered to prosecute
alleged offenders, including in the country where the
alleged offender might be residing. Article 7 of the
Convention thus accords to the States Parties to the
Convention the competence either to extradite the suspect
or to prosecute the suspect.

From the two judgments of the International Court of
Justice, it can be inferred, first, that the Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil
Aviation, signed at Montreal in 1971, provides the legal
framework for the case; and secondly, that the International
Court of Justice has a role because the parties differed on
whether the destruction of the Pan Am aircraft was
governed by the Montreal Convention or not. A legal
dispute of a general nature concerning the Convention thus
existed between the parties.

Specific disputes also existed concerning the
interpretation and application of Article 7 of the Convention
relating to the place of prosecution and of Article 11 of the
Convention relating to assistance in connection with
criminal proceedings. The International Court of Justice's
Judgment has established that Security Council resolutions
748 (1992) and 883 (1993) did not preclude the
admissibility of the cases because the State party concerned
had filed its application prior to the adoption of those
resolutions.

The Security Council needs objectively,
dispassionately and comprehensively to examine the
implications of the International Court of Justice's
Judgments. For the international community, those
Judgments constitute a historic development in the
evolution, interpretation and growth of international law.

The Security Council also needs to give serious
consideration to the question of whether the sanctions it
had imposed on a State Party to the Montreal Convention
in 1992 are still required. Furthermore, the Security
Council should reconsider whether it can remain seized of
an issue which is now sub judice in the International
Court of Justice. It is a universal norm of jurisprudence
that political or administrative organs of a legal system
withhold action on a matter which is pending before the
relevant judicial organs or institutions of that system.

The Member States recognize the Security Council's
powers to impose sanctions under Chapter VII. However,
in this context, attention is drawn to General Assembly
resolution 51/242, annex II, paragraph 1 of which
describes sanctions

"as a useful international policy tool in the graduated
response to threats to international peace and
security".

The General Assembly also stipulated that sanctions
should be resorted to only with the utmost caution, when
other peaceful options provided by the Charter have been
exhausted, and, in the next paragraph of annex II, urged
the Council to establish the sanctions

"with clear objectives and precise conditions for
their lifting".

In addition, in paragraph 5, it stressed the need to
minimize unintended adverse side effects on the civilian
population. The purpose of sanctions should be

"to modify the behaviour of a party that is
threatening international peace and security and not
to punish or otherwise exact retribution".

We therefore feel that, in accordance with the
International Court of Justice Judgments, the parties to the
dispute should take recourse to the legal framework
provided by the Montreal Convention of 1971 and extend
their full cooperation to the Court to decide the case on
merits. The Judgments of the International Court of

 

Justice provide a viable way out to address this important
issue amicably.

