Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): I, too, would like to thank Mr. Menkerios and
President Mkapa for their statements and for their
important work in the Sudan. I also thank Ambassador
Osman and Mr. Deng Alor Kuol, Minister of Regional
Cooperation of the Government of Southern Sudan, for
their statements.

The announcement of the final results of the
referendum on 7 February marks the conclusion of a
long political process throughout which the authorities
of both the North and the South showed great restraint
and commitment to peace. I would therefore like to pay
a warm and well-deserved tribute to them here.

The statement made by President Al-Bashir
recognizing the results announced by the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission and thereby
committing to respect the choice of independence made
by the Southern Sudanese should be commended.
Likewise, I welcome the commitments made by First
Vice-President Salva Kiir to work alongside the
Sudanese Government in the mutual interests of the
North and the South. The Council should therefore
encourage the two parties to keep up this momentum of
cooperation and spirit of openness in order to conclude
discussions on post-referendum arrangements and the
status ofAbyei as soon as possible. We call on the two
parties to make the necessary courageous concessions
to bring about a successful conclusion to the political
process. We welcome the leadership of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, chaired by
President Thabo Mbeki.

In addition, the parties to the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement must also agree on a framework to
determine the future of the millions of Southerners
who live in the North and Northerners who live in the
South. To that end, they must provide essential
guarantees to reassure the civilian population.

The clashes near the border town of Malakal,
which have caused almost 50 deaths, including one
United Nations staff member, remind us that the future
of friendly relations and peaceful coexistence between
the North and the South, aimed at achieving stability in
the Sudan, requires the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement and an early
conclusion of the suspended talks.

The success of the referendum in Southern Sudan
must not obscure the precarious nature of the situation
in Darfur and its impact on the civilian population and
humanitarian workers. We must therefore maintain
pressure on the parties, in particular to encourage
armed groups that have not yet joined the peace
process to do so without conditions or delay.

We welcome and support the efforts by the
Government of Qatar and African Union-United
Nations Chief Mediator Djibril Bassole. We also
welcome the presence in Doha of the Justice and
Equality Movement and the Liberation and Justice
Movement.

Establishing and building the new State of
Southern Sudan will require an enhanced mobilization
of efforts and substantial support by the international
community, in particular in the economic sphere. This
support must also be provided to the Government of
the Sudan, whose cooperation was a decisive factor in
the holding of the referendum in the South.

