Ms. Jones (United States of America): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her informative briefing and
for the ongoing work of her Office to help end impunity
for atrocity crimes committed in Libya.

When the Council decided, in 2011, to refer the
situation in Libya to the International Criminal Court
(ICC) (see S/PV.6491), it stressed the importance
of accountability. Even with Libya's increasingly
complex and unstable security situation, the call for
accountability remains necessary. Like Prosecutor
Bensouda, we are alarmed by the growing number of
atrocity crimes in Libya. Those abuses and violations
are laid out not only in the Prosecutor's report, but also
in the Secretary-General's September report to the
Council (S/2014/653) and in a range of reports from
civil society organizations and other observers on the
ground.

The United States condemns the recent surge in
politically motivated killings, kidnappings and other
abuses, many of which appear calculated to silence and
intimidate a wide range of actors - from politicians
and journalists to human rights defenders and civil
society organizations. Assassinations, violence and the
intimidation of judges, lawyers and the judicial police
resulted in the closure of courts in Benghazi, Sirte and
Derna and in the spread of coercion throughout the
justice system.

Nevertheless, cooperation with the ICC remains
critical. We welcome Libya's continuing coordination
with the ICC's Prosecutor and Registry, including with
their memorandum of understanding and approach to
burden-sharing.

We encourage Libya to continue to prioritize
prosecutions that focus on those bearing the greatest
responsibility for their crimes and to explore other
accountability measures such as those envisioned in
Libya's transitional justice law.

Libya and the Council have an interest in ensuring
that the alleged perpetrators of atrocity crimes in Libya,
including the former regime officials who are already
subjects of ICC proceedings, are held to account and
that it is carried out in a way consistent with the rights
of the defendants and Libya's international obligations.

The United States continues to call on all parties
to accept an immediate and comprehensive ceasefire
that would allow for the political process to proceed
and to engage constructively in the United Nations-
led political dialogue to resolve the ongoing crisis. We
are deeply concerned about the explosions near the
meeting between Prime Minister Al-Thinni and Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Bernardino
Leon this past Sunday, 9 November. While the
circumstances of that event are unclear, we emphasize
that the political process must continue despite the
challenging circumstances in Libya, since only a
political solution can pave the way for the country's
democratic transition.

We support Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Leon's continued commitment to achieving this
goal through political consensus. We urge neighbouring
countries to support the Libyan Government through
sustained and constructive engagement. We also
support the implementation of resolution 2174 (2014),
particularly its measures to address threats to Libya's
peace and stability or security. But Libya's ability to
navigate its many challenges and to secure justice for
the worst crimes against Libyan civilians ultimately
depends on the willingness of all parties to the conflict
to put Libya's future above their own narrow political
and economic interests.

In conclusion, let me reiterate our thanks to
Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for the work they
have done to advance the cause of justice for the people
of Libya.

