The Secretary-General: I have listened very
carefully to the interventions made by President Tadic'
and all members of the Security Council. I would now
like to make some brief further comments, especially
with respect to key issues raised by delegations.

The situation today on the ground, as well as in
the Security Council, is very different from the earlier
period of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). Within the mandate
provided by resolution 1244 (1999), elements of
international civil presence have, over the years,
evolved to address differing needs and changing
circumstances. That was introduced within resolution
1244 (1999).

As I have stated, the Secretariat continues to
operate in Kosovo on the understanding that resolution
1244 (1999) remains in force unless the Security
Council decides otherwise. I expect everyone in
Kosovo to act in a manner consistent with the
operational framework for the international civil
presence established in accordance with resolution
1244 (1999).

As I noted earlier, I have taken note of the
decision of the European Union (EU) to deploy a rule-
of-law mission and an EU special representative. I
would consider that an enhanced role of the EU in
Kosovo would be assessed in the context of the overall
concept of UNMIK operations, the objectives of the
United Nations in Kosovo and the objectives of
protecting the United Nations legacy in Kosovo and the
Balkans. The imperative need to ensure peace and
security in Kosovo obliges me to address the reality on
the ground as it develops and in the light of the
evolving circumstances.

As we seek to manage the situation on the
ground, I would like in closing to underline to the
members of this Council that my principal objectives
are to ensure the safety and security of the population
in Kosovo, with particular attention to the minority
communities; to uphold international peace and
security and the overall stability in Kosovo and
regional stability; to ensure the safety of United
Nations staff; and to safeguard the achievements and
legacy of the United Nations in Kosovo and the
Balkans.

