Mr. Sautter (Germany): I thank the Secretary- General for his report (S/2020/951), and the Special Envoy for his briefing. Let me make three brief points. First, on regional cooperation, we commend the encouraging signals that we have seen recently, particularly in response to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. At the same time, we remain concerned about the negative impact the pandemic is having, especially with respect to health, socioeconomic and humanitarian issues as well as on the human rights situation. It is therefore important to strengthen health infrastructure, step up humanitarian efforts by the international community and mitigate the negative socioeconomic effects of the pandemic. Human rights violations, including sexual and gender-based violations, must stop. We encourage the region to seize the current moment of collaboration in order to make further progress on regional economic integration and in the fight against the illegal exploitation of natural resources. There is an urgent need to address root causes in that regard. The creation of jobs and tax revenues and the reduction of incentives for armed groups and criminal networks to use violence are key. Regional organizations, such as the International Conference on the Great Lakes Region and the African Union, have an important role to play in that context. My second remark is on armed groups. We remain especially worried by the situation in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which continues to destabilize the country and the region. We commend the ongoing increased regional efforts, such as exchanges among regional intelligence and security services and the commitment to greater security cooperation by Rwanda, Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Uganda that was reached at last week's regional summit. It is important that the delayed tenth Summit of the Regional Oversight Mechanism take place without delay. I would like to make a third remark, on the situation in Burundi. We take note of some positive signals and gestures emanating from the new Burundian Government, which seems ready to normalize its relations with the region and the international community. But visible change is needed; the peaceful conduct of elections has formed a solid basis, yet more progress needs to be achieved. The issue of human rights ina difficult humanitarian situation is a still a cause for great concern. Democratic spaces keep narrowing. We are worried about persistent human rights abuses. We hope to see improvements in thatregard. We also encourage the Burundian authorities and all parties involved to respect the principle of the voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees. Let me conclude by expressing our hope to soon see a new peace and security strategy for the Great Lakes region.
