Ms. Bahous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to congratulate you, Mr. President, and South Africa on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council this
month and to thank you for your wise leadership of the
Council's work. I would also like to welcome the State
Secretary of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany
and to thank the Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process.

In his speech before the General Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, His Majesty King Abdullah II
ibn Al Hussein, who is the custodian of Islamic and
Christian holy sites in Jerusalem, stated the following:

"It is a terrible irony that a land holy to three
faiths that share the great commandment to love
one's neighbour should ever be a place of conflict.
That is the land where prophets have walked and
where generations of Muslims, Christians and Jews
have sought to live in obedience to God, teaching
their children compassion, mercy and respect for
others. Segregation, forced displacement, violence
and mistrust do not belong in that Holy Land."
(A/74/PV3, p. 39)

Based on our strong belief in those principles, the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan continues to strive to
protect Jerusalem and its holy sites - both Islamic
and Christian - and to preserve its Arab, Islamic and
Christian identity, as well as its legal and historical
status. Jerusalem has always been the key to peace.

Moreover, we will continue to work with the
international community to break the deadlock in
the political process and put an end to the Israeli
occupation so as to achieve comprehensive and just
peace. However, Israel's daily actions, which include
violations of the rights of the Palestinian people, illegal
settlement activities and the confiscation of property and
attacks on Islamic and Christian holy sites, undermine
any chance of achieving peace in accordance with a
two-State solution, which is the only path to just and
comprehensive peace. Israel's continued violation of
resolutions of international legitimacy and its persistent
occupation, oppression and repression will neither
achieve peace and development in our region, nor will
it guarantee security or stability.

Next month, the General Assembly's Special
Political and Decolonization Committee will consider
its agenda item on the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNWRA). In that regard, we call on all fraternal
and friendly States to vote in favour of extending the
mandate of UNWRA and to work to meet its financial
needs and maintain its role and mandate until a just
solution is achieved with regard to the Palestinian
refugee issue, in accordance with international law and
in a manner that guarantees refugees the right of return
and compensation.

Preserving UNRWA and its services in its five
areas of operation means preserving the right of
5.5 million Palestinian refugees to a dignified life,
maintaining the right of half a million students to
education, and preserving the right of hundreds of
thousands of people to access health care and many
other essential social services. That is our collective
international responsibility until we find a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee issue within the framework
of a comprehensive solution and in accordance with
the Arab Peace Initiative and the relevant international
resolutions, first and foremost General Assembly
resolution 194 (III) of 1948.

We reaffirm that there can be no military solution
to the crisis in Syria. We must intensify our efforts to
put an end to that crisis in a manner that would preserve
sisterly Syria and its people through a political solution
developed and accepted by Syrians that would safeguard
the unity, territorial integrity and sovereignty of Syria;
bring security and stability to the country and rid it of
terrorism; and guarantee the voluntary and dignified
return of the Syrian citizens who have been displaced
by the crisis. We would also like to stress the need for
sisterly Syria to recover its health and role as the pillar
of security, stability and development in the Middle
East and of the system of collective Arab action.

Jordan has always been a destination for all those
seeking succour and we have opened our hearts, our
doors and our homes to all those who have sought
our help. We have faced many challenges since the
Syrian crisis began and, from the very start, we have
shouldered a large part of the humanitarian disaster
that ensued. We have borne that burden on behalf of
the international community. Today, Jordan hosts the
second largest percentage of refugees compared to
the size of its population, according to statistics of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. From
this Chamber, we reiterate our call on the international
community to assume its responsibilities and to provide
Jordan and other countries hosting refugees with
continuous support. Syrian refugees are the victims of
the disastrous Syrian crisis and it is incumbent upon
all of us - not just the host countries - to collectively
bear the responsibility of offering them a dignified life
until they can return home.

Serious collective action and diligent multilateral
diplomatic efforts must succeed in tackling these urgent
international issues and arriving at peaceful political
solutions to crises, as well as supporting efforts to
achieve sustainable development. We must offer more
opportunities and hope, especially to young people,
men and women so as to avoid despair and prevent the
spread of violence, extremism and terrorism - scourges
that find fertile ground in poverty, oppression, injustice
and the absence of hope.

In conclusion, the primary crisis in the Middle East
is the Palestinian question. The region will not enjoy
security, stability and peace without the elimination
of occupation and a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict based on a two-State solution that will
guarantee the Palestinian people their right to liberty,
statehood and a dignified life. Such a solution must lead
to the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the 1967 borders and with East
Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with Israel
in peace and security.

