Mr. Bouchaara (Morocco) (spoke in French):
Allow me first to thank Ambassador Osorio, Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006), for his 90-day report and to express our
appreciation of his efforts. I would also like to thank
the Panel of Experts established under resolution 1929
(2010) for the presentation of it programme of work. We
encourage the Panel to continue, under the aegis of the
Committee, its participation in the various conferences
and meetings that are relevant to the mandate of the
Committee, and in particular its dialogue with Member
States through the visits that have been organized to
countries in its purview.

The Committee has continued its inspection of
the cases brought to its attention, and we hope that
it will continue to benefit from the cooperation of
Member States and to draw on the professionalism and
impartiality of the Panel of Experts. In the same spirit,
my delegation welcomes the holding of an informational
meeting for all delegations. Such initiatives help
contribute to enhancing the transparency of the
Council's work and its subsidiary organs.

The most recent report submitted by the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), dated
30 August, has shown that the pending matters
regarding the Iranian nuclear programme have yet to
be resolved. The report also notes the intensification
of dialogue between Iran and the IAEA since January
2012. We hope that the Agency will be enjoy all the
cooperation necessary to clarifying all pending
matters. We welcome the resumption of negotiations
between the five plus one group and Iran in order to
move towards a negotiated and diplomatic solution to
this question.

We remain convinced that dialogue and diplomacy
are the only way to find a solution to this question.
The successful outcome of such a dialogue will require
clear, sustained commitment in good faith, as well as
the absence of any actions that could further complicate
the situation. We also believe that the resolution of this
question will require respect for the Security Council's
resolutions and a reponse to the requests ofthe IAEA in
the context of Iran's compliance with its international
obligations.

We remain convinced that the IAEA, the only
institution with jurisdiction in this sphere, must receive
the necessary cooperation, including with respect to the
required information and access.

We reiterate that the non-proliferation regime
should not be weakened and that all States must
scrupulously abide by their obligations with respect
to safeguards. The goal of nuclear disarmament,
which my country holds dear, will remain elusive if
the commitments freely entered into under the Treaty
for the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons are not
upheld. At the same time, we wish to underscore that
this regime is based on a clear balance between the
rights and obligations of States, a balance that every
State must uphold.

