Mr. Naeemi (Afghanistan): I want to thank the Vietnamese presidency for organizing this meeting on such an important topic, namely, upholding the Charter of the United Nations to maintain international peace and security. We believe this to be a timely meeting, considering that we are on the eve of the seventy-fifth anniversary of the adoption of the Charter. Back then, the community of nations came together to end decades of conflict and destruction, creating an international framework to maintain peace and security around the world. Today, in a world that continues to suffer from the havoc caused by conflict and the evolving threat of terrorism, it is time to recommit to the values of the Charter and revitalize the role of the United Nations in achieving that challenging endeavour. With the rise of violence and terrorist threats around the world, we must emphasize the work that the Secretary-General has put into enhancing the focus of the United Nations on prevention. We must continue to work on the implementation reform and revitalization efforts that emphasize economic cooperation over conflict in a more proactive approach that seeks to avoid polarization. We have been doing so in our region by promoting various initiatives, including under the Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and the Heart of Asia-Istanbul Process, which have fomented economic growth and connectivity in our region, as well as tackling the economic vulnerabilities that lead to conflict by giving people jobs and ways to ensure their livelihoods. In terms of other ongoing reform processes within the Organization, Afghanistan continues to call for an effective and substantive approach to the reform of the Security Council. Having previously chaired the intergovernmental negotiations on the matter, we understand both the difficulty of the task and the importance of attaining a solution that can strengthen the Council's faculties and mandate for safeguarding international peace and security. We believe that a successful reform of the Council will enhance not only the organ's representation, but also its working methods in order to ensure that it adjusts to the threats of conflict, terrorism and violent extremism and operates in a more transparent and efficient matter. In addition, the Council must continue to work in ensuring the effective implementation of all Security Council resolutions by all Member States - Council members and non-Council members alike. Throughout the years, the Council has adopted a series of resolutions to target major threats to peace and security, such as the movement of foreign terrorist fighters and the financing of international terrorism. The lack of implementation of, or disregard for, those important documents by various countries does not only deter our efforts in the fight for international peace and security, but also leads to the weakening of the political mandate of the Council. That needs to be avoided. Finally, the Security Council should further evaluate ways to make its many tools to counter threats to international peace and security more effective. Sanctions regimes and efforts to tackle the financing and movement of terrorist groups must be strengthened and thoroughly implemented to ensure that all countries comply with their obligations and such regimes. No financial havens or other sanctuaries must be allowed to permit the continued operation of those groups. The United Nations has launched a_ global conversation on the role of global cooperation in building a better future for us all. We must heed this conversation as States and provide further inputs on ways through which we can continue to revitalize and reform this Organization, transforming it into a United Nations that is reflective of our modern reality and that can more effectively tackle the plethora of new challenges to peace and security. As a country that has seen and continues to suffer from the effects of conflict, terrorism and violent extremism, Afghanistan will continue playing a proactive role by proposing ideas and sharing its experience on ways in which the United Nations and the Council can approach our Organization's seventy-fifth anniversary with a stronger mandate that reaffirms the values of our Charter and our important mandate to uphold peace and security for all.
