Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Once
again, we welcome the presence of the Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
and thank her for introducing her twenty-second report
on Darfur, Sudan, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).

As acknowledged by the Prosecutor in her powerful
report, it is unacceptable that 10 years after the referral
of that case to the Court, the humanitarian crisis in the
region remains highly alarming due, inter alia, to the
lack of adequate accountability and cooperation to that
end. My country reiterates its categorical condemnation
of the serious crimes against civilians cited in the
report, all of which are cited in various resolutions
of the Council. These include aerial bombardments,
sexual and gender-based crimes, and attacks on human
rights defenders, humanitarian workers and members
of the peacekeeping operation.

My country feels duty-bound to reiterate and
emphasize the call for full cooperation with the
International Criminal Court and its Prosecutor,
pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). Such cooperation is
required not only of States parties to the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court, but of all States
and relevant regional and international organizations,
in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
resolution 1593 (2005). Such cooperation should be
reflected in diverse aspects, particularly in the ongoing
investigations and the implementation of judicial orders
and rulings.

In point of fact, the responsibility of the Council
under the Charter of the United Nations must not be
circumvented.Therefore, justice for victims of crimes
committed in Darfur cannot be systematically denied,
which - in the light of the crimes committed and given
that a decade later not a single arrest warrant has been
executed - is at the very least inconsistent with the
purpose of referring such situations to the Court.

In that regard, my country welcomes the tireless
efforts of the Prosecutor to pursue her investigations
and the quest for accountability in the Sudan. We
commend the work undertaken day in day out by her
team. The provision of support and resources for the
cases referred by the Council is, in our view, a priority
and critical matter. As we stated on the occasion of
the submission of the tenth briefing of the Prosecutor
on the situation in Libya (see S/PV.7549), the Council
must consider the roll-out of complementary financing
mechanisms that would allow the Prosecutor to carry
out her investigations in an effective and efficient way.
Chile will continue to work to promote a closer
relationship between the Council and the International
Criminal Court, particularly with respect to the two
cases referred. Failure to address the lack of effective
follow-up to these cases represents a failure of our goal
to work for the maintenance of international peace and
security. We call for the adoption of tangible measures
to strengthen due cooperation and to implement the
Security Council resolutions.

