Ms. Mejia Velez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank France and you personally, Madam Ambassador,
for having convened this meeting, which marks the
official closure of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) after 13 long years.

We have mixed feelings today, because now we can
say that it is possible to have United Nations missions
that conclude their mandates and move into new phases,
as in this case, where MINUSTAH is transitioning
to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in
Haiti (MINUJUSTH) in order to strengthen Haitian
institutions and be able to respond adequately to the
challenges that all democracies face, as Ambassador
Regis just noted in his statement.

I would echo the words of appreciation expressed
here in connection with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Ms. Sandra Honore. She
has brought honour to her post and to her gender
through her efforts for the Mission, her leadership
and her commitment. Above all I would stress, as the
Ambassador just stated, the work she has done in recent
years, which has promoted coordinated efforts with
the national authorities, the Government and Haitian
society, including in difficult periods of political
instability, in which the commitment of all sectors and
national ownership were key. I thank Ms. Honore and
her team and all her predecessors, some of whom paid
with their lives in that effort.

Colombia endorses the statement delivered by
the representative of Peru on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Haiti. We are convinced of the value of
the role played by MINUSTAH in guaranteeing and
ensuring stability and security in the country up to a
point of no return, whose logical consequence was to
develop and transition towards a quest for justice and
the strengthening of the rule of law. As President Juan
Manuel Santos said in this very Chamber when we held
the presidency of the Council in 2012, this is a natural
transition, a transition from a peacekeeping operation
to a genuine operation focused on development.

The actions undertaken to ensure that the Haitian
people have a strengthened and professional national
police force have the full support of Latin America, as
has been made clear here. The Colombian Government
will continue to contribute our men and women
police officers and to provide training in our country,
focusing in particular on the training of Haitian women
police officers, who will undoubtedly play a key role
in the coexistence and security of their communities,
within the framework of the strategic development plan
established by the Haitian National Police.

If we all pool our efforts to preserve the progress
made and overcome the tremendous challenges and
obstacles that remain, particularly in the area of
economic and social development, with the ongoing
support of the country team, we are sure that the
brave people of Haiti, with whom Colombia has stood
since their independence, will be able to reach their
maximum potential.

