Mr. Pamir (Turkey): Ever since the question of
Iraq entered its present phase, Turkey has been
unequivocal in its commitment to the principles that
continue to govern its 80-year-old relationship with its
southern neighbour. Likewise, Turkey has actively
supported the wide-ranging quest for a peaceful
solution of the Iraqi crisis, and we have been at the
forefront of the regional initiatives in that vein. More
recently, the Istanbul Declaration, carrying the
signatures of the regional countries, called on the Iraqi
leadership to move irreversibly and sincerely towards
assuming its responsibilities in restoring peace and
stability in the region.

At about the same time, my Government let the
Iraqi authorities at all levels know directly of our dire
assessment of the unfolding events. We told them that
Security Council resolution 1441 (2002) can in no way
be construed as other than an unambiguous signal of
what it said in writing.

Our efforts were geared to strengthen not the
tone, but the substance, of the message that these were
indeed last warnings; that it was incumbent upon the
Iraqi leadership to do everything in its power to help
the United Nations inspectors to absolve them, once
and for all, of the charge of continuing to produce
weapons of mass destruction and of continuing to
conceal whatever it had of that nature, especially those
biological and chemical agents that remained
unaccounted for.
Today, we continue to look for the same thing: a
peaceful solution. We are looking for a solution that
will not require military involvement, while reassuring
the world that there are no lurking dangers whatsoever
of the sort that Security Council resolution 1441 (2002)
deals with. In that vein, yesterday's European Union
summit declaration should be seen as the latest
significant initiative aiming at similar ends.

I happen to speak on behalf of another old
country - founded in 1071, precisely five years after
the French, according to Mr. Straw, founded Britain in
1066. And this old country has every reason to be
worried. Because, along with the people of Iraq and
other neighbouring countries, it is Turkey which has
been receiving the raw impact of instability to its
south. We cannot observe what is taking place in this
oldest part of the world with any degree of
indifference.

When, in 1991, for instance, nearly 500,000
refugees entered Turkey in distress, many old countries
of Europe were loath to accept more than a mere 20 to
90 refugees, men, women and children. Throughout the
1990s, Thomas Friedman and others talked and wrote
about Amazon tribesmen watching satellite television
and demanding New York prices for their ounces of
gold. Literature, both scholarly and shoddy, about
globalization, extolling the beneficial effects of that
process, abounded all over the world. And, throughout
that decade, my country, for the first time in 1,000
years, was not able to trade to its south, because of the
sanctions imposed on Iraq. Instead, we had to fight and
lose tens of thousands of our most promising
generation to contain and finally eradicate terrorism of
the worst sort. Time has shown the truth.

Today, the very talk of war has a debilitating
effect on our already fragile economy. Whatever the
promise of our riches, and of the opportunities that my
country abundantly possesses and that the Turkish
people offer, foreign investors and other people shy
away from the manifold uncertainties that seem to
haunt the region.

Clearly, the Turkish people have every reason and
right to desire intensely to see an end to this crisis -
and, of course, a peaceful one. But even today, in spite
of all I have been recounting, there are those in some
quarters who would tell us that Turkey has an agenda
with regard to Iraq. I would remind them of the Turkish
proverb cautioning against those anglers who prefer
murky waters. I am sure other languages have their
equivalent warning against those who do not want you
to see what they are actually seeking to achieve.

Turkey has no agenda other than reaffirming the
territorial integrity and political unity of Iraq and
defending the rights of all its people - Arab, Kurdish,
Turcoman, Assyrian, Chaldean and others - to live in
security, at peace with the world and in peace among
themselves, as citizens of a country collectively
benefiting from its riches.

We continue to hope that the Council will remain
the focal point. Iraq must fully comply with its
disarmament obligations. The international pressure
exerted to that end should be pursued forthwith. The
Iraqi authorities should be keenly aware that time is of
the essence. More important, we should recognize that
intense diplomatic efforts backed by a credible force
posture still seem to be, especially in this case, the
most plausible means to achieve progress. After all, the
immediate, unconditional, and complete disarmament
of Iraq is still the serious concern confronting
international peace and security that it has been since
1991.

In that connection, we wish to commend Mr. Blix
and Mr. ElBaradei for their work and to salute their
efforts towards reaching the peaceful disarmament of
Iraq. We have full confidence in their objectivity and
professionalism. We hope that the recent steps taken by
the Iraqi Government - including allowing
surveillance flights, encouragement of private
interviews without minders in or outside Iraq, and the
provision of additional documentation on outstanding
disarmament issues - will prove to constitute
substantive progress, thus serving the aim of achieving
the long-desired proactive cooperation on the part of
Iraq.

Before I conclude, I wish to underline two
considerations that are foremost in our minds.

The first of these concerns the plight of the Iraqi
people. The people of Turkey have close historical and
cultural ties with them, along with human bonds. We
are cognizant of their difficult situation and dire
humanitarian conditions under the duress of harsh
economic sanctions coupled with the abuse of
resources, which have both gone unabated for years
now. The people of Turkey know very well that they
will continue to be their neighbours, next year, the year
after and forever.

Secondly, Turkey attaches utmost importance to
the unity and coherence of the Security Council. As we
enter the corridor leading to this Chamber, we see the
replica of the Kadesh Agreement, written in cuneiform
on a great stone. It is a gift of Turkey to the United
Nations, in fact, a gift of the Turkish soil, which has
seen the dawn and rise of many empires, from the
Hittites to the Ottoman. The original of this great stone
of the Kadesh Agreement is in Turkey. It was signed
between the Egyptians and the Hittites in 1270 BC,
that is, some 3,300 years ago, and it attests to the first-
ever written agreement between two States.

Indeed, the Security Council being the only tool
humanity has been able to achieve after more than
three millennia of diplomacy, it is incumbent upon the
members of the Council to let collective wisdom
prevail. Bridging whatever gap there may be in the
Council will maintain the unity and the legitimacy of
this body while proving its relevance in these critical
times.

For Iraq, it is the moment of truth. Iraq should
now act with conviction and in a manner convincing
for others in this defining hour.

