Ms. Sirkin: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to address the Security Council regarding
attacks on health facilities and personnel and their
impact on civilians in Syria. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock just provided insight into the horrific
humanitarian crisis taking place in north-west Syria as
we speak here today.

My name is Susannah Sirkin, and I am the Director
of Policy at Physicians for Human Rights, which is
an international non-governmental organization that
brings the expertise of science and medicine to the
defence of human rights. Our researchers at Physicians
for Human Rights have been rigorously corroborating,
documenting and reporting on violations in the Syrian
conflict for the past eight years.

Since the beginning of the conflict in Syria, the
ongoing assault on health-care facilities and personnel
has been a defining factor and a deliberate, inhumane
and illegal strategy of war. When hospitals are
destroyed, the loss is far greater than the buildings.
When medical workers are killed, the human toll is
not just their lives but also the exponential number of
people who suffer and die without medical treatment.
Our years of meticulously gathered documentation
lay bare the blatant disregard for civilian life in the
Syria conflict, as revealed by the Syrian Government's
repeated attacks since 2011 on health facilities and
personnel. The numbers I am about to share with the
Council are an undercounting, because we apply a
conservative methodology.

From March 2011 through July 2019, Physicians for
Human Rights corroborated 578 attacks on at least 350
separate facilities, and we documented the killing of
890 medical personnel. Five hundred and twenty one of
those attacks - 91 per cent - were perpetrated by the
Syrian Government and allied forces - 297 by Syrian
Government forces and 224 by either Russian or Syrian
Government forces.

Each of the attacks on a functioning health
facility is a war crime. Taken together, those assaults
constitute crimes against humanity. The widespread
and systematic destruction of health facilities and the
killing of hundreds of doctors, nurses, pharmacists
and paramedics by Syria and its Russian allies has the
apparent aim to break people's spirits, as one Syrian
doctor put it in the powerful new documentary For
Sama, which I hope all members of the Council will
have the chance to see, if they have not already.

That repeated tactic of terror turns places of safety
and life into danger zones and death traps. For years,
the Secretary-General has routinely shared those data
with the Security Council. They have been publicized
to the world again and again. Yet, appallingly, those
crimes continue to be committed with utter impunity.

In Aleppo, Physicians for Human Rights has
documented 161 attacks on health-care facilities, with
54 in 2016 alone. Hospitals attacked then by Syria with
its Russian allies forced tens of thousands of civilians
into flight and literally killed patients who were
stripped of life-saving care. And now, three years later,
the world is watching - silently - the same escalation
of brutality in Idlib and north-western Syria, which
could result in the worst humanitarian crisis of the
twenty-first Century.

On 29 April, as we just heard, the Syrian
Government and its Russian ally started their military
escalation targeting Idlib and northern Hamah. Since
then, Physicians for Human Rights has received reports
of 46 attacks on health-care facilities, and so far, using
its rigorous methodology, we have confirmed 16 of
them and are still counting.

From May to 15 July, the number of newly
internally displaced persons who are trapped in this so-
called demilitarized area has reached close to 500,000,
bringing the total there to at least 1.3 million. There are
very likely more of them. Many of the families now in
Idlib have already been displaced - four, five or more
times - throughout the relentless waves of violence in
the Syrian conflict. People in Idlib today, as we speak,
have nowhere else to go.

Many of the health-care facilities in that area have
been forced out of service, but - shockingly - we
see that agreements coordinated by the United Nations
to notify all parties as to the locations of health-care
facilities, which are intended as a strategy to protect
them - as we just heard from Under-Secretary General
Lowcock - have been violated again and again. The
Syrian and Russian Governments know the exact
location of most health-care facilities, and yet they
continue targeting them.

The courageous remaining medical workers are
providing life-saving care while being bombed, and
doctors tell us that hospitals, which should be the
safest places in Idlib, are the exact opposite. They are
targets. At least 14 facilities have been hit, according
to the Syrian American Medical Society, despite
sharing their coordinates with belligerents through the
so-called deconfliction mechanism of Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), which,
we just heard, is failing.

Physicians for Human Rights has documented
attacks, for example, those of 10 July on the Saraqeb
Primay health-care centre and the Maarat Al-Numan
central hospital - which, as we just heard, has been
supported by the United Nations and continues to
function as a hospital despite attacks. Both facilities
had shared their coordinates. Three surgical units were
attacked on the same day in early May. And the list
goes on.

In 2016 when the Council adopted resolution 2286
(2016), on protecting health care in conflict, then-
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon stated:

"[w]hen so-called surgical strikes end up hitting
surgical wards, something is deeply wrong;

"[e]ven wars have rules;

"[t]he Council and Member States must do more
than condemn such attacks. They must use every
ounce of influence to press parties to respect their
obligations" (S/PV7685, p. 3).

The Council's current collective inaction is a clear
derogation of its responsibility to protect. Governments
failed to heed the warnings of this criminal strategy of
war that has devastated all manner of infrastructure,
community and culture. Civilians in Syria have been
let down by the Security Council's failure to act, by
individual Governments that were in positions to stop
the carnage, as well as - sadly - by United Nations
agencies hamstrung by rules that have enabled the
perpetrators to flout the most basic humanitarian
agreements with zero consequence.

We are calling on Syria and Russia to immediately
stop attacks on hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure. We are adding to the call of those
children. And we are calling on all parties to the
conflict to cease violence against civilians. We are
urging the Secretary-General to launch an immediate
investigation into attacks on health-care facilities
and personnel in Idlib, northern Hamah and western
Aleppo, and investigate the failure of the deconfliction
mechanism. All parties must cooperate fully and ensure
unimpeded access to investigators.

We call on all Governments, everyone in this
Chamber and people of conscience everywhere to do
everything in their power to end the slaughter and
protect the civilians cornered in Syria. The continued
failure of the Security Council to end impunity for
those crimes is a blight on the credibility of this organ
to carry out its core mandate. Continued inaction sends
a message of abandonment and erosion of humanitarian
law, not only to those in Syria but to all people subjected
to war crimes and crimes against humanity.

I thank Council members for the opportunity
to address them today. I would like to add that we at
Physicians for Human Rights pay special tribute to
health professionals, to those still alive and providing
care under fire, to those who were forced to flee and to
all those who gave up their lives, for their bravery and
commitment to save lives.

