I thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mr. Filippo Grandi, for his informative briefing. China appreciates the tireless efforts made by the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in helping refugees in various locations. Today UNHCR issued its annual report, Global Trends: Forced Displacement in 2019. According to what we heard from Mr. Grandi, the situation of refugees globally remains worrisome. A complex range of crises have led to a constant increase in refugee flows. Humanitarian needs are also on the rise but are not being adequately met owing to social and economic difficulties, including the coronavirus disease pandemic. Against that backdrop, I should like to highlight the following points. First, the issue of refugees should be tackled in a multilateral framework. The refugee issue is a global challenge that requires a global response. We need to enhance cooperation among and strengthen the role of multilateral institutions such as the United Nations and UNHCR. We need to work in compliance with the relevant international law and implement the commitments made under the global compact on refugees. Developing countries host 85 per cent of global refugees, and their burden must be shared and alleviated. We call on the international community, especially those actors with the capacity and responsibility to do so, to scale up support and assistance to host countries and communities. It is also important to eliminate xenophobia, racism and discrimination against all refugees. Secondly, we must address the root causes of refugee flows and displacement. Most refugees come from conflict situations that are on the Security Council's agenda. We must take a holistic approach and deploy broader efforts on peace and development. We need to make a greater investment in conflict prevention and resolution, peacebuilding, poverty eradication and development cooperation. Only in this way can we create the conditions necessary for refugees to return and enable them to enjoy a peaceful and prosperous life in their home countries. The various United Nations bodies should contribute according to their respective mandates and achieve synergy in that regard. The Security Council should promote dispute settlement by peaceful means and find political solutions to hotspot issues on its agenda. Many civilians become refugees when their home countries are dragged into conflict through the use of force unauthorized by the Security Council. Such violations of the Charter of the United Nations should not happen again. Thirdly, we must uphold the principles of objectivity and neutrality. In dealing with refugee matters, the international community and UNHCR must stay objective and neutral and avoid the use of double standards and politicization. That is key to the credibility of the international refugee-protection mechanism. That mechanism should not be used as a shield for terrorists and criminals or as a tool for interference in the internal affairs of other countries. China has been working actively with the international community to address the global challenge of refugees by adopting a people-centred approach. We are promoting the political settlement of disputes, participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations and providing humanitarian and development assistance to people in need. We have maintained good cooperative relations with UNHCR and are willing to further strengthen such relations.
