Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Antonio
Guterres for his very instructive briefing. We are
grateful to him and to the staff of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their dedication and their leadership in
protecting and assisting refugees.

The ongoing scourge of refugees and internally
displaced persons resulting from conflict and from
natural disaster is a matter of grave concern today.
Worldwide, tens of millions of refugees and displaced
persons live in extremely difficult conditions, because
of overcrowding in camps, volatile security and
humanitarian conditions, extreme poverty and disease,
not to mention numerous and repeated violations of
their most basic rights, in some cases by the very
people responsible for protecting them.

Attacks against camps for refugees and displaced
persons, the militarization of such camps, the forcible
recruitment of children in the camps and increasing
sexual violence are simply unacceptable and demand
vigorous action on the part of the entire international
community.
The tragedy of refugees is closely related to the
question of international peace and security and
therefore requires special attention by the Security
Council, in particular with respect to the mandates of
peacekeeping operations. These should be continually
adapted on the ground in order to ensure better

protection for refugees and displaced persons. Here, it
would be appropriate to strengthen the capacity of
peacekeeping operations, and indeed to review their
configuration, as is currently being done with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is also necessary
to ensure that their personnel are given appropriate
training in human rights and ethics, in order to protect
against abuses of the rights of refugees and internally
displaced persons.

States first and foremost, and also parties to
conflict, bear the responsibility to protect civilians,
including refugees and internally displaced persons -
particularly the most vulnerable among them: women
and children. They must create conditions conducive to
protecting the rights of refugees, in accordance with
international instruments in force. This process also
entails strengthening the existing legal foundations and
establishing favourable conditions for stability,
sustainable peace, building the rule of law and good
governance and promoting preventive diplomacy.

Unfortunately, most host countries are themselves
facing difficulties. They do not always have the
resources they need to shoulder their responsibilities.
That is why the international community should
provide them with all necessary support. In that regard,
we wish once again to commend the commitment and
leadership of UNHCR. Such collective action must be
complemented by regional organizations and bodies in
order to ensure an integrated, inclusive and
participatory approach.

Africa, in which the largest number of refugees
and displaced persons are located, views this issue as a
true problem of development. It is thus a challenge that
must be met as quickly as possible. That is why the
forthcoming adoption of a convention on protection of
and assistance to displaced persons will be a milestone
in mobilizing African countries. We are certain that our
continent will always be able to rely on UNHCR.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to endorse
the views expressed by many other speakers, in support
of refugees and displaced persons in Gaza.
