Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to begin by hailing your presence with us here
today, Mr. President. We thank you for having
travelled, for a second time this month, to participate in
our work. I wish to thank Ambassador De Mistura in
particular for his work throughout all this time, and for
the work of his colleagues, who together have
contributed to the well-being of the people of Iraq. I
thank him for presenting the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2009/284). I greet Ambassador Al Bayati
warmly and thank him for his valuable briefing.

As Ambassador De Mistura has indicated, there
has been significant progress in Iraq in recent months
in different areas. In particular, we are happy to hear
that the Government of Iraq has strengthened the
electoral processes, based on the experience garnered.
We hope the upcoming elections in Kurdistan and the
parliamentary elections will be inclusive and
transparent and will include the active participation of
women. These electoral processes are valuable
opportunities, as the Secretary-General said, to
strengthen local governing and to legitimize the
authority of the State throughout the entirety of Iraqi
territory.

Costa Rica wishes to urge the political leaders of
Iraq to continue their work to promote progress for all
their population by way of equitable mechanisms. We
call on them to ensure that all of the fruit of Iraq's
enormous wealth is distributed among the population.

Along these lines, we urge the United Nations
team in Iraq, as well as the international donors, to
continue to work closely with the Iraqi authorities in
the creation of a normative environment that allows for
the implementation of the necessary reforms in the
public sector and the necessary regulation of the
private sector, so as to facilitate the achievement of the
development goals. Economic, social and political
development also presupposes that governments be
receptive, transparent and responsible in all levels Vis-
a-vis their citizens. It is in this context that we believe
that in order to optimize the benefits of public
investment, it is necessary to strengthen the anti-
corruption policies.

Costa Rica is convinced that improvements in
security cannot be made at the expense of fundamental
freedoms or the full enjoyment and protection of the
human rights on the part of the population of Iraq. We
note with great concern the observations contained in
the most recent report on the human rights situation in
Iraq prepared by UNAMI. We regret that recent
security improvements have not been accompanied by
a strengthening of the rule of law or by a systematic
approach to combating impunity. We are concerned
that despite the establishment of the Independent High
Commission for Human Rights, sufficient budgetary
funds have not been allocated to that body to enable it
to begin its work in 2009. We hope that the Iraqi
authorities will swiftly honour their commitments to
strengthen and broaden the protection of the rights of
the Iraqi population by establishing independent
institutions to monitor and supervise human rights, as
Ambassador Al Bayati stated during the previous
Council debate on UNAMI and reiterated today.

Costa Rica urges that it is of fundamental
importance that Iraq uphold its commitments to human
rights by ratifying key international instruments and

ensuring the effective implementation of those it has
already ratified, in particular the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women.

Before concluding, I wish to put on record our
concern with regard to the reported intention to
reinstate the practice of executing convicted
individuals in Iraq. My country, which abolished the
death penalty in 1877 and recently supported an
initiative in the General Assembly promoting a global
moratorium on executions, respectfully urges the
Government of Iraq to suspend such executions. We
are similarly concerned by the paragraphs of the report
noting the lack of reliable information on the prison
population and the overcrowding of detention centres.
We share the concern expressed in the report regarding
the absence of guarantees required by standards with
respect to human rights and fair trials. We should also
like to register our concern at the persistence of
interrogation procedures that, according to the report,
could be tantamount to torture. We hope that the
Government of Iraq will translate its political will into
concrete actions, that it will ratify the Convention
Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional
Protocol, as well as the Second Optional Protocol to
the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights, Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty.

