Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to once again thank the Under-
Secretaries-General, Mr. Lacroix and Ms. DiCarlo, for
their detailed briefings.

With regard to the sovereignty of the Golan
Heights, I believe many members of the Security
Council have clearly expressed their positions, in line
with the relevant resolutions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly, which is that Israel
does not have sovereignty over the territories that it has
occupied since 1967. That position fully aligns with
the Government of Equatorial Guinea's, which is long-
standing and unwavering. It is furthermore in line with
the position of the African Union.

We must be aware that changing the status of
that territory would constitute a direct violation of
resolution 242 (1967). The international community
recognizes that the Golan Heights is occupied territory,
as recognized by the General Assembly and the
Security Council in the various resolutions they have
adopted, which stipulate that Israel must withdraw
from that territory.

On the other hand, Equatorial Guinea deeply values
the high-profile work being done by the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF) in its 44
years of existence. Its role and mandate in maintaining
stability in the area of separation is most appreciated.

The regional context remains delicate and fragile
due to the internal conflict in Syria, a part of which is
taking place near the area of separation and the border
between Israel and Syria, which sometimes leads to
crossfire between the two sides, with UNDOF often
being caught in-between the offensives.

We note that UNDOF's operational environment
has undergone some changes in recent months owing to
the fact that the Syrian Government has retaken control
of areas that had previously been occupied by various
armed groups. There is no doubt that this will have an
impact on and implications for UNDOF's capacity to
implement its mandate, including its full operationality
on the Bravo side. To that end, the Council must urge
parties to stress the need for UNDOF to continue
using the Qunaytirah crossing, without impediment of
any sort.

Along these lines, we would recall here that as
military offensives in the area of operations undermine
the full implementation of the Disengagement of
Forces Agreement, the Security Council must continue
resolutely to call on the parties involved to exercise
greater moderation and show greater prudence in
all their activities around the border so as to prevent
any deterioration of the situation, which is already
quite volatile.

In that context, it is important not only that the
Syrian Government and the armed groups operating
in the areas of separation refrain from any action
that could have a cross-border impact, but also that
the Israeli Government refrain from any violation
of the Disengagement Agreement and do everything
in its power not to further fuel tensions in the area.
The goal here is to prevent a fresh escalation of
tensions - voluntary or involuntary - in the area.

We should also recall here that in keeping with
resolution 2450 (2018), there should be no non-UNDOF
military forces in the area of separation. In that
regard, I wish to underscore the need for the parties
to withdraw all of their military equipment and armed
personnel from the area of separation in order to avert
the possibility of an increase in hostilities.

Finally, we recognize that UNDOF operations have
been limited in recent years by the Syrian conflict and
cannot function regularly or normally on the Bravo
side. This underscores once again the importance of
reaching a lasting political solution in Syria and thus
relaunch peace negotiations between Israel and Syria.

