The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Plurinational State of Bolivia.

Bolivia is grateful for the briefings made by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and the
Head of Mission of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya, Mr. Martin Kobler, and by Ambassador Olof
Skoog, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya. We take this opportunity to
reiterate our support for the sensitive duties with which
they have been entrusted.

We commend the work of regional and international
actors to enhance coordination efforts in support of
the political process and help Libya in its transition
to democracy, such as the meeting held in Brussels on
23 May by the European Union, the African Union, the
League of Arab States and the United Nations.

We are also especially alarmed by the plight of
internally displaced persons. According to a report
issued by the International Organization for Migration
on 2 June, the more than 250,000 internally displaced
persons are, to a large extent, the result of ongoing
clashes among the various armed groups. Unfortunately,
that is a clear illustration of the widespread violence
in Libya. Similarly, we are very concerned about the
incident that occurred on 18 May at Brak Al-Shati,
which resulted in summary executions, in flagrant
violation of international humanitarian law. We remind
all actors and parties concerned that the only solution to
the conflict is through a political transition, which has
already begun and must continue. We therefore urge
them to stop the fighting and relinquish any approach
that calls for the use of weapons as a method to settle
this or any other conflict.

In conclusion, we believe that such developments
should encourage the actors and parties involved
in the Libyan Political Agreement to redouble their
efforts and take a decisive and resolute step towards
agreement and consensus, which would enable them
to conclude a peaceful, inclusive and orderly political
transition, by and for the Libyan people, which respects
the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Libya.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Libya.

