Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): We congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your initiative to have a second debate on
the role of United Nations peacekeeping in disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR). We would also
like to thank Malaysia for introducing this item in the
Council last July. We hope that over time, with the
discussion of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, when United Nations delegates see the term
"UN-DDR" they will no longer associate it solely with
the United Nations Delegates' Dining Room.

The fact that we are talking about DDR today as a
normal aspect of peacekeeping operations shows how far
peacekeeping has evolved. In the early days of
peacekeeping, the sole purpose of a peacekeeping
operation was to provide a buffer between two combating
countries after they had decided to make peace. If these
combatants attempted to breach the peace, the United
Nations peacekeeping operation would merely report the
breach without seeking to enforce the ceasefire. Indeed,
the pride of traditional United Nations peacekeeping
forces was that they could do their job without using
force and, often, without arms. The Blue Helmets served
as a true symbol of peace.

It is truly amazing how much things have changed
since those halcyon days. Indeed, United Nations
peacekeepers have been deployed in such a variety of
roles that it may be legitimate to ask whether the term
"peacekeeping" has a distinct or singular meaning. The
Secretary-General's initiative in creating a new panel
under the leadership of Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi to study all
aspects of peacekeeping is therefore timely. Significantly,
this project is called "peace operations". The use of this
term implicitly acknowledges that the concept of
peacekeeping may no longer be adequate to cover all the
work that the United Nations is doing now under the
umbrella of peacekeeping. We would like to note here
that peacekeeping operations are traditionally launched
under Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter, but
sometimes under Chapter VII or in between. It may be
useful for Mr. Brahimi's panel to assess the criteria for
creating peacekeeping operations under Chapter VI or
Chapter VII, because at this stage we are not clear as to
what the criteria are.

DDR is, therefore, clearly a new dimension of
peacekeeping. However, when we compare this new
dimension with the traditional work done by the Blue
Helmets in the past, we must acknowledge that
disarmament and demobilization are inherently difficult
and dangerous operations. Most people who have been
carrying guns for years have either been shot at or have
been shooting at others. Guns have become an essential

 

part of their existence. Indeed, many feel naked without
them. They will not part with their guns easily. One clear
example of this can be found in Sierra Leone. In his new
book, Deliver Us From Evil, William Shawcross writes:

"The RUF [Revolutionary United Front] was part of
a post-cold-war phenomenon - a non-ideological
guerrilla movement. As elsewhere in Africa, AK-47s
gave dispossessed young men more money and more
raison d'etre - even if it was only senseless
violence - than peace."

But it is not only the United Nations that has had problems
with disarmament. Even peace processes outside the United
Nations framework - for example, the Northern Ireland
peace process - have had similar difficulties with
disarmament.

In reviewing these problems, we asked ourselves one
simple question: which United Nations operations have
successfully carried out disarmament or demobilization?
The failures are of course, well known. Somalia is the best
example, although there the United Nations has been
unfairly blamed for serious errors in judgement by amajor
Power acting independently of United Nations control.
Cambodia has rightfully been hailed as a peacekeeping
success story. In an article entitled "The Nightmare is
Over", which appeared in the New York Times on 12
October 1993, William Shawcross wrote: "Let there be no
doubt about it. Success is the right word" to describe the
United Nations operation in Cambodia.

And indeed, a recent conference on peacekeeping in

Singapore made the following observations:

"From the start, UNTAC [United Nations Transitional
Authority in Cambodia] was conceived as a
comprehensive and ambitious operation, with a good
mix of both peacekeeping and peace-building
elements, including human rights, the return and
rehabilitation of refugees, civil administration, civilian

police and electoral assistance."

However, the same conference in Singapore also observed
that

"UNTAC was, however, not a complete success.
Ceasefire was not fully realized."

And these are the crucial words:
"Disarmament and demobilization of soldiers did not
take place. This was a major reason why the ability
to implement the other aspects of the mandate was
eroded."

Clearly, even in relatively successful peacekeeping
operations, DDR can be a problematic element.

Indeed, if one reads the report of the Secretary-
General carefully, the only clear example of success that
is frequently mentioned is Mozambique, although in some
aspects this, too, was seen or described as a qualified
success. There may be other success stories, but we must
confess that we did not find them in the report. What we
did find in the report, however, was sound
commonsensical advice on the key factors that could lead
to success in disarmament and demobilization. These
included the political will of parties to the conflict to
abide by the peace agreement; full cooperation of the
whole affected population, including both combatants and
non-combatants; a clear and robust mandate for DDR in
the peacekeeping operation; strong political support from
the Security Council and the international community; the
swift provision of ample resources for DDR; and the swift
deployment and considerable deterrent capacity of the
peacekeeping operation.

There is one particular paragraph of the Secretary-
General's report is worth reading in full:

"The ability of an operation to reassure
demobilizing combatants of their security may
require considerable deterrent capacity; this should
be available as swiftly as possible with deployment
of an operation. If an operation arrives in the field
without the necessary capacity, this not only hobbles
its practical effectiveness, but undermines its
political viability. Credibility becomes a wasting
asset unless support is forthcoming to sustain it, and
where an operation is called upon to discharge a
robust role in ensuring security, it is particularly
important that well-equipped elements be deployed
quickly. A mission that has been perceived as strong
from the beginning of its deployment is far less
likely to be tested than one which is perceived as
initially vulnerable or ineffective." (S/2000/10], para. 67)

Therefore, the Secretary-General's report essentially
indicates that a long list of factors are required for a
successful DDR process. The logical conclusion that
emerges from the report is that the success of DDR

 

depends on the overall conceptual soundness and viability
of the peacekeeping operation that is launched. DDR on its
own cannot be the crucial variable to determine a
peacekeeping operation's success. A conceptually unsound
peacekeeping operation cannot be rescued by good DDR,
but a conceptually sound peacekeeping operation can be
assisted by DDR.

A simple analogy may help explain this point. Each
time the Council launches a new peacekeeping operation,
we should compare it to the launch of a new sailing boat.
Preferably, of course, it should be launched in propitious or
favourable weather, but we are sure that the Council is
aware of this. Whether the boat sinks or sails after the
launch will depend on the conceptual and practical
soundness of its construction. Poorly designed boats are
more likely to sink. They are handicapped even before they
are launched.

The elements of DDR serve as three additional sails
on such a boat. On a well-designed boat, with favourable
winds, they can help. On a poorly designed boat, even the
best sails will make no difference. Hence, one key point
that we hope to put across today is that each time we
discuss DDR, we should do so in a holistic manner: look at
the total picture of the boat and not just the sails.

We make this point here because the record of the
Security Council in launching peacekeeping operations has
been a little mixed. Many successful operations have been
launched. The success stories are well known and lauded,
but there have also been failures. This is normal. The
Security Council is a human institution. Like all human
creations, it has also erred, but, unlike other human
institutions, it does not freely or frankly discuss its failures.
Take the two most recent peacekeeping operations that
have been launched: in Kosovo and East Timor. The
operation launched in Kosovo clearly appears to be
conceptually unsound. The reasons are obvious. No
explanation is needed. The daily reports we read of the
trials and travails of United Nations and other peacekeepers
in Kosovo confirm that all is not well. The current phase of
the East Timor operations, by contrast, appears to be a
conceptually sound operation, even though we have to
concede that the initial phase under the United Nations
Mission in East Timor had flaws. We hope that the rest of
the East Timor operation will continue to do well.

Our role here is not to be negative. We are acutely
aware, as are most in this Chamber, that most peacekeeping
operations are not launched under perfect circumstances.
Given the nature of the problems that they have to deal
with, they are inevitably launched in messy and often
difficult situations. But these obvious difficulties make it
even more imperative for the Council to identify the
critical factors that will create success stories rather than
failures out of new peacekeeping operations.

Peacekeeping operations, as we indeed noted in our
previous statement to the Council, are once again
becoming a growth industry. The number of peacekeepers
reached a high of about 80,000 in 1994, but then declined
to around 10,000 in 1998-99. The number is now on the
verge of going up significantly again. In the mid-1990s,
we went through one wave of disillusionment that led to
a sharp cutback in peacekeeping operations. How do we
prevent another wave of disillusionment? This is the
underlying concern that explains the remarks we are
making to the Council today.

Hence, we applaud the greater attention that the
Council is paying to many key dimensions of
peacekeeping operations, including DDR. We also value
the attention that the Council is paying to the
demobilization of child soldiers in this context. In this
regard, we welcome the progress made in child protection
and note that senior child protection advisers have been
included in two recent peacekeeping operations in Africa
to help ensure that protection of children's rights remains
a priority throughout. We hope that the Secretariat and
other key United Nations agencies, like the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations
Children's Fund, will provide greater support to the office
of Under-Secretary-General Olara Otunnu, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict.

We believe that all this attention needs to be woven
into a holistic approach that the Council should take
towards new peacekeeping operations. Political realities
often dictate both the location and nature of the new
peacekeeping operations that are created. But these
political realities have to be balanced with a careful,
professional evaluation of the soundness of the operations
that are to be launched. Most of us would be alarmed if
sailing boats were built and launched without professional
advice having been heeded. We should be equally
alarmed if new peacekeeping operations are launched in
a similar manner.

