Mr. Mazeiks (Latvia): I thank the Secretary-
General and the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
as well as Ms. Vian Dakhil and His Beatitude Louis
Raphael I Sako, for their statements. I also thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this important debate on the widespread and
systematic targeting of persons belonging to ethnic and
religious minorities in the Middle East.

Latvia aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union.

In the twenty-first century, the world is experiencing
new and emerging challenges in the form of the rise of
radicalization and violent extremism. Today's debate
with a special focus on the vulnerable groups affected
by that scourge in the Middle East region is particularly
timely and pertinent. The unjustifiable Violent attacks
of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL)/
Daesh and other armed groups against ethnic, religious
minority groups and other vulnerable groups, including
women, children and the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender and intersex community, are shockingly
widespread and extremely severe.

Christians, Yazidis, Kurds, Turkmen, Shabaks,
Sunnis, Shiites and others are deliberately targeted only
because of their religious or ethnic origin. According
to the reports, the atrocities committed by ISIL/Daesh
include killings of civilians, torture, abductions,
rapes, slavery and trafficking of women and children,
as well as the forced recruitment of children. Sexual
Violence has been part of ISIL's strategy of spreading
terror, persecuting minority groups and suppressing
and forcibly displacing communities that oppose its
ideology. Such grave human rights violations may
amount to war crimes, crimes against humanity
or genocide, as reported by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. They cannot be
tolerated by the international community.

Latvia strongly condemns all forms of Violence,
persecution, discrimination and intolerance based
on religion or belief, ethnic origin or other grounds.
We condemn in the strongest terms the unspeakable
atrocities committed by ISIL/Daesh and other terrorist
groups, in particular those against vulnerable groups.
The destruction of religious and historical sites,
characterized by UNESCO as a campaign of cultural
cleansing, is also deplorable.

The human rights violations and abuses committed
by ISIL/Daesh and other armed groups against civilian
populations in the Middle East must be properly
investigated and the perpetrators for such crimes must
be held accountable. It is the primary responsibility
of States to protect their Civilian populations and to
promote and protect human rights, including those of
persons belonging to religious and ethnic minorities
and other vulnerable groups.

Concerted international action is vital to counter
Violent extremism. Latvia has therefore joined the
global coalition to counter ISIL. It is also important
to address the underlying causes of violent extremism
and religious intolerance and to implement preventive
measures to reduce radicalization and recruitment,
especially of young people. The humanitarian needs of
forcibly displaced populations, primarily of religious
and ethnic minority groups, as well as support to
victims released from ISIL/Daesh captivity, including
social reintegration and the medical and psychological
care of women and children, are the areas that require
our greatest attention and more coordinated efforts.

Religious and ethnic minority groups living in
the Middle East have the inalienable right to continue
living in their historical areas, where they have
coexisted peacefully for centuries. Peaceful, inclusive
societies, rich in their diversity, must be at the centre
of global efforts to promote tolerance in the region and
to counter the transnational scourge of terrorism and
Violent extremism.

