Mr. Alshamsi (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in Arabic): I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
important debate on youth and peace and security, and
for your continued support for youth issues. We also
thank the Secretary-General's Envoy on Youth and the
lead author of the progress study on youth and peace
and security (see S/2018/86) for their briefings.

Thanks to the leadership of the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan, resolution 2250 (2015) was adopted three
years ago. Since then, significant efforts have been made
to mainstream and highlight the positive work of young
people in issues ofpeace and security. The United Arab
Emirates welcomes the efforts that led to the progress
study and commends its participatory approach. We
find the study especially valuable in addressing long-
held stereotypical beliefs and ideas concerning youth,
and called for a more detailed and balanced approach
when crafting policies related to young people.
The United Arab Emirates attaches great
importance to developing a more comprehensive notion
of peace, with a focus on the prevention of extremism
and violence, while addressing the root causes of
those issues. The study highlights the fact that in our
quest for peace and security, young are indispensable
allies. I would like to underscore the importance of
the work of women and girls. We see that the agendas
of youth, peace and security and of women and peace
and security overlap in several areas. We therefore
encourage building on former achievements.

Given the high number of young people who
experience violence worldwide, as highlighted in the
study, and against the backdrop of a region beset by
conflict in recent years, the United Arab Emirates
looks to its youth and the youth of the region to become
positive drivers of peace. With strong political backing
at the highest level, the United Arab Emirates has
taken concrete steps nationally towards the meaningful
inclusion of youth in decision-making processes. In
2016, the United Arab Emirates appointed a young
female Minister of State for Youth Affairs. Since the
appointment, several mechanisms and initiatives have
been established, including the establishment of youth
councils at every level of Government and the adoption
of a national youth strategy. Those steps underpin an
open policy of engagement that is the cornerstone of
nurturing a peaceful and thriving society.

It is a common understanding that maintaining
peace does not equate to simply ensuring the absence of
violence. The United Arab Emirates is of the View that
many of the challenges in our region cannot be solved
without exploring the potential of young people and their
active involvement. Our role as key policy-makers is to
provide young people with the proper tools for success,
such as good education, competitive job markets, equal
opportunities and a nurturing environment, all of
which, as the progress study illustrates, are among the
most important factors of growth and peace.

In the United Arab Emirates, we take pride in
supporting a tolerant and moderate model that provides
alternatives to the cycles of extremism and violence
in our region, with the aim of unlocking a talented,
creative and innovative generation. At the heart of that
model is a focus on prevention that underpins the stakes
and investments that we have made in pursuing a policy
of engaging and empowering youth. Building on that,
the United Arab Emirates is home to such initiatives as
the Arab Youth Centre, which provides opportunities
for young Arab pioneers in different fields to mobilize
their peers and take part in the sustainable development
of their communities.

In conclusion, it is our duty as Member States to
mainstream and embrace youth in our work at the United
Nations as one of the solutions to reach our goals. The
United Arab Emirates launched the Youth Delegate
Programme in 2016, which involves Emirati youth
in the official United Arab Emirates delegations that
participate in General Assembly meetings, committees
and relevant international forums. Convinced of the
importance of such programmes, we encourage all
States to launch programmes for youth delegates and
enrich the work of the General Assembly with a youth
perspective.

