Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Under-Secretary-
General O'Brien for his report and once again reiterate
our full support for the work he has been tasked with.

The fighting that has resulted in death and
destruction in Syria has now been going on for
more than six years. According to the International
Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs,
about 13.5 million people have been forced to flee their
homes for safety. The Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees has reported that
more than 620,000 people remain under siege in Syria
and about 5 million have fled the country between 2011
and March of this year. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs believes that over the same
period about 6.6 million more people, half of them
children, have been internally displaced within Syria.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains critical.
In April alone, according to the Secretary-General's
report issued on 23 May (S/2017/445), there were
around 30 attacks on medical and educational facilities
and personnel. We are very concerned about the fact
that despite the ceasefire that has been implemented
in accordance with resolution 2336 (2016), attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure by the parties to
the conflict still continue.

Bolivia insists firmly that agreements reached
in the framework of the ceasefire must be abided by
and respected, and we reiterate that all the parties
involved are obliged to ensure the safety and integrity
of everyone caught up in the conflict. We also welcome
the most recent message, on 26 May, from Mr. Zeid
Ra'ad Al Hussein, United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, in which he urged all the parties to
the conflict to take much greater care to distinguish
between legitimate military targets and civilians, and
to fulfil their obligation to protect the population,
saying that

"[t]he same civilians who are suffering from
indiscriminate shelling and summary executions
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant are
also falling victim to the escalating air strikes,
particularly in the northeastern governorates".

On behalf of Bolivia, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation for the work being done to alleviate the
humanitarian crisis facing the Syrian people by the staff
of various humanitarian aid agencies and organizations,
such as the International Committee of the Red Cross,
the Syrian Red Crescent, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, UNICEF
and the International Organization for Migration. We
would also like to highlight the important work that the
Russian centre for the reconciliation of opposing sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic has been doing, both in
ensuring security for the deployment of humanitarian
assistance and in evacuating people from areas where
there have been armed clashes. In that regard, we would
like to remind the parties to the conflict once again that
they must allow unconditional access for humanitarian
assistance. They should ensure and protect its security
and integrity and refrain from targeting humanitarian-
assistance convoys as military objectives. We call
on the parties to the conflict to intensify efforts to
guarantee humanitarian access to besieged and hard-
to-reach areas.

We believe that as long as military tactics take
precedence over politics, there can be no lasting peace
and that the civilian population, especially women and
children, will be exposed to unnecessary suffering as
a result. We also firmly condemn all acts of terrorism
as criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of motive and
wherever, whenever and by whom they are committed.
We reaffirm the importance of ensuring that all States
combat this human scourge by every possible means, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
their other obligations under international law.

Lastly, we reiterate that the only way to resolve
this conflict is through an inclusive political process,
organized and led by the Syrian people, and we
therefore reaffirm our support for the progress that
has been made in the Astana and Geneva meetings and
express our fervent hope that those dialogues can help
us achieve a definitive and lasting peace.

