Mr. Deng (South Sudan): This being my first time
to address the Council in my new capacity as Permanent
Representative of the Republic of South Sudan to the
United Nations, I would like to personally express my
appreciation for this opportunity and to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency this
month.

I would like to thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations for his briefing, and
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Hilde
Johnson and Special Envoy Haile Menkerios for their
hard work in support of peace and security in South
Sudan and Sudan. Furthermore, I would like to express
my appreciation to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for
his comprehensive and balanced report (S/2012/820),
which has just been presented, outlining the successes
in and ongoing challenges to the maintenance of
peace and security between Sudan and South Sudan.
Establishing a comprehensive and sustainable peace
with the Republic of the Sudan is our Government's
number-one priority.

The Republic of South Sudan would also like to
reiterate its appreciation to the members of the Security
Council for their support for the road map established
by the African Union Peace and Security Council on
24 April, and for the importance that this Council
attaches to the leading role that the African Union (AU)
plays in the promotion of peace and security in our
region.

The leaders of the Sudan and South Sudan have
long agreed, as far back as the signing of the Machakos
Protocol in 2002, that war would never represent a
viable solution to end the conflicts between them,
and that negotiation remains the only worthwhile
approach. At the same time, negotiation without end
is in no one's interests. Our two States cannot prosper
or pursue greater development in an atmosphere of
continued uncertainty about their relations. It was for
that reason that the AU road map and resolution 2046
(2012) helpfully established deadlines for resolving all
the outstanding issues between our two States. Both
the AU road map and the resolution created a climate
and an opportunity for our two countries to resolve
those issues definitively. Resolution 2046 (2012) also
called on the Secretary-General, in consultation with
the African Union and the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development, to issue binding proposals on any
issues on which the parties could not agree within the
reasonable deadline established by the Council.

The Republic of South Sudan appreciates the efforts
of the African Union High-Level Implementation
Panel, comprised of President Thabo Mbeki, President
Pierre Buyoya and President Abdulsalami Abubakar,
all of whom tirelessly supported the parties during
this summer's negotiations and provided the required
continental context and political support to enable the
creation of African solutions for establishing peace and
stability in our region.

The agreements signed by the parties on
27 September are welcome. They represent an
important milestone, defining in concrete terms the
future relations between our two States. However, as
the Council itself recognized when it unanimously
adopted resolution 2046 (2012), what is required, some
seven years after the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA), is a final resolution of all
of the outstanding issues that remain between us. My
Government signed the cooperation agreements on
27 September because we were convinced that it would
be possible to resolve quickly the matters on which we
could not agree on that day, most importantly border
demarcation and the status of Abyei.

We would welcome the Council's continued and
active support of that objective, in full cooperation
with, and in support of, the African Union. It is only
when all the issues are addressed and we have made
much greater progress towards the full implementation
of key provisions of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace
Agreement that sustainable peace will exist in our
region. There are no shortcuts to that destination.

It is with that in mind that we respectfully ask the
Security Council to support unreservedly the AU Peace
and Security Council decision of 24 October. As we are
all aware, the AU High-Level Implementation Panel's
proposal of 21 September on the final status of Abyei
reflects the previous agreements signed by the parties,
such as the Abyei Protocol of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, the arbitration agreement that led to the 2009
Award of the Permanent Court of Arbitration, and the
agreement of 20 June 2011. Those agreements provided
the foundation for the High-Level Panel's approach to
the discussions on Abyei over recent months. All of
them accept the need to hold a referendum in the Abyei
area. A referendum, implemented in accordance with
the terms of the CPA, does not represent a win-lose
solution for that area's communities. Quite the contrary,
it would ensure peace, security and cooperation between
them, and to that extent it is a win-win proposal.

That having been said, following the 24 October
decision of the AU Peace and Security Council, my
Government expressed its readiness to negotiate with
the Sudan for a further six weeks. President Salva Kiir
Mayardit formally invited President Omer Hassan
Al-Bashir to Juba in order to continue their discussions
on the final status of Abyei. We regret that President
Al-Bashir has so far been unable to take up the
invitation.

The deadline established by the AU Peace and
Security Council is now approaching. It is our hope
that the efforts of my Government to negotiate on
the basis of the High-Level Panel's last proposal and
to establish temporary institutions for the Abyei area
will be supported both by the members of the Peace
and Security Council and by the Council here. The
Republic of South Sudan would also welcome the
Security Council's endorsement of any decision made
by the African Union with regard to Abyei or other
outstanding issues - not as an imposition on the
parties but rather as a demonstration of support for the
region's considered view of what constitutes the most
appropriate way forward.

The Republic of South Sudan is also eager to
implement the security mechanisms, namely, the
safe demilitarized border zone and the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism, without
further delay. My Government remains extremely
concerned about the humanitarian impact of the
conflict in Southern Kordofan and southern Blue Nile
on the people of those areas, and indeed by extension on
the people of South Sudan, who have so far welcomed
more than 100,000 refugees from that conflict. As the
Secretary-General notes in a recent report, the human
suffering in the two States is a direct consequence of
the conflict in those areas, and only a resolution of the
conflict can stop the humanitarian crisis.

As the Council is aware, in connection with the
insecurity in the two areas, the Sudan has recently
conducted aerial bombardments inside the territory of
South Sudan, specifically in Northern Bahr el Ghazal
State. The Republic of South Sudan does not wish to
return to violence and remains fully committed to
peace. We do not believe that there can be genuine
security in the border states of either country nor,
therefore, sustainable peace in our region unless there
is a complete cessation of hostilities in the two areas.

We therefore strongly encourage dialogue between
the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLA)-North, as called for in
resolution 2046 (2012), and offer ourselves to the parties
to play whatever facilitating role might be deemed
necessary. It is clear that unless there can be a dialogue
on the basis of previous agreements, including the CPA
and last year's agreement of 28 June, it will be difficult
to implement the safe demilitarized border zone and
Joint Border Verification Monitoring Mechanism.

The Republic of South Sudan continues its
preparations for the resumption of oil production and
the transport of oil through the territory of the Sudan,
despite calls by the Sudan to halt those preparations
and its imposition of additional demands on security
issues that go far beyond the scope of the 27 September
agreements. We are nonetheless encouraged by a recent
exchange between our two Presidents and an agreement
to reconvene the Joint Political and Security Mechanism
in Khartoum next week.

While relations with the Sudan occupy the highest
priority on my Government's agenda, the situation
in Jonglei state, as outlined in the statement of the
Under-Secretary-General, remains an acute focus of
concern. On Monday, President Salva Kiir reiterated
that his Government would spare no effort in support of
stability and inter-communal harmony in Jonglei. My
Government is pursuing a multi-pronged strategy in
Jonglei. The peace process is being led by a presidential
committee on peace, reconciliation and tolerance in
Jonglei state, and the disarmament process is being led
by the SPLA. Despite some very concerning reports
about the conduct of the SPLA in isolated situations,
the civilian disarmament process has largely been
conducted peacefully. The Government takes any
allegations of misconduct by the SPLA very seriously.
All allegations will be investigated and, if necessary,
addressed through the appropriate legal mechanisms
and channels.

The Government has gone to great lengths to
facilitate contact between the different communities
in Jonglei state. Both the reconciliation process and
the disarmament process have been welcomed by the
communities in Jonglei state, as has the SPLA's pledge
to remain on the ground in the state for up to two years
to provide ongoing security. The Sudan Council of
Churches also continues a grassroots peace process to
complement the Government-led process.

We welcome the support that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) has provided to the
Jonglei peace process, and would welcome enhanced
logistical support, as well as ongoing support for the
implementation of the May 2012 peace agreements
signed in Jonglei.

We note the concerns expressed by several
members of the Council, as just articulated by the
Under-Secretary-General, regarding the expulsion of a
human rights officer who served with UNMISS. While
South Sudan takes these concerns very seriously, it is
our belief that we acted consistently with the UNMISS
status-of-forces agreement. The Republic of South
Sudan does not intend to hinder human rights reporting
in South Sudan and accepts it as an integral component
of the work of UNMISS. We also welcome ongoing
negotiations and dialogue on this issue.

In that connection, I might add that, initially, two
individuals were expelled, including the Director,
but as a result of discussions with the leadership, the
decision regarding one was reversed. I should also say
that the relevant institutions within the Ministry for
Foreign Affairs and legal institutions have conducted a
thorough analysis of relevant international conventions
and norms in order to give a legal basis to the decision
made. We therefore believe that, contrary to the
allegations, the decisions were not taken lightly or in
disregard of the relevant international standards.

We want to underscore here our unwavering
commitment to international human rights and
humanitarian standards. The war that raged in our
region intermittently for half a century was a struggle
for human rights and the values of human dignity. We
recognize that there is always a gap between ideals and
practice on the ground and, in this area, we endeavour
to do more.

I noted with great interest some of the specifics,
cited by the Under-Secretary-General, of instances
indicating the gap I am referring to. Once again, we
are quite willing and prepared to discuss some of those
issues with our partners, and in particular the United
Nations presence on the ground, and, where possible, to
provide remedies to the satisfaction of both sides.

In conclusion, we want to reiterate our commitment
to peaceful coexistence and cooperation with the
Republic of the Sudan, as both sides stand to gain from
cordial ties. I take this opportunity to reaffirm our deep
appreciation for the sustained and unwavering support
we have received from the international community,
in particular the AU and the United Nations, without
which we could not have achieved all that we have been
able to achieve to date.

