Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): First of all, allow me
to extend my deepest condolences to the delegation of
the Russian Federation with regard to the passing of
Ambassador Vitaly Churkin.

I would like to start by thanking the Ukrainian
presidency for organizing this timely discussion today
on a very important topic. It is the harsh reality that in
too many parts of the world we find emerging, raging
or frozen conflicts. We also have to face that reality in
Europe. The ongoing and protracted conflicts in Europe
pose a risk to stability and security at the regional
and global levels. They obstruct the socioeconomic
development of our countries and regions, and impede
the full enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Sometimes those conflicts are referred to
as "frozen", which is clearly a misnomer. As we have
unfortunately seen time and again, such conflicts can
easily flare up. However, it is not the conflicts, but the
conflict-settlement processes that tend to be frozen.

We all know that the prohibition on the use of force
and the respect for the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of Member States lies at the heart of the
Charter of the United Nations. Those principles have
our firmest support. Other regional organizations, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
(OSCE) in particular, also have a crucial role to play in
supporting the rule-based international order in Europe.
The security order in Europe has been dented but not
dismantled. The existing system works, provided that
all participating States adhere to the principles and
commitments that it rests on, and provided that all
States do so not only in principle but also in practice.

We need to find a solution to the conflict in Ukraine.
It is quite clear what needs to be done. The Minsk
agreements must be carried out, and a sustainable
settlement must be found within the framework of
the existing negotiation formats. For the first time
since the Second World War, borders in Europe have
been changed through the use of force. Russia must
withdraw its forces from Ukraine, allow Ukraine to
restore control over its border and territory, and end the
illegal annexation of Crimea.

We also remain concerned about the de facto
annexation of the Tskhinvali and Abkhazia regions of
Georgia. Foreign forces should be withdrawn from those
regions. Russia should abide by its commitments under
international law and the 12 August 2008 ceasefire
agreement, and engage constructively in the Geneva
International Discussions. We support the efforts of
the ongoing conflict-resolution processes, namely, the
Minsk Group seeking to find a peaceful resolution to
the Nagorno Karabakh conflict, and the 5+2 talks on
the Transnistrian settlement process. Sometimes the
lack of progress in those formats has been frustrating.
That is why genuine political will and good faith is
needed from all sides.

Not all of the conflicts in Europe could have been
prevented, yet the effect of many of those conflicts
could have been mitigated, had we acted sooner. We
all know that the Security Council has as its primary
responsibility, under the Charter of the United Nations,
the maintenance of international peace and security. As
such, the Council bears the important responsibility for
preventing conflicts and for having the capacity and
readiness to adequately respond to them. Unfortunately,
we have had to witness, on numerous occasions, how
some members of the Council have used or threatened
to use the veto, and by doing so, have left the Council
paralysed and unable to act in situations where action
is urgently needed. That has led to the significant loss
of life and the displacement of millions of people, and
to unprecedented human suffering.

In 2005, the States Members of the United Nations
committed to the principle of the responsibility to
protect. When a Government fails to live up to its
commitments or when it violates the fundamental
norms of international law, the international community
must act. The Security Council must act. That is why
Estonia has expressed before and continues to highlight
its position, namely, that the permanent members of the
Security Council should voluntarily and collectively
commit not to use their veto to block Council action
aimed at preventing or ending situations involving
mass atrocity crimes.

