Mr. Pfanzelter (Austria): I feel privileged to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) in the
presence of the distinguished President of Timor-Leste.
The acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania, the
candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Serbia and Montenegro, and the European Free Trade
Association countries Iceland and Norway, members of
the European Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova, align themselves with this
statement.

It is now eight months since the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL) took over the job of
assisting the Government in the capacity-development
of critical State institutions with the aim of further
strengthening democratic governance and building
peace in Timor-Leste. As the EU stressed in its
statement in the open debate on this subject in May
2005 (see S/PV.5180), we very much appreciate the
invaluable work of the United Nations in peacebuilding
in Timor-Leste, through its various missions since
1999. We welcome the fact that there was a high
degree of continuity between the United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor and UNOTIL, which
facilitated the seamless takeover by UNOTIL of the
Mission's functions. We commend the commitment and
contributions of UNOTIL personnel under the
continued leadership of the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa.

Since voting overwhelmingly in favour of
independence in 1999, Timor-Leste has come a long
way and has achieved remarkable progress in
reconstruction and State-building. It is in the context of
consolidating those gains that the question of the future
presence, after the end of the mandate of UNOTIL on
20 May 2006, arises. We understand that, with the
recent appointment of a new United Nations
Development Programme Resident Coordinator, the
transition to the regular United Nations and
multilateral development framework is well on track.
However, we agree with President Gusmao that, given
the remaining challenges in other fields, a small, time-
limited political United Nations presence beyond 20
May 2006 might be useful.

The main task ahead in the months and years to
come will be to secure the long-term success of the
State-building process in Timor-Leste. In this regard,
the preparations for and conduct of the presidential and
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2007 are
crucial. Those elections will be a test for the maturity
of the young democracy in Timor-Leste. Fair, correct
and open conduct of the election process and the way
in which the election results are handled will be
essential to the success of the electoral process. The
EU therefore believes that the process leading to the
elections - including the elaboration of new election
legislation - must be managed in an inclusive and
transparent manner, involving all political forces and
civil society.

Of equal importance for the long-term stability of
Timor-Leste is sustainable economic progress. In that
regard, the European Union welcomes the recent
signing, on 12 January, of the agreement between
Australia and Timor-Leste dividing equally between
the two countries the revenues derived from the oil and
gas fields in the Timor Sea. We regard that as a very
positive development that will guarantee a steady
source of clearly needed income for the Government of
Timor-Leste. At the same time, as past examples have
shown, oil revenues can be a mixed blessing if not
managed properly. It is in that context that we stress
the importance of establishing clear and transparent
mechanisms - including oversight mechanisms - for
the management of those resources to benefit
reconstruction and development in Timor-Leste.

As the European Union has stressed repeatedly,
we are convinced that justice must be done for the
serious human rights violations in Timor-Leste in
1999. In that regard, the EU welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General's Commission of Experts
(S/2005/458, annex II), which was published in July
2005. We note the Security Council's September 2005
request to the Secretary-General to submit a report on a
practical and feasible approach to justice and
reconciliation for Timor-Leste. We are looking forward
to tangible progress in that area.

Regarding the Commission for Truth and
Friendship established by the Governments of
Indonesia and Timor-Leste in November 2004, we
remain concerned about the amnesty provisions
contained in its statute and urge the two Governments
to revisit that issue. Tackling impunity by holding to
account those responsible for serious human rights
violations is crucial for Timor-Leste's long-term
development as part of a process that also seeks peace
and reconciliation, as well as the strengthening of the
rule of law.

Since 1999, the European Union and its member
States have consistently expressed their support for
Timor-Leste's peaceful development and economic
viability. From the outset, the EU and its member
States have lived up to their promises, contributing
more than €700 million in support of Timor-Leste's
development. That accounts for half of all the external
assistance the country has received. With Timor-
Leste's full membership in the framework of the EU's
Africa, Caribbean and Pacific cooperation agreement,
Timor-Leste will also be eligible to benefit from
support under the European Development Fund. That
will ensure continued, reliable and predictable
financial support from the European Union for Timor-
Leste.

I would like to conclude by assuring the
Government and the people of Timor-Leste of the
European Union's continued commitment to support
them in their objective of securing the long-term,
sustainable stability and development of their young
country. To that end, we will continue to work closely
with all bilateral and multilateral donors. The European
Union has confidence in the responsible leadership of
the Government of Timor-Leste and the determination
of its people that the country will continue to be
regarded as one of the true success stories of United
Nations peacebuilding and as an example for the
Peacebuilding Commission.

