Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): Today is the last day of your presidency this
month, Sir, and we consider it fortunate that this important
meeting is being held under your presidency, in view of
your personal qualities and of the positions of the friendly
country of Portugal. Allow me also to extend my thanks to
your predecessor, Ambassador Njuguna Mahugu, the
Permanent Representative of Kenya, with whom we worked
last month on the same issue during his presidency of the
Council.

The Security Council is meeting today to consider an
issue of great importance to us in Palestine, to the Arab and
Muslim worlds and to the international community as a

 

whole - namely, the issue of Jerusalem, the Holy City of
three monotheistic religions.

Since its inception, the United Nations has dealt with
the issue of Jerusalem in a manner commensurate with its
importance and reflective of its special status. The United
Nations adopted a special international regime - the
corpus separatum - for the city and later refrained from
recognizing the de facto situation resulting from the war
of 1948. It then effectively dealt with the occupation
resulting from the war of 1967 with the aim of preventing
Israel, the occupying Power, from carrying out any
measures aimed at changing the legal status or
demographic composition of East Jerusalem, as an
integral part of the territories occupied since 1967 and to
which the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 is
applicable. The Security Council has adopted 16
resolutions with regard to Jerusalem, 10 of which were
adopted after the occupation of 1967. The Council
reaffirmed in these resolutions its rejection of all the
Israeli measures, considering them null and void and
calling upon Member States not to recognize them and
not to move their embassies to Jerusalem.

Thus, there exists what may be considered a clear
international consensus concerning the issue of Jerusalem.
This position is based upon a deep understanding of the
important religious, historical and political factors of this
issue. Israel, in return, has taken a position in direct
opposition to that of the international community and
continues to ignore its will and to violate international
law and Security Council resolutions. This position
refuses to recognize Palestinian and Arab rights and
persists in monopolizing Jerusalem, considering it to be
solely Jewish or Israeli. Consequently, such a position
negates the possibility of achieving peace and guarantees
the continuation of war and hatred in the region.

Over the years, Israel has adopted a number of
policies and carried out many measures to impose its
position and to create certain facts on the ground. These
illegal, appalling and immoral policies and measures
include attempts to annex occupied territories, the
confiscation of lands, the expansion of the city's
municipal boundaries, and the isolation of East Jerusalem
from the rest of the West Bank. They also include the
influx of 150,000 settlers in an attempt to create a
specific demographic composition; legal and de facto
discrimination between Jews and non-Jews; and the direct
oppression of Palestinian Jerusalemites, the confiscation
of their identity cards, the demolition of their homes and
preventing them from living in the city of their ancestors.

 

All of these actions have been repeatedly condemned
by the international community, which has refused to
recognize their results. All of these actions have been
challenged by our people, who have succeeded in thwarting
some of the aims of these actions, including the fact that
Palestinian Jerusalemites still constitute the overwhelming
majority of the population of East Jerusalem within the
legal boundaries of the municipality of the city. However,
their suffering is immense and their feelings of injustice
and pain are immeasurable. These Israeli measures have
created and are still creating a situation that could lead to
the explosion of the whole region at any moment.

A few years ago the peace process came to the Middle
East, along with the Palestinian-Israeli agreements within its
framework, according to which the two sides agreed to
negotiate the status of Jerusalem in the negotiations on the
final settlement. Palestinian Jerusalemites have exercised
their rights in participating in the elections for the
Palestinian Legislative Council within the Jerusalem
electoral district. Furthermore, additional guarantees were
given to the Palestinian side with regard to the preservation
of the Palestinian institutions in the city. All of this
constituted a significant change and was expected to lead to
a comprehensive change in Israeli policies and measures
with regard to Jerusalem, based upon compliance with the
goals of the peace process and the need for all the parties
to refrain from creating new facts on the ground that would
abort the forthcoming negotiations. This was not completely
adhered to by the former Israeli Government, but at least
that Government did not comprehensively violate these
commitments or undertake measures that could destroy the
peace process in its entirety.

When the current Israeli Government came to power,
it set us back to the period before the peace process and
adopted, carried out and even intensified the
aforementioned policies and practices. It opened the tunnel
in the vicinity of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, following which the
Security Council adopted resolution 1073 (1996). Then it
began the construction of a new settlement in Jabal Abu
Ghneim to the south of occupied Jerusalem, which was the
focus of the resolutions of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly, which was convened after
the Security Council failed twice to adopt a resolution in
this regard because of the vetoes exercised by one of its
permanent members. This was followed by a series of other
illegal Israeli actions, particularly the escalation of settler
colonialism inside the Old City in Burj al-Laqlaq and
outside it in Ras Al-Amud, Silwan and the Mount of
Olives, to which we referred in several letters addressed to
this Council.

 

Lastly, the Israeli Government decided on 21 June
1998 to adopt a plan aimed at strengthening the illegal
hold of Israel on Jerusalem. This is the direct reason for
the Security Council's meeting today. The plan would
expand the municipal boundaries of the city and establish
an "umbrella authority" to include a number of illegal
settlements in the West Bank. This represents a concrete
step towards the illegal annexation of more occupied
Palestinian lands to the already illegally expanded
Jerusalem municipality in order to maintain a specific
demographic composition with the aim of furthering the
process of the judaization of the city.

The Israeli Prime Minister said on 18 June 1998,
when he was announcing the plan:

"I think this is a basic change in Jerusalem's status
which will be remembered as a turning point."
(S/52/958)

The Prime Minister also said:

"The first thing we are doing is to link 'Greater
Jerusalem' and the second thing is strengthening the
Jewish majority in Jerusalem." (ibid.)

With regard to the illegal settlement in Jabal Abu
Ghneim, he stated:

"Write it down. You will see houses at 'Har Homa',
many houses, by the year 2000." (ibid.)

Could there be any more blatant revelation than
these outrageous statements of the nature of the plan and
its dangerous and malicious goals? This plan constitutes
a flagrant violation of international law, the Fourth
Geneva Convention of 1949, several Security Council
resolutions, and those of the tenth emergency special
session of the General Assembly. It manifests contempt
for the values which these laws and resolutions represent
and for the will of the international community and its
collective position.

What will the Security Council do in the face of all
this? We hope that the Council will have the sufficient
will finally to undertake the necessary measures to
guarantee the rescinding of this plan and to prevent Israel,
the occupying Power, from undertaking any further illegal
actions in Jerusalem and the rest of the occupied
territories, beginning with the adoption of the draft
resolution sponsored by the Arab Group in this regard.
We believe that the Council is obligated to do this in

 

accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
international law.

Here, I will have to recall that the Israeli plan and the
other Israeli policies and practices in Jerusalem to which I
have referred also gravely violate the agreements reached
between the two sides within the framework of the peace
process in the Middle East. I said, "I will have to recall" it,
because there is not much left of this peace process
anyway, thanks to Mr. Netanyahu and his Government. The
policies and practices of the Israeli Government not only
violate the agreements, but are clearly aimed at the
systematic destruction of those agreements and at
discarding the entire peace process. It is sufficient to refer
to Israel's long-standing rejection of the American
proposals aimed at revitalizing this process, which were
accepted by the Palestinian side despite our understanding
that the proposals are incomparably closer to the Israeli
than to the Palestinian position. The Prime Minister and the
Israeli Government do not hesitate to use old and new
gimmicks in an attempt to cover up the reality of the Israeli
position. We see them immersed in coordinated propaganda
campaigns to direct accusations against the Palestinian side;
we see them invent, for example, the idea of the illegal
popular referendum with regard to the recent American
proposals; and, finally, there is the idea of a new peace
conference - as if the Israeli side had complied with the
results of the first Conference in Madrid in order to discuss
another conference. All of this is no longer capable of
covering up the reality, and the Israeli plan for Jerusalem
is a stark reminder of that reality. This plan constitutes
another basic step towards the Israeli Government's final
divorce from the peace process.

It is not possible to imagine the peace process being
revitalized and continuing, given the existence of such a
plan. It is unacceptable for the Israeli violations in
Jerusalem to continue, even if there is somehow a sudden
Israeli change with regard to the American proposals. For
our Palestinian people, Jerusalem is a red line: we cannot
give it up. This is a stubborn reality that all the parties need
to comprehend.

Israel says that our coming forward to complain to the
Security Council violates the existing agreements. That, of
course, is a ridiculous claim that does not even deserve to
be addressed. But there is another party that says that this
action is counter-productive and that consideration by the
Council of these Israeli violations will harm the peace
process. This is really very unfortunate. How, legally,
politically or morally, can anyone say something like that?
How can it be said that, despite the responsibilities of the

 

Council in accordance with the Charter, the Council
should not intervene in Middle East affairs? How can it
be said, in the face not only of Israel's violations of
international law and the agreements reached, but of its
persistence in these violations, that it will be counter-
productive for the Council to deal with this issue? How
can it be said that Palestinian complaints about these
violations - our mere complaining and seeking to stop
violations that were not stopped by the continuous efforts
of the sponsors of the peace process - will harm this
process? How can anyone make a comparison between
actions in violation of international law and the reactions
to those actions, which are entirely based on international
law? It is unreasonable and unacceptable, and it is our
hope that this position will soon be changed, if not for the
sake of fairness and credibility, at least for the sake of the
Charter and the United Nations.

In spite of everything, the Palestinian people have
high hopes that this time all members of the Council will
enable the Council to exercise its responsibilities, at least
on the basis of an understanding of the great importance
of the issue of Jerusalem and the desire to contribute to
rescuing the peace process and to preserving the United
Nations Charter, international law and Security Council
resolutions.

