Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): This debate is taking
place against the backdrop of an increasingly serious
situation in the Middle East. The stalemate in the peace
process jeopardizes the stability of the whole region, as
recent tragic developments prove only too well. This
situation of virtual paralysis, which is conducive to the
escalation of tension and hostilities, demands the
permanent engagement of the Security Council.

The follow-up of the situation by the Council on
the basis of its monthly assessments is now insufficient
and is putting the Council's credibility at risk. Unless
prompt and concrete measures are adopted, we may be
faced with a full-scale crisis beyond our control.

Brazil has had many opportunities to express its
condemnation of all acts of violence and all forms of
terrorism. We have voiced our dismay at the spiral of
brutality, founded on retaliation and revenge, that
characterizes daily life in parts of the Middle East. Too
many innocent lives have already been claimed.

Peace will not be achieved by merely forcing the
hand of one party until it finally capitulates. Only the
resumption of negotiations that result in a just and
comprehensive agreement can pave the way for lasting
peace for all the peoples in the region. In this regard,
the construction of a separation wall and the
announcement by the Israeli Government of new
settlement activities in the occupied territories further
discourage the trust and confidence that are
indispensable at this moment.

We call upon the parties to return to the
negotiating table and, with resolute and bold steps, to
begin the implementation of the road map. The parties
must do their best to make the road map work. The
creation of a Palestinian State, in accordance with the
legitimate aspirations of its people, and a State of
Israel, living within internationally recognized borders,
is the only way of ensuring peace and stability in the
Middle East. The Government of Brazil reiterates its
willingness to contribute to any initiative, under the
auspices of the United Nations, which may lead to that
end.

