The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Chad.

First of all, I would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Farid
Zarif, for his briefing. I would also like to welcome
Mr. Aleksandar Vucie, Prime Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime Minister of Kosovo, to the
Security Council and thank them for their statements.

The report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2014/773) describes a tense
political situation with an institutional impasse that is
a challenge to the democratic process in Kosovo. We
note with concern that in the five months since the early
legislative elections of 8 June, which took place in a
unified legal framework, Kosovo has still not formed a
new Government. The crisis provoked by the search for a
balance of forces has not found a solution either, despite
the matter's having been referred to the Constitutional
Court. Furthermore, Kosovo organized municipal
elections on 3 November, which took place, according
to international observers, in a proper manner, except
in the north, in northern Mitrovica, where violence and
low voter turnout were reported.

We believe that this ongoing political tension and
the institutional vacuum could exacerbate an economic
situation that is already quite difficult. Chad calls upon
Kosovo's political actors to enter into a dialogue to find
a way out of the impasse, with a view to allowing a
Government to be formed, and thereby preserve the
country's fragile cohesion. In a similar vein, Chad
encourages the authorities to pursue the dialogue being
facilitated by the European Union, in accordance with
the 19 April 2013 agreement on the normalization of
relations between Belgrade and Pristina.

Chad welcomes and encourages the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
in fulfilling its mandate and specifically reiterates its
support for the work on disappeared and displaced
persons. According to High Commissioner on Refugees,
there are still more 17,200 internally displaced persons
in Kosovo. We note the progress made on the issues
of return and identification as well as the improvement
of access of minority communities to employment
opportunities in the Kosovo public institutions.

With respect to the judiciary, Chad also notes
the progress achieved on the issue of war crimes, the
fight against organized crime and corruption, human
trafficking, property rights and institutional capacity-
building in the justice sector. We invite the Kosovo
authorities to further strengthen the appropriate
measures to curb the phenomena of foreign terrorist
fighters and the desecration of holy places.

Finally, we recall that the Mission's highest priority
remains the promotion of security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and the region. In this
regard, we welcome the fruitful cooperation between
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Kosovo Force, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and UNMIK as they pursue
their efforts to achieve peace, stability and development
in Kosovo.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

There are no more speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.25 pm.
