Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): At the outset, I wish to
congratulate you, Sir, and Chad on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to address my delegation's appreciation to
you and your team for having convened this important
open debate and for the thought-provoking concept
note on this issue (S/2014/879, annex). Allow me to also
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, and the African Union High Representative
for Mali and the Sahel, His Excellency Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, for their briefings on this issue.

Malaysia associates itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Iran on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

We wish to underscore the importance of developing
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations and the relevant statutes
of the regional and subregional organizations. In that
regard, we are encouraged to note the progress made
in the ongoing cooperation between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU), which is manifested
in the ongoing capacity-building efforts in many
important areas, including mediation, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding.

We note the structured annual consultative meetings
that have been established between the United Nations
and the Peace and Security Council of the AU. We
further acknowledge the need to strengthen cooperation
and develop a more effective partnership with the Peace
and Security Council of the AU to address the many
security challenges facing Africa.

Over the last decade, the AU and subregional
organizations have significantly bolstered their own
role in building the architecture for peace and security
on the African continent. Regional organizations,
including the AU, are indeed well positioned to analyse
the root causes of conflicts given their knowledge of
the region. Such organizations can also provide useful
information to enhance the effectiveness of United
Nations efforts in the management of conflicts.

In our view, while cooperation has intensified
in recent years, the AU and the United Nations must
increase and improve collaboration in the maintenance
ofpeace and security in Africa. As such, we fully support
the efforts undertaken by both sides to harmonize their
approach to crisis management and peacekeeping, as
well as to mobilize their resources to bolster regional
security, whether in political, civilian or military
terms. The partnership can also be further enhanced in
a number of ways, including by learning news lessons,
developing new tools and intensifying engagement with
civil society on issues related to mediation and conflict
prevention.

In that regard, there is a need for the United Nations
to build an innovative, flexible, action-oriented and
balanced partnership with the AU so as to ensure that
Africa's concerns and positions are taken into account
when making decisions on matters of fundamental
interest to Africa. We also support the idea that there
must be greater clarity on how the Security Council
should best consult with the Peace and Security
Council of the AU on major decisions relating to peace
operations.

We furthermore note that the United Nations-
African Union Joint Task Force on Peace and Security
issues recently adopted recommendations to strengthen
the exchange of information between the United Nations
and AU and promote joint analyses of conflict in order
to build a common understanding of the causes and
drivers of organized violence in Africa. We believe that
this could be a valuable forum to strengthen regional
efforts and cooperation to combat terrorism and other
peace and security challenges across Africa.

We also fully support the proposal to have a greater
level of coordination between the Security Council
and the Peace and Security Council of the AU on their
agenda of work, in particular in relation to African
issues and related thematic discussions such as the
protection of civilians, women and peace and security,
and children in armed conflict. As such, we believe
there should be greater engagement and interaction
between the Presidents of the Security Council and the
Peace and Security Council of the AU, in accordance
with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations.

Given that the maintenance of international peace
and security is primarily the responsibility of the
Security Council, assisting in the capacity-building
and funding of peacekeeping efforts of regional,
subregional and other organizations that lack resources
for peacekeeping should also be a concern of the
Council.

We believe that capacity-building and technical
support for the AU in the area of peace and security
is an important matter that should be addressed
accordingly. The need for continuous operational
and planning support as well as long-term capacity-
building support is clearly established. This includes
support to the planning and management of the ongoing
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations, as well as
potential future operations and technical advice and
support in the development of policies, guidelines,
doctrines and training.

The importance of finding a lasting solution to the
funding of AU-led peace support operations cannot be
over-emphasized. There is clearly an urgent need to
enhance the predictability, sustainability and flexibility
of financing the AU when undertaking peacekeeping
missions under United Nations mandates. In that
regard, the international community should consider
the establishment of a financing mechanism that could
be mobilized quickly as needs arise. The United Nations
States Members could contribute significantly in this
area by paying their annual assessed contributions to
the Secretariat in full, on time and without conditions.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reaffirm
its commitment to continue working together with all
partners and stakeholders in our collective efforts to
advance the cause of international peace and security
in Africa and around the world through the United
Nations' peacekeeping and peacebuilding agenda.

