Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank Equatorial Guinea for convening
today's meeting, and express gratitude to Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Mr. Ramtane Lamamra and Mr. Vasu Gounden
for their briefings. We also welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Equatorial Guinea to this important
debate, in which we are recognizing the importance and
significance of the African Union Silence the Guns in
Africa by 2020 initiative. We also welcome resolution
2457 (2019) and the role played by Equatorial Guinea in
its important adoption.

We believe that this common effort by African
countries is a symbol of the commitment, will,
responsibility and unity of African peoples and leaders
around the ambitious goal of building a conflict-free
continent as an essential basis for its development. We
support this initiative which, in line with Agenda 2063
of the African Union and the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) of 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, seeks to build a stable, peaceful and
prosperous continent. In particular, we recognize the
importance in this context of SDG 16, which commits
us to promoting the rule of law and strengthening
institutions with a view to achieving peaceful and
inclusive societies.

We consider it positive that the progress achieved
in many countries in this region can be shared through
good practices and lessons learned with those who
continue to face serious challenges and threats driven
or exacerbated by acts of violence by armed groups,
illicit arms trafficking, the fight for illegal control of
natural resources, interethnic violence and the limited
presence ofthe State. In this regard, we wish to stress in
particular the importance of eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons, which contributes
significantly to exacerbating insecurity and violence
in various parts of Africa. Regional cooperation and
cooperation between neighbouring States are essential
for strengthening the intelligence work and border
controls required to confront this scourge. We stress
the need to fully implement existing international
instruments in this area, including the United Nations
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects, and the Arms Trade Treaty.

In addition, in order to achieve a conflict free
zone, it is necessary to address the root causes thereof,
including poverty, inequality, climate change and weak
institutions, applying a multidimensional approach
that privileges the strengthening of capacities and
institutions established to promote human rights, the
rule of law and sustainable development. In this regard,
the need to promote education and create employment
opportunities for women, young people and children.
To this end, the simultaneous implementation of the
African Peace and Security Architecture and the
African Governance Architecture, as well as the road
map to silence weapons by 2020, will be vital.

It must be stressed that this initiative must have the
support of the international community as a whole. It
will be necessary to promote greater cooperation and
synergies between the African Union and the United
Nations system, especially joint work between the
Security Council and the Peace and Security Council
of the African Union, particularly in peacebuilding
processes, as well as with other regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with resolution 2320
(2016).

As was mentioned by the Secretary-General
when he took part in the recent Ordinary Session of
the Assembly of the African Union, the relationship
between that organization and the United Nations,
while having been significantly strengthened in recent
years, is capable of generating an even closer and
more efficient alliance. The resolution that we have
just adopted is a sign of the Security Council's firm
commitment to this goal.
