Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Allow me first to thank
the briefers - Special Envoy Martin Griffiths and
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator Mark Lowcock - for
their briefings. South Africa would like to make the
following points with regard to the situation in Yemen.

South Africa remains concerned about the impact
of the conflict in Yemen, which has resulted in a
deteriorating humanitarian crisis. We support the need
to address the political and security concerns as part
of dealing with that humanitarian crisis. The conflict
in Yemen has already led to unspeakable tragedy for
millions of people. Innocent civilians, in particular
women and children, have been most affected by the
effects of that devastating war, which has become one
of the world's largest humanitarian crises.

We welcome the efforts of the Secretary-General
and his Special Envoy, Mr. Martin Griffiths, to convene
the meeting in Sweden last month. We are pleased that
the Yemeni Government and the Houthis participated
in the discussions that led to the Stockholm Agreement.
We are also pleased that the Security Council was
able to rapidly show unity of purpose following the
Stockholm meeting and adopt resolution 2451 (2018).

We note the proposal by the Secretary-General
regarding the modalities for the monitoring mechanism.
We also note the report of the Secretary-General on the
status of implementation of the resolution (S/2019/11).
We are pleased that the Redeployment Coordination
Committee has met, bringing together representatives
of the Government and the Houthis. It is important that
the parties agree on confidence-building measures to
overcome the trust deficit that exists.

However, we are concerned that, during the
reporting period, there were mutual allegations of
ceasefire violations by both sides. It is imperative
that the resolution and the Stockholm Agreement be
implemented by all parties and that there be a cessation
of hostilities. We wish to reiterate that the only
sustainable solution lies in negotiations and a Yemeni-
led political settlement that is inclusive and fair and that
puts the interests and well-being of all the citizens of
Yemen first.

We wish to remind the parties to the conflict that
they have an obligation to fully facilitate sustained
and unimpeded humanitarian access, as required by
international humanitarian law. We further call on the
parties to ensure the safety of humanitarian workers
and of United Nations personnel, and we call for the
speedy facilitation of visas and other logistical support.
We welcome the granting of 56 visas as a positive step.
However, that should not be a one-off event. We look
forward to the meeting scheduled in Amman next week,
as Mr. Griffiths indicated, to discuss the long-awaited
exchange of prisoners by both sides.

In conclusion, we appeal to both sides to spare the
lives of women and children in Yemen.

