Mr. Wisnumurti (Indonesia): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation to the
Argentine delegation and the other sponsors for their
endeavours in initiating the draft resolution before us,
aimed at addressing the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Iraq, which has created concern among the
international community.

 

From the beginning, Indonesia has always believed
that producing resolutions on a humanitarian basis is
imperative in order to be able to address effectively the
human sufferings and misery largely affecting, women,
children and the elderly, which have taken on dramatic
proportions. We also believe that it is therefore
indispensable that Iraq's concerns also be taken into
account so that this humanitarian tragedy may be addressed
adequately and effectively.

Like others, Indonesia is deeply concerned over the
worsening humanitarian situation in Iraq, as clearly
reflected in the latest reports of the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), as
well as in the recent report made by an official of the
Emergency and Humanitarian Aid section of the
Netherlands Ministry for Foreign Affairs who had visited
central and southern Iraq. The situation in those areas can
be described only as a humanitarian tragedy, with young
children, in particular, suffering from the effects. Therefore,
the needs are enormous, and aid is urgently required in
order to ameliorate the situation and keep the number of
victims of this tragedy as low as possible.

We welcome the cooperation demonstrated by the
sponsors of this draft resolution in accommodating several
amendments addressing the concerns not only of Member
States, but also of the Government of Iraq. My delegation
regrets, however, that this draft resolution falls short of our
expectations. We respect the principles of sovereignty and
territorial integrity, which are guaranteed under the Charter
of the United Nations and which we all espouse. The
Indonesian delegation would therefore like to emphasize
that these fundamental principles of international law should
be adhered to and respected by all Member States.
Although we know that reference to these principles has
indeed been incorporated into some of the paragraphs of the
draft resolution, we note that its contents are not consistent
with these principles.

In this regard, my delegation would like to draw
attention to paragraph 6, which still insists that

"the larger share of the petroleum and petroleum
products"

should be shipped Via the Kirkuk-Yumurtalik pipeline. It is
our view that the volume of petroleum shipped through this
pipeline, the property of Iraq and Turkey, should be
considered a matter of paramount concern. We must respect
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Iraq, and Iraq
should therefore be able to decide on the use of its
pipelines for transportation and production purposes.
Furthermore, we believe that the application of
Chapter VII of the Charter should be specifically
addressed to peace and security in the region, and should
not be applied so as to interfere in the internal affairs of
Iraq.

My delegation would also like to express its
reservations regarding paragraph 8 (b), describing Iraq's
obligation to complement the distribution of humanitarian
relief and to provide an amount exceeding 10 per cent of
its oil production revenue. Within the context of the
principles of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
States, it would be more appropriate not to mention a
specific amount to be allocated for the three northern
Governorates within Iraq. This, in our view, would
constitute an infringement on the principle of non-
interference in the internal affairs of sovereign States, as
it would provide encouragement to separatist movements
in the northern part of Iraq.

In order for the draft resolution to achieve the
desired result and become an effective tool to rectify the
situation, it is imperative not only to properly address the
concerns of the issue at hand but also to maintain strict
adherence to the basic principles governing relations
between sovereign States. Indonesia is of the View that it
is a meaningless exercise to adopt resolutions that are not
implementable. However good the intentions are, if the
fundamental principles are not respected, such measures
may not adequately address the matter.

My delegation firmly believes that the humanitarian
situation in Iraq should be dealt with in a comprehensive
manner, that humanitarian considerations should prevail
and that the focus of our efforts should be directed
towards ensuring that the requirements for the population
are met. It is in this spirit, and with the reservations I
have expressed, that my delegation will vote in favour of
the draft resolution.

