Mr. Al-Sameen (Oman) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like at the outset to convey to you, Sir, my most
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. Without
a doubt, your diplomatic skills and your wisdom augur well
for the success of the Council's deliberations. I should like
also to congratulate Ambassador Mahugu for the
remarkable manner in which he steered the work of the
Council last month, with the assistance of his colleagues.

The Council is meeting today to consider a very
serious and important question. Indeed, the decision on 21
June by the Israeli Council of Ministers to expand the
municipal boundaries of Jerusalem to include the

 

neighbouring settlements and the West Bank, the
destruction of houses and the expulsion of inhabitants
represent escalating measures aimed at enabling the Israeli
Government to strengthen its hold over the Holy City of
Jerusalem, thereby jeopardizing the final phase of the
negotiations.

In view of the special and sensitive status of
Jerusalem and its status in the three major religions, the
Security Council has adopted 16 resolutions on behalf of
the international community. Through these resolutions,
it has reaffirmed that all measures and arrangements taken
by Israel as the occupying Power, including illegal
administrative decisions and arrangements, to alter the
legal status and demographic composition of the city are
null and void and without any legal validity.

Moreover, the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 is
applicable to all territories occupied by Israel in 1967,
including Jerusalem. The Hague Convention of 1907 also
applies to all those territories, including Jerusalem.

The measures taken by the Israeli Government to
expand the municipal boundaries of the city of Jerusalem
and to expand the "municipal umbrella" to include certain
Jewish settlements in the West Bank represent a flagrant
violation of the principles underlying the peace process
and of internationally binding resolutions. These measures
jeopardize the tireless peace efforts that have been
deployed over the past decade and risk igniting an
infernal cycle of conflict and instability.

Since Madrid, the peace process has registered major
achievements.

The Arab world has long viewed the peace process
as a strategic option and has worked sincerely to
implement the process. From the very outset, my country
has chosen that option because it is convinced that peace
is imperative for all the peoples and States of the region,
including Israel.

We are profoundly disturbed to see the peace
process threatened in this way owing to Israel's lack of
respect for agreed principles and for peace agreements.
This is not Israel's first violation of the peace process: it
has continued to pursue its settlements policy and has not
fulfilled commitments it entered into. Israel's failure to
fulfil its commitments and its continued pursuit of the
settlement policy have deadlocked the peace process. The
present impasse is a direct result of these arrogant
policies. The latest decision by Israel is but one in a long

 

series of violations. Yet the road to peace is clearly and
unequivocally marked.

My country calls upon all countries with influence, in
particular the co-sponsors of the peace process and the
States members of the European Union, to do their utmost
to help ensure the success of the peace process, and to
bring pressure to bear on Israel to comply with its
commitments. While we are convinced of the importance of
dialogue and direct negotiations between the parties
concerned, the current deadlock in the peace process, and
the gravity of the Israeli decision, pose a threat that could
bring about the collapse of the peace process, which could
in turn have grave consequences for international peace and
security.

We therefore call upon the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibility and urgently to adopt a firm
resolution declaring the Israeli measures to be illegal and
urging that country to renounce its policies. My delegation
would support such a draft resolution and believes that the
text being considered is commensurate with the gravity of
the situation and of the Israeli decision. The text is
balanced and non-confrontational. We hope that it can be
adopted by consensus and that it will consolidate the
Middle East peace process.
