Ms. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you, Mr. President,

for convening this timely meeting. I also wish to thank

the Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace

Process, Robert Serry, for presenting a thorough
briefing on the situation in the region.

Brazil has long maintained close and multiple ties
with countries and peoples in the Middle East.
Approximately 10 million Brazilians find their roots in
Arab lands, of which 6 to 7 million are the descendants
of Lebanese or Syrian immigrants. The cooperation and
friendship between my country and Israel, which dates
back to the latter's creation, have also been recently
strengthened. In Brazil, all communities live side by
side in harmony and are fully integrated into society.
We believe that this is also possible in the Middle East.

It is our shared history and the wealth of our
political, economic and cultural relations with the
Middle East that provide the foundation for our
growing presence in and involvement with the region.
Brazil was the first Latin American country to join the
Arab League as an observer. In 2005, at the initiative
of President Lula, the first South American and Arab
Countries Summit was held in Brasilia, with a View to
identifying and exploring synergies. The next summit
will take place in Doha this coming March. In 2007,
the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR)
signed a free trade agreement with Israel. It is this
robust relationship with the Middle East that leads
Brazil to contribute to international efforts designed to
help Israelis and Palestinians end their conflict and to
alleviate the plight of those living in the occupied
territories. We attended the Annapolis conference, as
well as the Palestinian Donors Conference in Paris a
month later. On the latter occasion, we pledged $10
million, in addition to $3 million over three years,
through the India-Brazil-South Africa Fund and offered
enhanced technical cooperation to the Palestinian
National Authority. We received over one hundred
refugees from the Ruweished camp in Jordan, and only
last week we disbursed a contribution of $200,000 for
the Nahr el-Bared camp in Lebanon.

Brazil is convinced that there will be no peace in
the Middle East before a just, lasting and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question is
reached on the basis of the Quartet Road Map, the
Madrid terms of reference, the principle of land for
peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and relevant United
Nations resolutions. We deeply regret that the
Annapolis peace process will not be completed in the

timeframe originally envisaged. However, we were
encouraged by the Quartet's statement of 9 November,
according to which the Israelis and Palestinians could
set up "a solid negotiating structure for continued
progress in the future". We were also reassured by the
commitment of both parties to "vigorous, ongoing and
continuous negotiations". This is crucial.

Brazil supports the Security Council in its
commitment to the irreversibility of the bilateral
negotiations, as stated in resolution 1850 (2008). The
Council must ensure that such words are turned into
deeds. The political leaders of Israel, the Palestinian
Authority and the United States bear a special
responsibility in assisting the Council in that
formidable task.

We also join the Quartet's call for negotiations to
be intensified. Brazil listened carefully to the
resolution's call for all States to contribute to the
negotiations and to the well-being of the Palestinians.
Once again, we renew our readiness to cooperate fully
and effectively with the parties and the international
community.

It is imperative that Israelis and Palestinians fulfil
their obligations under the performance-based Road
Map, as stated in the Annapolis Joint Understanding.
The parties must also refrain from any activity
inconsistent with a future agreement based on the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council. Settlement
in the occupied territories must cease. It is also
indispensable that all violence be stopped, including
that committed by settlers. Humanitarian law must be
strictly observed by all parties, in all cases.

We express our grave concern regarding the
plight of Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. We support the
Secretary-General's call that a steady and sufficient
supply of fuel and humanitarian assistance be allowed
into Gaza and that the work of the United Nations be
facilitated. Not only are several such measures required
under international law and existing political
commitments but they are also needed to ease
negotiations. The peace process will be greatly
strengthened if substantial improvement occurs in the
situation on the ground, including in the West Bank. As
we have done in the past, we condemn the launching of
rockets against Israel this week.

Progress must also be made on other crucial
tracks on which efforts are under way to decrease
tension and eventually reach a comprehensive solution
to the interwoven challenges to peace and security.
Palestinian reunification is indispensable and we praise
Egypt for its good offices in this domain. Dialogue and
understanding between Israel and Syria are also
necessities. We commend Beirut and Damascus for
recent steps toward the normalization of bilateral ties.

Resolution of the question of Palestine has eluded
the international community for simply too long. Our
inability to address this challenge effectively has had a
negative impact and made it even more difficult to
solve other problems in the region. Years and years of
30

failed attempts to bring peace and stability to the
Middle East risk eroding the credibility of the entire
international community, as recently recalled by former
President Martti Ahtisaari. We need just, lasting and
comprehensive results and we need them now. Brazil is
ready to continue making its contribution.

