Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): It is a pleasure to see you, Madam, presiding
over this very important meeting ofthe Security Council
on the working methods of this body. We welcome
this initiative. We acknowledge and are grateful for
your work and that of your team, which has injected
dynamism into the work of the Security Council. On
this specific topic, we thank you for all your efforts
and your initiatives in the Informal Working Group on
Documentation and Other Procedural Questions.
Nicaragua associates itself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of Saint Lucia,
Ambassador Rambally, who spoke on behalf of the
L.69 group, of which we are a member.

We hope that this discussion will help us achieve
a deeper understanding of the central issue that is at
the very heart of our discussion, that is, to achieve an
in-depth reform of the Security Council, including of
its working methods, so that the work of the Council
can become more transparent, that there be true
accountability and, most importantly, that the Council's
credibility can be restored.

In order to discuss the working methods of the
Security Council, it is essential to recognize not only on
an individual basis but also collectively that the Council
needs to be comprehensively reformed. We cannot
speak of working methods of the Security Council
in a piecemeal way. Everything is part and parcel of
a comprehensive reform that we have committed
ourselves to carrying out. It is vital urgently to expand
the Security Council in both categories of membership
to enhance its representation, give greater legitimacy
and credibility to its decisions, and to give effect, inter
alia, a substantial improvement in its working methods.

We are aware that significant improvement in
the methods of work of the Council is an imperative
in order to improve its efficiency and effectiveness
and to achieve accountability in line with the needs
of the members of the Organization as a whole. Such
improvements should not simply remain cosmetic; they
must be real. Changes in both procedure and approach
are necessary.

First and foremost, we need to reform the
composition of the Council. Article 24(1) ofthe Charter
clearly sets out that in discharging its duties under its
responsibility, the Security Council acts on behalf ofthe
other Members of the United Nations, that its primary
responsibility is the maintenance of international peace
and security. What the Security Council does and how it
does it to fulfil this task is of great interest to the entire
international community, not only to the members of
the Council.

In the past few years, there has been a growing
recognition of the fact that the current composition
of the Council, which has existed since 1945, and
its methods of work must be brought into line with
contemporary reality.

The Council has demonstrated often that it has
little interest, when taking its decisions, in consulting
with the countries most affected by such decisions.
A more transparent and democratic Council will
need to establish a permanent mechanism for broad
and inclusive consultations that takes into account
the interests of the affected countries and the troop-
contributing countries before any decisions are taken.
Also, broader consultations with regional organizations
and the General Assembly should be held.

Access to documentation and information is a
topic of particular concern and the trend of holding
closed meetings, for which there is no record, should
be reversed. By the same token, often the rest of
the Organization's membership - non-Council
members - are not allowed to participate in debates.
Even when the discussion is on topics of interest to the
international community that affect all of us and, above
all, topics on which we all have the right to have an
opinion.

With regard to concrete ideas on reforming the
Security Council, including its working methods,
we note with interest some of the very important
recommendations that have been expressed today.
We hope to see those recommendations and the
recommendations made during the sixty-eighth session
of the General Assembly, circulated in the concept
paper (S/2014/725, annex) by the President, included in
the text ofa proposal that should be circulated among us
as soon as possible in order to fulfil a mandate given to
us by our Heads of State. The mandate is to implement
those reforms on the occasion of the seventieth
anniversary of the United Nations in 2015, so that this
important body of our Organization genuinely is and
acts in accordance with the realities of the twenty-first
century.

