Mr. Richardson (United States of America):
Mr. President, I join my colleagues in welcoming your

 

Foreign Minister, whom I briefly had a chance to meet as
he departed.

The United States welcomes this opportunity to
discuss the problem of security for humanitarian operations
around the world. There is a growing need for integrated
and creative approaches to complex emergencies,
approaches that will take into account the political, as well
as the military and humanitarian, aspects of each situation.

The United States is extremely concerned about the
increasing incidence of violence against humanitarian
workers as they carry out their work. Emergency assistance
to refugees and displaced persons is difficult enough
without security threats and violent actions against relief
workers and those they are trying to help. Our hearts go out
to the relief workers who have been the victims of violence
in recent months and to their colleagues who continue to
work in dangerous circumstances - among them the
Department of Humanitarian Affairs workers who were shot
in Sierra Leone; the United Nations Children's Fund
(UNICEF) workers who faced armed attackers in their
compound and suffered grave injury in Zaire; the human-
rights monitors who were killed in Rwanda; the staff
members of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and others who were held
hostage in Tajikistan in February; and the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) staff who were
murdered in Chechnya last December.

Security concerns for United Nations and non-
governmental organization staff working in today's
humanitarian emergencies, often in or near war zones or
areas of civil unrest, pose unique and complex challenges
for the agencies involved and for the United Nations system
as a whole. The increasing number of internal crises - in
the Balkans, the Great Lakes, the Caucasus - has greatly
complicated this problem with irregular and often
undisciplined combatants. There is no single solution to this
problem, no model we can set up ahead of time to meet the
complexities of each new emergency situation. But
certainly, local security issues must be addressed each time
the United Nations sends people to work in an area of
unrest, whether they are assigned to distribute emergency
food, repatriate refugees, monitor human rights violations
or provide technical assistance for elections.

In some cases, United Nations peacekeeping forces
already on the ground have been assigned a protective
function for humanitarian workers. But the United Nations
cannot send peacekeepers into each and every emergency,
and the record on using the military to provide security for
humanitarian deployments is mixed. Armed forces, even
those wearing blue helmets, are sometimes not seen as
neutral in a conflict. At times, the presence of armed
security forces can complicate delivery of humanitarian
assistance. Some organizations, such as the ICRC, do not
work with security forces, except under very limited
circumstances. United Nations peacekeeping forces have
themselves become the target of violence, as in the recent
kidnapping of military observers in Tajikistan, or the
targeted killings of United Nations military personnel in
Rwanda and Somalia in years past.

In some emergencies, regional organizations have
played a positive role in providing security in conflict
situations: notably, the coalition forces in Haiti; the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) in Liberia; or
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) participation
in the former Yugoslavia. We welcome such initiatives as
these, coordinated with the United Nations, that can
enhance regional capabilities to provide security in
complex emergencies.

Growing confusion of victims and victimizers has
complicated the delivery of humanitarian assistance. It has
become increasingly difficult in some cases to distinguish
legitimate refugees from parties to the conflict. The
tendency of humanitarian agencies has been to give
persons fleeing their country the benefit of the doubt, and
to classify all as refugees. Or large refugee camps
administered by humanitarian agencies can serve as
staging bases for armed combatants. Inevitably, this leads
other parties to the conflict to view the humanitarian
agencies as taking sides and losing their impartiality.
Humanitarian agencies should not be giving succour to
combatants who perpetuate conflict and hide behind
innocent populations. The moral dilemma is whether to
leave those human shields to their fate, or to rescue them
and simultaneously protect their victimizers.

For each new humanitarian operation, security
assessments should be incorporated into the planning from
the very beginning and updated continually. The
international community and those involved in the conflict
must observe the principle of respect for the neutrality
and inviolability of international humanitarian personnel.
They all have the responsibility to provide protection for
international humanitarian workers and to facilitate their
work. They should also ensure access by humanitarian aid
workers to vulnerable populations. When a party cannot
and will not provide security for humanitarian operations
in its territory, the United Nations agencies and the

 
Security Council must work together to explore the best
response.

Appropriate, effective measures to ensure security
should be incorporated into the programmes of the
humanitarian agencies. Finally, continuous coordination
between the political, military and humanitarian aspects
of any intervention in a crisis is crucial to its success. We
urge the United Nations, at this time of self-examination.
to consider how best to ensure such coordination.

The United States will continue to work with the
Security Council and all the United Nations agencies to
address the grave problem of assuring the security of
humanitarian assistance operations, These brave people
remain in the front lines fighting hunger. disease and
homelessness in stark and often dangerous surroundings.
They deserve not only our thanks but our active efforts to
improve their security as they help the world's most
vulnerable citizens.

