Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to thank France
for organizing and convening this open debate. We also
convey our gratitude for the report of the Secretary-
General (S/2017/821), to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Virginia Gamba, for her briefing, and
to Mr. Mubin Shaikh for sharing his life experience
with us.

Murders, mutilations of children, recruitment, the
use of children as human shields and suicide bombers,
and denying them access to humanitarian assistance
in certain situations shows the enormous challenge
that States and the Organization face in dealing with
the situation of children in armed conflicts. Such
conflicts profoundly affect the lives of girls and boys
in many parts of the world. The direct consequences
of war and violence affect them to a greater extent
because they suffer from psychological trauma due to
the abhorrent acts that they witness or fall victim to,
and are also subject to the physical consequences that
affect their normal development and very often lead to
their death. An example of such tragic situations can
be seen first and foremost in the actions of the terrorist
group Boko Haram. They involve children in violence,
and their aim is to break the will of the children. Their
worst crime is a kind of baptism of group violence,
ceremonial sacrifice, mutilation and murder, making
their reintegration into society all the more difficult, as
was pointed out recently by a local newspaper.

Another case that is particularly striking is the
situation of Palestinian girls and boys. According to
the Secretary-General's report, 444 minors, including
15 girls, are detained in Israeli military prisons. In the
east of Jerusalem there havebeen 712 documented cases
of Palestinian minors detained for "security" reasons.
Due to the conflict in 2016 a total of 36 Palestinian
girls and boys lost their lives in addition to one Israeli
girl, and 900 minors were injured. The data given in
the Secretary-General's report are alarming. Clearly,
the ever-growing participation of non-State actors and
the employment of non-traditional methods of war are
increasing the difficulty of qualifying in any detailed
manner the consequences of war on children. The
proliferation and expansion of armed groups, wars over
natural resources that provoke and sustain conflicts,
in addition to the internationalization of terrorism,
are factors that have not been sufficiently combated
or significantly reduced. We agree with the Secretary-
General when he states that the best way to protect
civilians, in this case girls and boys, is to address the
root causes of conflict. For us, among those causes are
war, insecurity, illicit trafficking in persons, trafficking
in weapons, terrorism, regime-change policies, the race
for natural resources, and socioeconomic conditions
related to an unequal distribution of wealth, among
other things.

Girls and boys suffer an unacceptable level
of Violation of their rights as parties in a conflict,
as mentioned in the report. At least 4,000 verified
Violations have been committed by State forces and
more than 11,500 by armed groups in 20 countries
around the world. According to UNICEF, approximately
50 million children have been involved in armed
conflicts, of which 28 million are indirectly affected by
forced displacement, sexual Violence, the loss of family
and abandonment. In times of war and conflict the
limited security leads once again to a lack of access to
basic services and education and health. That is made
worse by the destruction of infrastructure, schools
and hospitals.

The growing number of children in armed conflicts
has as a result an increase in child victims. The
participation of children in hostilities is a disturbing
phenomenon that to date has not been able to be
completely resolved by the international community,
either by the non-implementation of measures aimed
at preventing conflicts or because of a lack of visible
action to put an end to impunity for such crimes.
In that regard, we condemn all acts committed by
armed groups, including those that commit acts of
terrorism, mass kidnappings, rape and other forms of
sexual violence, such as sexual slavery, and all forms
of exploitation.

In that regard, we should remember that various
norms of international humanitarian law, including
those provided for in the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and their Protocols Additional of 1979, as well as the
provisions set out in the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, refer to the special
protection that children should enjoy because of their
greater degree of vulnerability. For all those reasons,
we should mention as an important set of information
that, of the 15 members of the Security Council
meeting here today, 14 have ratified the Convention on
the Rights of the Child. Bolivia would also call on all
States to adhere to similarly important international
instruments. Bolivia also calls on the members of the
international community in general to comply with
their obligations in order to protect children in armed
conflicts, and thereby safeguard their fundamental
rights. We would emphasize the responsibility that all
States have to end impunity and to investigate those
responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war
crimes and all such horrendous acts that are perpetrated
against boys and girls.

We consider it is fundamental and urgent to design
and implement tangible actions that include protection
plans for girls and boys in armed conflicts, in addition
to implementing programmes that will guarantee
remedial measures through physical and psychological
rehabilitation, an end to stigmatization and ensuring
that such acts are not repeated.

We would like to end on a positive note: the end
of the armed conflict in Colombia. That is something
that should be stressed because of the progress made
and the measures adopted by the parties to address the
Violations and abuses committed against boys and girls
in the context of the armed conflict in that country.
That includes a dialogue that involves minors in the
agreements, legislative advances aimed at promoting
the protection of children affected by that armed
conflict and the joint coordinated work carried outwith
United Nations agencies.

All of those activities as a whole are goals that
should guide the efforts of national Governments, the
United Nations, regional and subregional organizations
and all specialized institutions in the protection of girls
and boys in armed conflicts.

