Mr. Spatafora (Italy): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak
Republic and Slovenia, the associated countries
Bulgaria, Romania and Turkey, and the European Free
Trade Association country member of the European
Economic Area, Iceland, have declared that they align
themselves with this statement.

The European Union reiterates its strong
condemnation of the brutal killings and violence that
took place in Kosovo during August and September
against a United Nations police officer and against
Kosovars of both Serbian and Albanian ethnicity. In
expressing our deepest condolences to the families of
the victims and to the Government of India, we are also
confident that no efforts are being spared to arrest the
perpetrators and bring them to justice. The European
Union believes that everybody in Kosovo must
understand that the time for violence is over and that
such deplorable incidents can only undermine the
image of Kosovo in Europe and in the international
community.

We therefore welcome the arrival in Kosovo of
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Harri Holkeri. We would like to reaffirm
our strong support for him in the challenging task of
ensuring full implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999), which continues to be the
cornerstone of the international community's
commitment to Kosovo.
In that regard, we very much appreciate the
briefing given to the Council by Assistant Secretary-
General Hedi Annabi. He has given us a very clear-cut
picture of where we stand and of the way forward.

We also would like to urge all concerned in
Kosovo and in the region to cooperate in a constructive
manner with the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on fully implementing resolution
1244 (1999) while refraining from unilateral acts and
statements that risk jeopardizing the goal of a stable,
multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo.

The European Union fully supports the United
Nations weapons amnesty programme launched on 1
September by Mr. Holkeri and shares his views that
"the people of Kosovo should seize this opportunity to
help themselves while helping Kosovo" and that "the
values of tolerance and democracy are the foundation
of a free society".

Kosovo must comply with international and
European standards as soon as possible. That goal can
be achieved only through the active cooperation of all
the stakeholders in Kosovo and the region. We
therefore urge the leadership in Belgrade and Pristina
to launch without further delay a direct dialogue on
practical issues of mutual interest. That is a
prerequisite to building mutual confidence, as was
announced at the European Union's Western Balkans
summit held at Thessaloniki on 21 June.

The European Union will ensure that Kosovo's
European prospects are not held back by the final
status issue. Before addressing that issue, however, a
democratic, multi-ethnic and multicultural Kosovo
guaranteeing full respect for the rule of law and for
human and minority rights will have to be built. To that
end, the European Union reiterates its support for the
"standards before status" strategy, which now needs to
become operational.

The European Union is also firmly committed to
supporting Kosovo's economic recovery and
development, including the privatization process, as an
indispensable measure for ensuring the normalization
and development of society. At the same time, we
would like to see progress on decentralization and on
the return process, where there is still an urgent need
for concrete measures to be taken by the competent
authorities, both at the central and local levels.

