Mr. Vassilakis (Greece) (spoke in French): In the
first three months of the year, the Security Council
addressed the issue of the Sudan on several occasions.
The collective wish of the Council was to see the
implementation of the Naivasha Comprehensive Peace
Agreement as swiftly as possible. We also succeeded in
adopting the resolution establishing the United Nations
force to monitor the implementation of the Agreement.
In addition, the Security Council reached agreement
with regard to the situation in Darfur. Thus, we adopted
a resolution on specific measures that, we hope, will
help to find a political solution in that region, which
has suffered enough.

The last issue that the Security Council had to
address was the violation of humanitarian law. It is the
issue of impunity, which we must never allow to go
unpunished. The issue of violations of humanitarian
law is one to which my country attaches very great
importance; that is why we are a party to the
International Criminal Court. We would have preferred
a resolution text without exceptions, but we were
guided by our concern that it would be far more
important to have a resolution that took into account
certain differing views than to have no resolution at all
and to allow violations of humanitarian law to go
unpunished.

When we address issues in which moderation is
given top priority, we achieve positive results. It is in
that spirit that we voted in favour of the resolution. We
believe that it strengthens the authority of the Security
Council in its efforts to promote peace, security,
international justice and law in all societies,
particularly those in conflict. The resolution also
strengthens the authority of the International Criminal
Court, which will have the chance to prove itself and
show what it can do.

The resolution creates certain exceptions for the
specific case of the Sudan for countries not parties to
the Statute of the International Criminal Court. That
will create certain problems of interpretation regarding
the application of the principle of exclusive
international jurisdiction. In our view, the resolution
does not infringe on that principle, which is firmly
rooted in the Statute of the Court and in other
international agreements. Despite that, we preferred to
vote in favour rather than to allow violations of
humanitarian law to go unpunished.

We are sure that the three resolutions adopted by
the Security Council this month will help to restore
peace in the Sudan and the prosperity of its people.

