Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council, and to commend
the Permanent Representative of Gabon and his team
for having steered the work of the Council in June. I
would also like to thank you, Sir, for scheduling
today's debate on Afghanistan. And I thank
Ambassador Zahir Tanin, Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan, for his statement. We are grateful for the
Secretary-General's latest report (S/2011/381) and
appreciate the briefing by Special Representative
Staffan de Mistura.

Afghanistan is at the beginning of the
implementation stage of the transition whereby its
security forces will start to assume their
responsibilities in seven key areas, including Kabul.
This is a critical phase for both Afghanistan and the
international community. We are deeply concerned that
the challenges confronting Afghanistan, particularly on
the security front, do not appear to be receding. On the
contrary, the overall security environment continues to
deteriorate. The Secretary-General's report notes that
there has been a 51 per cent increase in security
incidents compared with the same period in 2010,
characterized by a significant increase in suicide
attacks, abductions and assassinations. The terrorist
attacks on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) compound in Mazar-e-Sharif
and the Government buildings in Kandahar, and the
coordinated suicide attack at the highly secure
Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul and on a hospital in
Logar, confirm a change in tactics whereby the Taliban
and other opposition groups are opting for soft civilian
targets.

As was pointed out in our statement on this
subject on 17 March (see S/PV.6497), such attacks
point to a dangerous osmosis of ideologies, ambitions,
training and operations among the terrorism syndicate
in the region, with suicide terrorism as its main
technique and targets not limited to Afghanistan. The
international community, in its hurry to withdraw from
a combat role in Afghanistan, will ignore this at its
own peril. It therefore becomes crucial that the
transition be linked to the realities on the ground rather
than to a rigid timetable.

A constant assessment and review of the evolving
situation, in coordination with the Afghan Government,
is essential in that regard. We appreciate the enhanced
collaboration between the International Security
Assistance Force and the Afghan National Security
Forces in building the requisite strength and
capabilities of the Afghan forces, which, along with
adequate enablers, is essential to the transition of
security responsibilities. It is important that the
transition be Afghan-owned. It must also be planned
and implemented in a systematic manner and must
ensure the protection and promotion of the human
rights of all Afghans.

For the security and stabilization of Afghanistan,
it is important to isolate and root out the terrorism
syndicate that includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, Lashkar-e-Taiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating within and outside
Afghanistan's borders. These groups are ideologically
and operationally fused, and their bonds have
strengthened over the years. As the Secretary-General's
report points out, the insurgency in Afghanistan
remains resilient, demonstrating a capability for
launching multiple complex attacks. The insurgents'
continued resilience, their changing tactics, their
numbers and their spread to areas previously
considered safe are a grim reminder that security gains
will remain transient unless the international
community is able to deal firmly with safe havens for
terrorist groups outside Afghanistan's borders.

India fully supports an Afghan-led, inclusive and
transparent process of reconciliation, adhering to the
guidelines enunciated by the Afghan Government in
the Kabul and London communique's. This must be
accompanied by an inclusive political process and
intra-Afghan dialogue. It is important that the
antecedents of those willing to reintegrate be
ascertained, and that it be ensured that they are
genuinely reconciled.

We support the views and decisions of the
Government and people of Afghanistan as they seek to
build a more secure, stable and prosperous future and a
strong democracy in their country. The Afghan people
must be allowed to rebuild their land in conditions of
peace and security, free from interference by their
neighbours, and they must be the arbiters of their own
destiny. It is our expectation that the new sanctions
regime established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011)
will enable the Afghan Government to have a greater
say in confronting the challenges posed by those who
constitute a threat to the country's peace, security and
stability.
Afghan ownership and leadership are vital to
development and reconstruction in Afghanistan. This
also implies greater coherence, coordination and
further streamlining of the international community's
development efforts, including aligning assistance with
Afghan national priorities and increasingly working
through Afghan institutions. We are happy to note that
UNAMA continues to align its priorities with those of
the Afghan Government.

India and Afghanistan share a strategic
partnership based on a strong foundation of rich bonds
in history and civilization, and on the shared pursuit of
regional peace and prosperity. India remains committed
to partnering with the Government and people of
Afghanistan in the building of a peaceful, stable,
democratic and prosperous nation. India's assistance
programme is spread throughout Afghanistan and
covers almost the entire gamut of economic and social
development activities. Assisting Afghanistan with its
reconstruction efforts, with capacity-building and skills
for developing human resources, and with building its
public institutions is a special priority area for India.
As Ambassador Tanin mentioned in his statement,
during his last visit to Afghanistan, from 11 to 13 May,
our Prime Minister announced additional assistance of
$500 million over and above India's existing
commitment of $1.5 billion.

Afghanistan's stability and economic
development depend greatly on its neighbours and the
region as a whole. Closer economic integration with
India and other countries in the region is the key to
Afghanistan's future prosperity. The area of
Afghanistan south of the Hindu Kush all the way up to
the Ganges delta form a part of a single geographic and
economic basin, with the plains of India constituting
the centre of its economic gravity. It is by far
Afghanistan's largest regional market - a potential
source of investment, skills, training, technology and
expertise and a model of democracy and national
institution-building in a culturally comfortable context.

Afghanistan has immense potential as a land
bridge linking Central, West and South Asia and
emerging as a trade, transport and energy hub. The
recent developments in regional cooperation, including
the signing of the agreement on the Turkmenistan-
Afghanistan-Pakistan-India gas pipeline project, would
provide added impetus to regional cooperation.
Growing economic interdependence would catalyse
peace and prosperity in the region at large and in
Afghanistan in particular. Afghanistan, as a member of
the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
(SAARC) since 2005, is becoming an increasingly
active SAARC member. India, as a neighbour, will
continue its efforts towards the greater integration of
Afghanistan into the regional framework.
In conclusion, we commend the good work done
by UNAMA and we think that at this critical juncture,
it is imperative that the international community
continue to remain steadfast in its support for the
Government of Afghanistan as per its priorities.

