Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Ms. Federica Mogherini, High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, for her detailed briefing.

I would first like to congratulate everyone on
today's seventy-second anniversary of the victory over
fascism, an extraordinary event that changed the world
for the better and laid the foundations for the United
Nations. It made a genuine unification of Europe
possible, not one based on the delusions of some about
their superiority to others, but founded on equality and
mutual respect. We fully share those values, which
should constitute the pillars of today's multipolar world.

Russia has consistently advocated for the
development and improvement of United Nations
cooperation with regional and subregional mechanisms,
in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations, and cooperation with the European
Union (EU) is no exception. It, too, should be established
on the basis of the Charter and in the framework of
General Assembly resolution 65/276. We have seen
the contribution that the European Union has made to
solving many international problems and its emergence
as a truly global player in the world arena. Russian-EU
cooperation on many current issues on the international
agenda has not stopped, despite the fact that relations
between us have not been at their best in recent years.
That is particularly noticeable in areas where Russia
and the EU's interests objectively coincide, on issues
such as combating terrorism and drug trafficking,
dialogues on migration and readmission, problems of
disarmament and non-proliferation and situations in the
Middle East, the Balkans, Africa and Asia, including
Central Asia.

Some good examples of Russia's cooperation with
the EU have been our joint efforts to settle the Iranian
nuclear-programme issue, as well as our collaboration
on internal security, on which we have regularly held
constructive and useful talks on counter-terrorism.
We are pleased with the ongoing positive experience
of Russian-EU cooperation in providing security
support, including in the EU operations and missions
in Chad and the Central African Republic, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, and in the fight against piracy off the
coast of Somalia. Unfortunately, the absence of a legal
framework makes increasing our cooperation on crisis
management difficult.

Regrettably, however, current realities and
discussions in the Security Council have shown that
our European partners, rather than pursuing patient
and careful teamwork, have often chosen destructive,
unilateral approaches that can only leave us seriously
concerned. We are disturbed by the European Union's
continuing use of unilateral sanctions that bypass the
Security Council. In our view, such restrictive measures
are illegitimate and counterproductive, especially since
in most cases their expanded use over the past two
decades has increased people's suffering without in
any way helping to settle the crises they are designed
to resolve. Such practices undermine the legitimacy
of the United Nations and damage the authority of the
EU itself.

Another example of illegal activity is the
participation of the EU in the so-called coalition
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant; it has
been conducting military operations in Syria without
a mandate from the Security Council or an invitation
from the Syrian Government. This undermines the
international order based on international law, and
not on no-one-knows-whose rules. It diminishes the
prospects for a global anti-terrorism front coordinated
by the United Nations and makes the fight against
terrorism less effective overall. We have been closely
following the situation in the Middle East and North
Africa, including the continued exodus of refugees
from conflict-affected countries, and have regretfully
concluded that this sad situation is the result of
external interference in the internal affairs of States
and aggressive policies in those regions, accompanied
by violations of the Charter and Security Council
resolutions. The European Union's military Operation
Sophia in the Southern Central Mediterranean has still
not been able to handle its basic task of destroying
the business model of the networks that are illegally
transporting and smuggling people in the region.

In the light of the Secretary-General's latest
report (S/2017/95/Rev.1) on the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
and what it says about the EU entities' efforts there,
it would be appropriate if, where EU efforts - and
those of regional organizations in crisis situations more
generally - interact with United Nations political
entities, they were complementary to the work of
the United Nations and aimed at implementing the
internationally agreed-on parameters of the settlement
in question. It is unacceptable for them to subordinate
the resolution of the conflict to their own agendas
and priorities.

With regard to resolving the conflict in south-
eastern Ukraine, there is no alternative to the
established settlement framework of the Minsk package
of measures. The efforts must focus on fulfilling the
political provisions of the agreement, which include
granting special status to the Donbas region and
amnesty to its citizens, separating the parties and
conducting humanitarian demining. None of that is
possible without conducting a direct dialogue with
Donetsk and Luhansk. Only Kyiv can start action on
these political aspects, and it has been stubbornly
refusing to do so. For the time being, Brussels has
continued to display an antagonistic attitude on the issue
through its anti-Russian sanctions, which does nothing
but create a sense of impunity and irresponsibility in
the Ukrainian authorities.

Here is another example. At this time, when the
world is once again celebrating the end of the Second
World War, I would like to recall here the EU's refusal
to support draft resolutions submitted to the General
Assembly by Russia on combating the glorification of
Nazism (resolution 71/179). We should not ignore the
acute problem of neo-Nazism in countries that Brussels
protects, including the Baltic States and Ukraine, let
alone play with that sort of fire for the sake of fleeting
political goals. Europe should have learned that lesson
by now.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that for
our part we are committed to full cooperation with
the European Union in working for common strategic
goals. However, that should take place exclusively
on a equal footing taking full account of each other's
interests and concerns.

