Mr. Sumi (Japan): I, too, wish to thank President
Renate Winter and Prosecutor Stephen Rapp of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone for their informative
briefings. Their briefings to the Security Council are
very timely in view of the commencement on 13 July
of the defence case in the trial of Charles Taylor and of
the progress made in the other cases since the most
recent briefings in 2007. I also welcome the presence
of the representative of Sierra Leone in the Council
today.

Japan is strongly committed to the realization of
justice and the rule of law at both the national and the
international levels, and believes that international and
hybrid criminal tribunals have played an important role
to that end. We have therefore been making the utmost
effort to contribute to the activities of the various
criminal tribunals.

I take this opportunity to reaffirm Japan's strong
support for the activities of the Special Court for Sierra
Leone. The Special Court was established in a country
where serious crimes had been committed. Although
the case of former President Charles Taylor had to be
conducted in The Hague for several reasons, the
closeness of the Special Court to the people of Sierra
Leone and its effective outreach programmes have
contributed to gaining the understanding and
acceptance of the affected people. This unique feature
of the Special Court is noteworthy and provides
12
important lessons for future trials for serious crimes
committed in conflict situations.

Japan highly appreciates the efforts made by the
judges, prosecutors and registrars, who have
contributed greatly to the significant progress made so
far. We also appreciate the tireless efforts of the
Management Committee chaired by Canada, which has
been addressing a number of difficulties faced by the
Special Court. Japan strongly hopes that, through the
continued efforts of the Special Court and the
contributing States, the Court will be able to overcome
the current financial challenges and successfully
complete its mandate.

The Special Court for Sierra Leone has played a
pioneering role in addressing unprecedented legal and
practical challenges. The issue regarding the residual
functions of the ad hoc tribunals after the completion
of trials is another unprecedented challenge that the
Special Court must address before the other
international tribunals. Although there are important
differences between the Special Court and the other
tribunals, Japan hopes that the experience of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone will offer useful
insights on that issue for the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and other tribunals.

