The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the Deputy Minister of International
Relations and Cooperation of the Republic of South
Africa.

South Africa expresses its appreciation to
Assistant Secretary-General Oscar Fernandez-Taranco
for his briefing to the Security Council. We thank the
Permanent Observer of Palestine and the Permanent
Representative of Israel for their statements.

My delegation associates itself with the
statements to be delivered later today by the
representatives of Benin and Egypt, who will speak on
behalf of the Group of African States and the
Non-Aligned Movement, respectively.

The historical celebrations that took place in
South Africa on 8 January, marking the 100th
anniversary of the African National Congress, the
oldest modern liberation movement in Africa, were a
stark reminder of the resilience of the human spirit. In
1994, after decades of struggle for liberation, South
Africa emerged from the scourge of apartheid to
become an equal among the nations of the world.

The year 2012 marks 45 years since Israel first
occupied Palestinian land. Drawing lessons from our
own experience, we are certain that the Palestinians,
with the assistance of the international community, will
prevail in their quest for a viable State of their own. We
should all play our part in fulfilling the aspirations of
the Palestinian people, who have long yearned for
freedom and who continue to endure the harshness of
Israeli occupation.

In that regard, South Africa remains convinced
that Palestine meets all the criteria for United Nations
membership as set out in the United Nations Charter
and deserves to become a full Member of the
Organization. In addition, we must work towards a
solution that maintains Israel's right to exist and
ensures long-term peace and stability for its people.

We have come to the beginning of a new year,

and yet peace between the Palestinians and the Israelis

continues to be elusive. South Africa remains

disappointed that since 23 September 2011, when the

Quartet committed itself to assisting the parties to

make progress in the peace process, tangible progress
has yet to be registered.

We appreciate the efforts of the Quartet over the
past two months, in particular its facilitation of
meetings with the parties, albeit separately. We also
support the Quartet's appeal urging the parties to begin
direct negotiations immediately and without
preconditions and to submit proposals on borders and
security. Palestine's submission of proposals on those
issues is emblematic of its commitment to the prompt
and peaceful resolution of the conflict with its
neighbour. Conversely, Israel's failure to comply by
omitting to submit proposals as required by the Quartet
on the same issues is disappointing.

My delegation further welcomes the efforts of
Jordan in its attempt to restart direct peace talks. We
can only hope that such discussions will yield positive
results and culminate in an earnest beginning of direct
negotiations between the parties.

It is perhaps opportune that, as the international
community, we ask ourselves some questions, namely,
is it not time to assess the effectiveness of the Quartet
model? And what more can the Security Council do to
help the parties resume negotiations and find lasting
peace?

What is of concern is that, despite attempts to
resuscitate the negotiations, the prospects for direct
talks seem non-existent, as the Israeli Government
continues its acts of aggression, such as ongoing illegal
settlement construction, home demolitions, illegal
excavations of religious sites and restricting the access
and movement of the Palestinian people. It is worth
noting that in the midst of attempts to reinvigorate the
peace process, Israel has continued to issue tenders for
new illegal settlements, including on 3 January, the
same day that deliberations between the parties began
in Jordan. Those illegal actions cast a shadow over the
sincerity of Israel as a partner for peace, especially
since settlements have led to the fragmentation of the
West Bank and the isolation of Jerusalem from the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territories, undermining the
feasibility of a contiguous Palestinian State.

Those are antagonistic acts that make the reality
of a two-State solution, as called for by the
international community, a distant dream, if not a pipe
dream. It is the Security Council's responsibility to act
against such actions, as they violate international law,
including the resolutions of the Council. The last time
that the Council attempted to take action on the
settlements was in February 2011, and we failed to
fulfil our responsibility, despite all of us agreeing that
the settlements are indeed illegal.

Another disturbing development is the escalation
of settler violence in the occupied Palestinian territory.
In that regard, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) recently reported that
settler attacks against Palestinian civilians had
increased by at least 50 per cent. Settler attacks on
civilians, the desecration of Palestinian mosques and
churches and the destruction of property, including the
cutting down of olive trees, should be unequivocally
condemned. It is vital for the Israeli Government, as
the occupying Power, to prevent such acts of violence
and take action against perpetrators. The failure of the
Israeli Government to address violence perpetrated by
settlers has led to a state of impunity that, according to
OCHA, encourages further violence and undermines
the physical security and livelihoods of Palestinians.

We welcome the implementation of the second
stage of the prisoner release agreement, which we hope
will serve as a positive confidence-building measure.
We reiterate that that is a positive step towards greater
cooperation between Israel and Palestine that should be
maintained and built upon. With regard to the
remaining prisoners, we urge the Israeli Government to
fulfil its obligations under international humanitarian
law by ensuring their safety, allowing access to them
by family members and respecting their basic human
rights.

South Africa has always maintained that the
future of Palestine is significantly dependent on the
unity of its people. The Arab Spring augurs well for the
Palestinian struggle. In that regard, we encourage the
Palestinians to take advantage of the new regional
context and strive for greater unity among various
political groupings. In particular, we urge Hamas and
Fatah to implement the Cairo reconciliation agreement
and collectively consolidate the gains of the Palestinian
people. Having learned from our own experience, we
believe that intra-Palestinian unity is essential for long-
term reconciliation and sustainable peace in Palestine.

With regard to the situation in Gaza, South Africa
remains deeply concerned about Israel's continued
blockade. We concur with the call made by the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Valerie
Amos, after her visit to Gaza last year, for an end to the
man-made and protracted humanitarian situation
through the lifting of the blockade on Gaza. The
blockade and the restrictions it imposes are in violation
of international humanitarian law, including article 23
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, and contrary to the
will of the international community, as expressed in
various Security Council resolutions, including
resolution 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1515 (2003) and
1860 (2009). Violence and rocket attacks against Israel
emanating from Gaza are also of concern and should be
condemned. Those actions are indiscriminate and in no
way advance the legitimate Palestinian cause.

On Syria, South Africa has taken note of the
outcome of the Arab League ministerial meeting on
22 January. We welcome the League's decision to
extend its observer mission and the League's efforts at
achieving a peaceful resolution of the situation. We
remain deeply concerned about the ongoing violence
by all sides, including the recent spate of car bombings
and the resultant loss of life and injuries. South Africa
emphasizes that the primary goal is for the violence to
cease in Syria. We reiterate that any solution to the
Syrian crisis should be Syrian-led, based on genuine
national dialogue, devoid of any form of intimidation
and free of interference from outside. My delegation
has also taken note of the draft resolution submitted by
the Russian Federation, and we will continue to
participate constructively in the negotiations on the
text.

In conclusion, we believe that the current
developments in the Arab world will undoubtedly have
a bearing on the future of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the broader Arab-Israeli conflict. In our
search for a solution to the Palestinian question, it is
now more than ever clear that we should not lose sight
of the broader regional question to which Palestine is
inextricably linked. We therefore call on the Council
and other stakeholders to accelerate efforts towards the
holistic resolution of the Middle East crisis, including
the Lebanese and the Syrian tracks.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to not more than four minutes, in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and to
deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Egypt.

