Mr. President (spoke in French): | thank Ms. Sooka for her briefing. I shall now make a statement in my capacity as Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium. How can we reconcile and rebuild a society following mass atrocities and massive human rights violations? Such events destabilize families and entire communities. Their consequences are usually felt over decades or even generations. The three testimonies that we heard today illustrate those challenges but also outline prospects for solutions. Transitional justice is the set of measures intended to respond to that difficult past. It encompasses the full range of tools to provide truth, justice and reparations to victims, with the objective of preventing the recurrence of future conflicts or atrocities. The Security Council plays an important role in that area. Peace operations can help States build capacity and reform their public institutions in order to restore the rule of law. For almost 30 years, they have contributed to implementing transitional justice measures. Many of those processes, if not all, have had a significant impact on the populations concerned by giving them some form of justice to which they would otherwise not have had access. For my country, it is clear that establishing accountability for human rights violations and the most serious crimes is crucial in order to restore the population's confidence in inclusive institutions and thereby achieve lasting peace. Peace and justice should not be seen as opposing objectives, but rather as mutually reinforcing. In accordance with the principle of complementarity, the International Criminal Court may also have a role to play alongside national transitional justice measures in cases where the State concerned is unwilling or unable to effectively carry out the investigation or prosecution. However, the implementation of transitional justice is complex and of course involves many challenges. There is often a risk of falling into a victor's justice. Certain measures, including the restoration of a criminal justice system, can be very costly and entail a timeline that is unable to address the immediate challenges. Similarly, the financial resources required by disarmament, demobilization and reintegration processes may appear inadequate compared to the victims' expectations with regard to reparation. The sequence of the measures to be adopted is therefore critical for a successful transition. Mechanisms such as truth commissions and vetting processes are sometimes more appropriate than criminal proceedings when the post-conflict situation remains fragile, although some of those measures may facilitate prosecutions at a later date. Therefore, when the Security Council adopts measures to support a transitional justice process, it must be careful not to take a generic approach. We must focus our attention and actions on clear objectives that take the specific context of each situation into account. Certain guiding principles can nevertheless be drawn from numerous experiences over the past 30 years. In that connection, I would like to emphasize the following points. First, an approach that encompasses all aspects of transitional justice is fundamental in order to prevent itsfour pillars - truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-recurrence - from developing independently of each other. Those pillars are interdependent and complementary and should also create synergies with other transition processes. A holistic approach is therefore essential, and the Security Council has a role to play in that regard. Secondly, any transitional justice process must be subject to national ownership. For example, we have seen cases in which the lack of physical proximity of certain criminal mechanisms can make it difficult to find solutions and support the population. Awareness campaigns are also often crucial. Thirdly, the needs and demands of victims must be at the heart of transitional justice processes. Victims should be recognized as rights holders and included in the definition of measures decided by the national authorities. Fourthly, a more inclusive process will be more effective. That means paying particular attention to the most vulnerable victims, beginning at the development phase of transitional justice programmes, by organizing national consultations that involve victims as well as civil society. Transitional justice processes must also include a gender perspective. The voices of women are often overlooked when it comes to establishing a version of past events. Fifthly, and finally, transitional justice is a vital tool for enabling sustainable peace and development, and therefore the root causes of conflicts must also be taken into account. Those are some of the key principles that could guide the Council in its efforts to support transitional justice processes. I welcome the presence of a large number of Member States that have come to share their experiences and suggestions. I look forward to their contributions to this debate. To conclude, I would like to echo the words of Secretary-General Guterres when he said that the challenge we face here is bringing truth, justice and reconciliation together. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation, African Integration and Nigeriens Abroad of the Republic of the Niger.
