Mr. Charles (Trinidad and Tobago): I have the
honour to deliver this statement on behalf of the 14 States
members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).

CARICOM. wishes to commend Argentina, our
sister Member State in the Group of Latin Americas and
Caribbean States, for its outstanding work as President
of the Security Council during the month of August.

WearealsoheartenedbythedecisionoftheSecretary-
General to appoint one of our nationals, Ambassador
Sandra Honore, as his Special Representative and Head
of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). We express our deepest confidence
in her ability to oversee the work of the United
Nations system in Haiti, working along with Haitian
authorities to discharge the mandate of the Mission.
At the same time, CARICOM. acknowledges the work
of former acting Deputy Special Representative for
Haiti, Mr. Nigel Fisher, for his valuable contribution to
MINUSTAH and the development of Haiti.

The Secretary-General's report (S/2013/493)
provides useful information on the progress of
the efforts of the United Nations to bring lasting
peace and stability to Haiti through its Mission. For
us in CARICOM, Haiti's stability and economic
development are inextricably linked to the wider
development agenda of our subregion. CARICOM
consequently lauds MINUSTAH's efforts, which have
promoted increased stability in Haiti. We also welcome
the decision of the Security Council, as expressed
in resolution 2070 (2012), to renew MINUSTAH's
mandate until 15 October 2013, and we support the
Secretary-General's recommendation that it be further
extended until 2014.

CARICOM. also welcomes plans for encouraging
investment, which will play a critical role in spurring
Haiti's social and economic development. Nevertheless,
we submit that international assistance must be aligned
with Haiti's national priorities, so as to ensure that
there is appropriate national ownership of programmes
intended to benefit the Haitian people.
We also applaud the strides made by the Haitian
Government in reaching certain political milestones
that are indicative of progress. We remain optimistic
that the forward momentum achieved thus far will be
sustained and that all parties involved in the political
process will be able to rise above the differences that
exist between them and, in the spirit of compromise,
work together to put in place the machinery for holding
the overdue partial senatorial, municipal and local
elections.

CARICOM. notes the progress made in upholding
the rule of law in Haiti, as exemplified in the
Government's "five Es" policy programme, which lists
the rule of law as one of its pillars. We are heartened
by the reductions in civil unrest, homicides and
kidnappings, as well as the fact that the political and
security situation in the country has remained relatively
stable, with a notable decrease in major crimes. We are
encouraged by the appearance in court in February of
two former presidents. We view that as positive signals
of an emerging trend towards stability and evidence of
the increasing acceptance of the judicial process, which
is an indispensable ingredient in the maintenance of the
rule of law.

We are further encouraged that the performance of
the Haitian National Police has continued to improve
since it assumed increasing responsibility for the
provision of internal security. We note, however, that the
targets of the National Police development plan require
continued commitment on the part of the Government
and Haiti's partners in order to ensure that adequate
resources are available to support the plan's viability.

There have been a number of other positive
developments in Haiti following the devastating
earthquake in 2010 and the further destruction
following Hurricane Sandy last year. They include
the establishment of an interministerial commission
on human rights, the resettlement of a number of
formerly displaced persons and efforts to address the
cholera epidemic, including those undertaken in line
with the Secretary-General's initiative for supporting
national plans in that area. The efforts made by Haitian
authorities to promote socioeconomic development,
including strides made by President Martelly to attract
foreign direct investment, are also noteworthy.

CARICOM. remains, however, gravely concerned
about the declining international aid for sustaining
the work of rehabilitation in Haiti. That situation is
worrying in the midst of hurricane season, when Haiti
is vulnerable to the effects of devastating storms. We
therefore urge all parties with contributions outstanding
to pay them in order to ensure the timely execution
of the mandates of United Nations peacekeeping
missions, whose work is crucial to fostering peace,
security, stability, the protection of human rights and
the promotion of development in the States concerned.

While progress has been made in several areas, Haiti
continues to experience a political, social and economic
crisis, and, with that in View, the discussion at hand
should not be whether MINUSTAH should conclude its
operations but should, rather, focus on addressing the
changes required in Haiti and the Mission to ensure that
a phased withdrawal is linked to stronger institutions
and underpinned by progress towards lasting stability.

In conclusion, CARICOM. remains committed to
working together with other partners in the international
community in support of the agenda of the Haitian
Government and MINUSTAH's efforts in that regard,
in order to facilitate lasting stability and the social and
economic development of Haiti.

