Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank you, Sir, for
giving me this opportunity to introduce the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on Sierra Leone (S/2011/119).

This biannual review of Sierra Leone's progress
towards peace and stability takes place at a time of
dramatic political events that are unfolding in many
countries of Northern Africa, adjacent regions and
places closer to home, such as Cote d'Ivoire. Much of
the attention of the international community, and
2

indeed of this Council, is now directed at finding
urgent solutions to these political and security
developments, which are bound to shape the future of
the entire region.

Against this background, political developments
in Sierra Leone may appear pale in comparison.
However, I would like to argue that the events in
Northern Africa and adjacent regions may make it even
more important for the Security Council not to lose
sight of Sierra Leone and to continue to give it the
attention it deserves and still needs.

Sierra Leone, which was once a symbol of a
failed State, is now gradually evolving into a model
country for overcoming old divisions and developing
into a peaceful, democratic and prosperous country.
Success in Sierra Leone would create hope, and hope is
possibly the best ingredient for finding political
solutions for peace in other countries. That is why I
believe that any success in Sierra Leone is also bound
to have its own ripple effect on the search for peace in
other countries. Sierra Leone is on track towards
achieving these goals, but it is not yet out of the
woods. It will therefore continue to require
international attention and support.

In Sierra Leone, it was also disillusioned young
people who initially rose up against years of successive
authoritarian and unaccountable Governments, against
the plunder of its natural resources, and against
widespread corruption that benefited a small elite while
much of the country slid into widespread poverty. It
was mainly the young people who felt marginalized
and protested against the continuous deterioration of
social services, the lowering of educational standards
and the lack of job opportunities. At the time, Sierra
Leone was unable to solve its growing unrest, and the
country submerged into 11 years of a brutal and
devastating civil war.

It is now nine years since Sierra Leone's civil war
ended. During this short time, Sierra Leone has made a
truly remarkable post-conflict recovery. When my
Sierra Leonean friends see the images from a number
of other African and Middle Eastern countries, it
ignites in them the tragic memories of the recent past,
but at the same time there is also a sense of pride
among them in what they achieved over time. I fully
share that pride.

Sierra Leoneans now elect their Governments,
not only at the central level but also at the district and
11-27602
local levels. These elections take place regularly, and
as in all other democratic processes they have led to
the transfer of power from one elected Government to
another, both at the central and the local levels. The
conduct of these elections is not always without
problems, but what is encouraging is that elections in
Sierra Leone have become the norm.

Today, Sierra Leoneans live largely at peace with
each other, there is discernible security throughout the
country, and citizens as well as foreigners are all free
to travel to any part of Sierra Leone without any fear or
security threats. There are no longer any armed groups
terrorizing the population, nor are there any former
warlords with a political following in the country.
Sierra Leone no longer has any political prisoners, and
after years of brutalities there are no longer any
manifestations of systematic human rights abuses in
the country. Freedom of speech has given rise to an
independent, diverse and at times highly critical media.
Sierra Leone's freedom of association has resulted in
the creation of vibrant and active political parties, civil
society organizations, non-governmental organizations
and professional associations.

Above all, Sierra Leone remains a rare example
of exceptional religious freedoms and tolerance. It is
the diversity of Sierra Leone's society, in which
modern State authorities cooperate with traditional
leaderships, in which political parties interact with
independent media, and in which Muslim and Christian
communities work together closely with civil society
organizations that drives the country's evolving
democratic culture.

As we witness developments in Northern Africa
and adjacent regions, we must realize that Sierra
Leone's achievements are by no means automatic or
self-evident. These achievements are even more
remarkable when we consider that Sierra Leone had a
less fortunate start as a new nation, that it is a much
poorer country, and that its population is largely
illiterate.

Despite all achievements in overcoming its civil
war, Sierra Leone will remain fragile and vulnerable to
sudden economic, social and political shocks, both
from outside and from within the country. As Sierra
Leone is one of the world's poorest countries, the
capacity of the Government to absorb any adverse
shock will continue to remain weak. For example,
recent concerns over excessive budgetary expenditures,
11-27602
although small by any standards, could suddenly turn
into a sequence of incalculable political fallouts.

In a country in which the large majority of its
people live on less than $2 per day and with a
relatively small revenue base, even problems that
should be manageable - such as hikes in international
oil prices, increases in rice prices, the failure to pay
salaries on time, unfinished public work programmes,
and insufficient rains, combined with a large
population of unemployed and disillusioned young
people - could explode beyond control and threaten
Sierra Leone's hard-won achievements.

Any past, present and future Government in
Sierra Leone is therefore compelled to walk a very fine
line between mounting needs and financial constraints;
between the lure of a globalized economy and the
aspirations of it local population; and between the
demands on the Government to accelerate
development, coupled with a lack of budgetary and
human resources at its disposal. That is indeed the
reason why I believe that Sierra Leone will continue to
need strong international assistance, in particular
development assistance.

Let me also reflect on the two critical issues that I
had brought to the Council's attention during its review
of Sierra Leone in September (see S/PV.6391). These
are the exploitation of natural resources and the 2012
elections. At the end of my statement, I would also like
to talk about progress that is being made in
implementing resolution 1325 (2000) on women and
peace and security.

Although challenges remain, I am encouraged by
the progress the Government has made on mining and
the elections over the past six months. Since our last
meeting, the President has repeatedly stressed in public
and in private that he is determined to ensure that the
exploitation of Sierra Leone's rich mineral and
possibly hydrocarbon resources will be transparent and
for the benefit all Sierra Leoneans. Recently, the
President separated the previously combined Ministries
for Political Affairs and Natural Resources and Mining,
an important step that will allow the Government to
deal with the all important issue of mineral exploration
in a professional and politically more neutral manner.
The President has kept his pledge and initiated a
review of all old and new mining contracts to ensure
their conformity with Sierra Leone's mining laws.
3

After initial difficulties, the Government has now
renewed its commitment to fully implement the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative process in
consultation with civil society and other stakeholders.
The Government has agreed with the World Bank and
United Kingdom Department for International
Development (DFID) on a major technical assistance
programme to improve its capacity to manage the
exploitation of its mineral resources. Similarly, the
Government has agreed with Norway and the United
States on a comprehensive technical assistance
programme to reform and strengthen its institutions
dealing with oil and gas exploration and exploitation
matters.

However, the possible transition of Sierra Leone
into a major exporter of mineral and hydrocarbon
resources could test the country's social cohesion and
provoke greater social changes than previously
envisaged. For Sierra Leone to succeed in that vital
endeavour, much wider national consultations may be
required in the future.

Considerable progress has also been made in
preparing for the 2012 elections. In January, the
Government and its development partners - mainly
DFID, the European Union, Germany and Irish Aid -
agreed to fund a large election support programme that
will be jointly implemented by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) and the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL). Recently, the United States agreed
to a parallel but well-coordinated contribution for the
2012 elections. In addition to the more traditional
support to electoral management bodies, the security
services and the judiciary, the election support
programme will for the first time include the
introduction of modern biometric voter registration
systems and support to the so-called non-State actors,
aimed at ensuring an environment of political tolerance
and non-violence in 2012.

Despite the progress made so far, the 2012
elections still face a number of important challenges.
First, and probably most important, there has to be
greater and more regular engagement between the
National Electoral Commission and political parties,
including the main opposition party, the Sierra Leone
People's Party, over important electoral issues, such as
voter registration, planned reforms of electoral legal
frameworks, the planning for elections and so on. It is
important that all sides agree on the rules of the game
as early as possible, to prevent misunderstanding and
conflicts over the interpretation and implementation of
the rules at a later stage.

Secondly, with the nomination of its new chairman
and commissioners, the Political Party Registration
Commission (PPRC) should now engage more
forcefully in mediating among political parties and in
implementing the political party, code of conduct.

Thirdly, strong political parties are the
cornerstones in any functioning democracy. Together
with the PPRC, we must find ways to strengthen them.
Recent intra-party frictions within a major political
party remain worrisome, and certainly not in the
interest of the country's democratic process.

Fourthly, on the background of recent budgetary
constraints, the Government must give early indication
as to what it will be able to afford in supporting the
2012 elections. In particular, the electoral management
bodies should critically review their stated
requirements in order to bring them in line with
available resources for 2012.

Fifthly, to ensure peaceful elections, Sierra
Leone's security forces, and in particular its police
force, will have to improve their skills in preventing
the use of unnecessary force. In that context, the
mobility of police units is paramount. I hope that
Member States will be able to respond to a call by the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) for additional police
vehicles.

Finally, Sierra Leone's civil society organizations
engaged in the elections, in particular the National
Election Watch umbrella organization, should be given
the financial and technical resources necessary to
fulfill their important roles in voter education and in
monitoring voter registration and the electoral process
in 2012.

As this is the tenth year of resolution 1325 (2000)
on women, peace and security, allow me to say a few
words about the role of women and gender equality in
Sierra Leone. The empowerment of women and greater
gender equality must be an integral part of
peacebuilding processes. As democracy in Sierra Leone
has matured, so have the chances for women. Indeed, it
is now within reach to ensure women's greater say in
political decision-making and to attain a 30 per cent
quota of women representation in Parliament and other
elective bodies by 2012.

In the economic and social fields, it will be above
all women who benefit from the Government's free
health care initiative. After the first year of operation,
we can observe that maternal mortality rates have
dropped dramatically in some parts of the country.
Similar initiatives are being undertaken to increase the
enrolment of girls in secondary education and to fight
any kind of gender-based violence.

In line with our Joint Vision for Sierra Leone -
the joint United Nations programme - UNIPSIL and
the United Nations country team have developed a
joint United Nations approach to peacebuilding and
gender equality, which we will present at the PBC
tomorrow. It will focus on five priority areas, namely,
access to political decision-making, access to health,
access to education, access to justice and protection
against gender-based violence. To implement this joint
approach, we will work closely with the Government,
the political parties, the police, the judiciary, civil
society organizations and religious and traditional
leaders, as well as with traditional women's
organizations, including so-called bondo societies. I
believe that the progress that we can now achieve in
empowering women will no doubt help to consolidate
peace, development and social progress in Sierra
Leone.

Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
draw attention to the fact that we have quite a lot of
support with us. Behind me here are members of civil
society organizations from Sierra Leone, which I think
is a great symbol of the diversity of society in the
country. They include leaders from the women's wings
of the political parties, who will tomorrow present to
the PBC their plans for reaching the 30 per cent target
for women's participation in decision-making. Also
with me are two civil society goodwill ambassadors
who help to build schools in Sierra Leone. I would like
to congratulate them on the good work they are doing.
And we have post-graduate students from Colombia
University and New York University. Finally, I would
like to say that I am accompanied by two of my
colleagues from the United Nations country team,
Ms. Mia Seppo from UNDP and Ms. Ratidzai Ndlovu
from the United Nations Population Fund. We asked
them here today to illustrate to the Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission the unity and integration
we have achieved in Sierra Leone, which will not only
benefit the Council but, ultimately, the country itself.
11-27602
