Mr. Aziz (Pakistan): Allow me to begin by
thanking the President for taking the laudable initiative
to convene and preside over this important meeting of
the Security Council. This Council meeting sharply
focuses attention on foreign terrorist fighters, an
emergent and dangerous dimension of terrorism. We
fully support resolution 2178 (2014), which has been
adopted today. The Council decisions are timely for
mobilizing international political will, as the threat by
foreign terrorist fighters multiplies rapidly.

Terrorism is the scourge of humankind. We
condemn it in all its forms and manifestations. The
international community's fight against terrorism is
critical for the maintenance of world peace and security.
This is not a war of one or two nations or one or two
regions; it stretches across the globe. We all realize that
the war has become much more complex and dynamic.
The enemy is ubiquitous and lethal.

Over the past several years, Pakistan has paid
a heavy price in blood and resources in the war
against terrorism. More than 50,000 people, including
thousands of our security forces, have become victims
of terrorism. Our resolve to fight terrorism is strong.
Right now, as I speak, we are conducting the fierce
Operation Zarb-e-Azb in North Waziristan of our tribal
areas to take out terrorists and block the sources of their
funding. We know from experience that to advance
their nefarious agendas terrorist groups devises
sophisticate strategies, use modern technologies and
extract weaknesses in governing infrastructure. To
oppose this hydra-headed monster, our responses
must be quick, comprehensive and commensurate. At
the same time, our actions need to be compliant with
international humanitarian law and our cooperation
rooted in the principles enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.

Pakistan believes that foreign terrorist fighters
have no stake in the peace and stability of the region
they operate in. They thrive on lawlessness and resist
every effort towards peace and reconciliation. Often
they become the core around which radical and violent
extremism flourishes. The international community
needs to counter this threat in a comprehensive and
effective manner, including by resolving the conflicts
that breed them. The creation and existence of
foreign terrorist fighters is as much a function of the
environment as it is of security. As we fight them, we
should also focus on a preventive approach to stem their
growth.

It is evident that collective will and collaborative
efforts are required to counter the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. All States need to take
stringent counter measures at national levels. At
the same time, collaborative measures are essential
because of the transnational nature of this threat. In this
context, the sharing of information and expertise and
building the relevant capacities of States upon request
are, therefore, very important.

Pakistan, as always, is ready to contribute to the
international efforts to counter the threat posed by
foreign terrorist fighters. We also look forward to a
broader discourse and engagement with a View to refine
our approaches to deal with this transregional threat.

