Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I would
first like to welcome the presence among us of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Equatorial Guinea and that of the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany.
Allow me to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
on behalf of France, for organizing this important
debate, and to commend the excellent work carried
out by Equatorial Guinea during its presidency of the
Security Council in the month of February under the
unanimously appreciated leadership of its Permanent
Representative to the United Nations. I also wish
to welcome the unanimous adoption of resolution
2457 (2019), submitted by Equatorial Guinea on
behalf of the three African members of the Security
Council and the African Union, which France
co-sponsored, and to warmly thank Ms. DiCarlo,
Mr. Lamamra and Mr. Gounden for their particularly
enlightening briefings.

For France, the partnership between the United
Nations and the African Union is of strategic
importance today for the prevention and resolution of
crises in Africa. The development of that partnership is
in our View one of the main drivers of consolidating and
strengthening the multilateralism that we all yearn for,
so that supporting and strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is
one of France's top priorities.

The strength of that partnership is as robust as
it is promising. The past year has been testimony to
the important results that have been achieved thanks
to the joint initiatives of the United Nations and the
African Union - initiatives driven by the exemplary
collaboration between the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat.

Without being exhaustive, I would mention in
particular the recent signing of the peace agreement in
the Central African Republic, the peaceful transition
of power in the Democratic Republic of Congo, the
signing of the peace agreement in South Sudan in
September 2018 and the historic rapprochement under
way in the Horn of Africa since the end of last June. Of
course, these positive developments should not conceal
the fact that crises and conflict situations remain on
the continent. In that context, while the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union is of
strategic importance to France, we also note the rise of
African peace operations.

In line with what has already been said, in particular
by Mr. Lamamra and the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and Cooperation of Equatorial Guinea, we fully support
the initiative of the African Union for the sustainable
and predictable financing of African peace operations,
including mandatory contributions from the United
Nations. President Emmanuel Macron recalled France's
resolute commitment in this area during the most recent
general debate of the General Assembly (see A/73/PV.6)
and, as the Council is aware, African peace operations
are also a priority for the current French presidency of
the Group of Seven.

African peace operations and the military response
to crises on the continent are of course only part of the
solution. To echo what has already been said by several
speakers, in particular by the State Secretary of the
Federal Foreign Office of Germany a few minutes ago,
we believe that a broader approach is essential both
before and after crises. That is the goal of the Silencing
the Guns by 2020 initiative, which was launched by
the African Union and its member States and which
we fully support. That is another area in which the
partnership between the United Nations, the African
Union and African subregional organizations is of
major importance to us.

In the area of prevention, concrete results have
been achieved, in particular in the Gambia, where the
combined efforts of the United Nations, the African
Union and the Economic Community of West African
States made it possible to prevent the post-electoral
crisis from turning into a conflict, the victims of
which would have been the country's population. More
recently, successful work was carried out by the African
Union High Representative for Silencing the Guns in
Africa by 2020, Mr. Lamamra, in cooperation with
the Southern African Development Community, the
United Nations and the European Union in preventing a
major crisis from arising during the organization of the
presidential elections in Madagascar.

Finally, the African Union has adopted a number
of instruments in recent years, notably the African
Peer Review Mechanism, the Panel of the Wise and
the Network of African Women in Conflict Prevention
and Mediation of the African Union. I would like to
reiterate that the role of women in conflict prevention
and resolution and their participation in political
processes is an absolutely crucial factor in achieving
lasting peace - that is certainly something that France
is fighting for.

More broadly, all of the actions undertaken by the
African Union and its member States to address the root
causes of conflict are now key elements of long-term
crisis prevention and avoiding the recurrence of crises.
In that regard, we welcome the efforts undertaken by
the African Union, its member States and African
subregional organizations in implementing the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda
2063 of the African Union, as well as in launching the
Continental Free Trade Area, developing the governance
architecture of the African Union, promoting respect for
human rights, investing in the education of the younger
generations and implementing the Paris Agreement on
Climate Change - we are all aware of the extremely
serious threat to the continent posed by climate change.
France wholeheartedly supports all of those priorities.

Lastly, let us not forget the importance ofmobilizing
efforts to combat the illicit arms trade in Africa,
which continues to fuel conflict and exacerbate armed
violence while aiding organized crime and terrorism.
In this regard, we welcome efforts to universalize and
fully implement all the relevant instruments, which
should be a priority.

I would like to conclude by echoing the words of
Leopold Sedar Senghor, who stated that there is no such
thing as an armed peace, peace under oppression or
fraternity without equality. Those words should guide
us all in our resolute support to our African partners
and friends in their goal of ending the crises on their
continent. They can be assured of France's unwavering
commitment in that regard.

