Mr. Gopinathan (India): We congratulate you,
Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. This has
been, and will undoubtedly be, a month of major
activity for the Council. We are confident that the
conclusion of your presidency at the end of the month
will record forward movement on many important
issues currently under consideration.

It has been almost 17 months since the
establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET), pursuant to
resolution 1410 (2002). It is a rare but happy occasion
when we are able to review what the Secretary-General
has described as significant progress in reaching the
major milestones identified in the mandate of the
Mission's implementation plan. It is gratifying to learn
that since its independence Timor-Leste has made
significant progress in promoting its social and
economic development, and that its political
institutions have continued to develop, as have its
relations with countries in and beyond the region.

I wish to comment briefly on the following
highlights of the Secretary-General's report on
developments in Timor-Leste.

The first is the successful phased withdrawal of
UNMISET's military component, as per the revised
downsizing schedule authorized in resolution 1473
(2003), with plans to bring down its numbers to 1,750
by the end of 2003. We note that this downsizing has
gone hand in hand with the development of Timorese
armed forces.

The second highlight is the relative calm in the
internal situation that has allowed 12 districts to be
handed over by UNMISET to the National Police of
Timor-Leste, with the thirteenth district ready for
handing over.

The third is the progress achieved by UNMISET
in preparing Timor-Leste to gradually take over its
civil administration. The Secretary-General has
acknowledged this by referring to Timor-Leste's

"remarkable progress in laying the foundations
for a functioning civil service and police force."
(S/2003/944, para. 55).

The fourth highlight is the success of the
Government of Timor-Leste in generating revenues
worth $44.1 million, including $26.7 million from
Timor Sea revenues during the current year, as an
indication of the increasing ability of the State to
mobilize its own resources.

The final highlight is the establishment of strong
relations between Timor-Leste and Indonesia by way of
exchange of high-level visits and conclusion of a joint
statement reaffirming the intention of the two countries
to address together a number of important bilateral
issues.

Those developments illustrate the progress
achieved during the period covered by the Secretary-
General's report. Recognizing that nation-building is a
long-term process, the Secretary-General has
highlighted the continued indispensability of
international assistance. He has projected that Timor-
Leste will continue to need international guidance and
advice in the areas of civil administration, justice and
policing, human rights training and, possibly, security.
We took forward to hearing further from the Secretary-
General on his recommendations in this regard.

The progress achieved since the independence of
the Timor-Leste has to be attributed to the country's
enlightened and forward looking leadership. Special
recognition has to be accorded here to Prime Minister
HE. Mr. Mari B. Alkatiri, who only recently addressed
the United Nations General Assembly. The
contributions of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kamalesh Sharma and the
civilian, military and police components of UNMISET,
including the United Nations Volunteers, in the
successful evolution of Timor-Leste from a nascent
State to a confident member of the United Nations
fraternity, also deserve our recognition.

We also take this opportunity to pay tribute to the
memory of the late Sergio Vieira de Mello, who made
invaluable contributions to nation-building in Timor-
Leste.

