Mr. Motoc (Romania): Romania aligns itself with
the statement that will be delivered later on by
Ambassador Ryan of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union. In addition, I would like to make the following
remarks.

First, we appreciate the opportunity presented by
this open debate, its timeliness and usefulness in our
overall efforts to consensualize the adoption of this
draft resolution and to improve conditions for its later
sound implementation.

The proliferation threat has assumed a gloomier
dimension: the prospect of non-State actors seeking to
acquire and use weapons of mass destruction (WMD).

Present-day security and stability are seriously
challenged, both globally and regionally, by the risk
associated with the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction. State and non-State actor proliferation
routes are now starting to merge. Today, the
international community is confronted with a
consolidated network of proliferators established
among States and entities located in regions marked by
instability and armed conflict. The possibility of
terrorist organizations acquiring elements or even
systems of WMD is largely recognized today as among

the most dangerous threats - if not the most
dangerous threat - the international community is
facing.

There is no panacea or one-size-fits-all policy to
counter the threat posed by the proliferation of WMD.
A number of tools are at the disposal of the
international community. All are necessary; none is
sufficient by itself.

The spread of nuclear, chemical and biological
weapons has been successfully limited by international
disarmament and non-proliferation multilateral
agreements. But, unfortunately, the new phenomenon,
intimately interconnected with terrorism, is not covered
by those treaties.

The Security Council has the primary
responsibility for maintaining international peace and
security. Past experience in dealing with newly
magnified threats such as terrorism shows that
prevention is always better than the cure. It is therefore
time for the Security Council to address this new threat
in an appropriate manner by filling the existing gap in
international treaties. This is one threat the Council
cannot afford to overlook or fail to act upon.

The draft resolution will make a fundamental
contribution to the efforts of all responsible members
of the international community to address threats
stemming from the proliferation of WMD, especially
its most dangerous form - the pursuit of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State entities and terrorist
groups and organizations. For that reason, Romania
decided to be a sponsor of the Security Council draft
resolution.

The draft is, indeed, a platform for inducing
greater responsibility by all States in reducing
proliferation risks. At the end of the day, it can only
create a better and more secure environment for all of
us. It asks Member States, without discrimination, to
enact and enforce appropriate legislation to prevent the
proliferation of WMD, including criminal and civil
penalties for violations of export control regulations. It
also requires the establishment of physical protection
measures and effective controls over related materials.
For such a preventive approach to work, the need for
international cooperation is capital. It requires the
establishment of national authorities and the adoption
and enforcement of relevant domestic legislation.

While addressing a very specific and focused
issue, the draft resolution reaffirms the need for all
Member States to fulfil their obligations in arms
control and disarmament and upholds the multilateral
treaties.

Efforts for combating proliferation have to be
deeply rooted in the domestic implementation by States
of their obligations and in the permanent enforcement
of adequate related legislation on matters such as
export controls and the physical protection, secure
manipulation and transfer of sensitive materials.

The draft resolution's implementation will not
affect the obligations undertaken by States parties to
international treaties nor the statutory responsibilities
of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.
Efforts to prevent proliferation, undertaken at the
national, regional or international levels, through
enhanced coordination, do not hamper the transfer of
materials, equipment and technology for peaceful
purposes.

The critical importance of the draft resolution and
its contents was demonstrated by the extensive
consultations and exchanges that took place within and
outside the Council. They were complemented by a
transparent and constructive interaction with individual
Member States and regional and political groups. Most
of the concerns expressed during our deliberations have
been reflected in the text. We are satisfied that all those
strenuous efforts made possible a substantial
improvement of the draft and clarified how we can
ensure the optimal materialization of its fundamental
goal.

The objective of the draft resolution is very
important. Its aim is very high. If our aspiration is to
get rid of the scourge of the proliferation of WMD and
prevent self-destruction, we have to act accordingly, in
a united and responsible manner.

