Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): The year 2012
may well become the year of the rule of law at the
United Nations, not least because of the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly to be held in
September. It is gratifying to see that the Security
Council pays corresponding attention.

We agree that the Security Council is playing an
increasing role in promoting the rule of law and hope
that it will consider and follow the recommendations
contained in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/634*). We fully endorse his view that the
Council should adhere to basic rule-of-law principles
to ensure the legitimacy its actions. Indeed, the best
way for the Council to promote international law and
the rule of law is to lead by example. Such leadership
by example is required not only from the Council itself
but also from missions and operations mandated by it,
often with explicit mandates to support the rule-of-law
architecture in the respective host countries.

The importance of ensuring that United Nations
peacekeepers and other personnel operating in such
environments abide by applicable laws and do not
commit crimes themselves cannot be overstated. It
appears, however, that much remains to be done to
effectively prevent such crimes and to ensure that the
perpetrators are brought to justice. Repatriation alone
is insufficient to bring about accountability. Greater
efforts must be made to address this problem, and we
were disappointed to note an absence of any reference
to it in the report of the Secretary-General.

In recent years and decades we have seen an
enormous expansion of international mechanisms
promoting the rule of law, and criminal accountability
in particular, as evidenced most prominently by the
growing role of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
At the same time, it is evident, as well as in keeping
with the principle of complementarity enshrined in the
Rome Statute, that the domestic level holds the key for
sustainable progress. It must therefore be at the centre
of our attention and also a focus of Security Council
action. The Council should remind States of their
obligations to investigate and prosecute the most
serious crimes under international law and should
support efforts to strengthen domestic judicial
capacities, in particular by devising appropriate
mandates and structures for missions on the ground.

We are pleased to note the Secretary-General's
commitment to work together with the ICC and donors
to enhance support to national authorities. The General
Assembly has repeatedly stressed the importance of
placing national perspectives at the centre of rule-of-
law support and capacity-building. We hope that the
high-level meeting in September will be an opportunity
to improve the coordination of those efforts.
The report rightly highlights commissions of
inquiry as an important tool to promote accountability.
At the same time, it appears that the United Nations
system often struggles to provide those commissions
with the necessary support. Given the wealth of
experience gained in recent years with such
undertakings, the time seems ripe to systematize and
professionalize support for commissions of inquiry, in
a manner similar to the Secretariat's improvement of
its support for mediation activities.

Finally, we would like to take this opportunity to
remind the Council and Member States of an important
development in international criminal law. The 2010
ICC Review Conference adopted by consensus a
definition of the crime of aggression for the purpose of
the Rome Statute, as well as the conditions under
which the Court may - no earlier than 2017 -
exercise jurisdiction over that crime. Once formally
activated, the Court's jurisdiction over the crime of
aggression will give the Council a new policy option
for addressing the most serious forms of the illegal use
of force in contravention of the Charter. In addition,
the definition of the act and crime of aggression can
already assist the Council, even now, in its
deliberations on the legality of the use of force.

The prospect of judicial enforcement of this most
central prohibition of the United Nations Charter
represents a significant advance for the rule of law in
the maintenance of international peace and security. In
order to bring this new system to full effect, States
should ratify the amendments on the crime of
aggression soon. Furthermore, they should also
incorporate the definition of the crime of aggression
into their national criminal codes, at least with respect
to their own nationals.

It is our hope that the outcome of today's debate,
particularly the presidential statement, will have a
concrete impact on the Security Council's future work
in country-specific situations and will make a
contribution to the preparatory process for the
September high-level meeting. The Council's full
support for the rule of law is indeed indispensable for
the overall success of the United Nations in this area.

