Mr. Amano: Let me begin by thanking you, Sir,
for taking the initiative to host this important meeting
on strengthening the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT).

As Council members know, the most recent NPT
Review Conference in 2015 did not reach consensus
on a final document. The previous final document, in
2010, recognized that,

"IAEA safeguards are a fundamental component
of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, play an
indispensable role in the implementation of the
Treaty and help to create an environment conducive
to nuclear cooperation" (NPT/CONE2010/50 (Vol. I), Part], para. 11).

It also underlined the role of the Agency in assisting
developing countries in the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy.

With our atoms for peace and development
mandate, the Agency has supported the United Nations
in all NPT review conferences. I believe that our dual
role of nuclear verification and assisting with peaceful
uses is highly relevant to States parties to the NPT.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
now implements safeguards in 182 countries, 179 of
which are NPT States parties. Non-nuclear-weapon
States are required under the NPT to conclude a
comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA
They must declare all nuclear material in peaceful
nuclear activities.

The safeguards conclusions drawn by the Agency,
which are based on our independent verification and
findings, provide credible assurance to the international
community that States are abiding by their safeguards
obligations. In 1997, the IAEA Board of Governors
approved the model additional protocol. This is a
powerful verification tool that gives the Agency broader
access to information about all parts ofa State's nuclear
fuel cycle. It also gives our inspectors greater access to
sites and locations, in some cases with as little as two
hours' notice.

In 2009, when I became IAEA Director General,
only 94 countries were implementing the additional
protocols; today 134 countries have brought them
into force, which is very encouraging. However, the
combination of comprehensive safeguards agreements
and additional protocols needs to become universal.
I encourage States parties to the NPT without
comprehensive safeguards agreements in force to bring
such agreements into force without delay. I also ask all
countries that have not yet done so to bring into force
and implement additional protocols.

The steady increase in the amount of nuclear
material and the number of nuclear facilities under
IAEA safeguards, along with continuing pressure
on our regular budget, are among the key challenges
facing the Agency today. Under the IAEA Statute,
inspections must be financed through the regular
budget. For some years, our regular budget has had
close to zero increases - this year it has actually been
cut. If our regular budget continues to suffer cuts in
the coming years, it could seriously affect our nuclear-
verification activities.

The nuclear programmes of Iran and the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea remain among the top
items on the Agency's agenda. The IAEA has focused
on Iran's nuclear activities since 2002. I presented
a final assessment on past and present outstanding
issues regarding Iran's nuclear programme to the IAEA
Board of Governors in December 2015. I stated that
Iran had conducted a range of activities relevant to the
development of a nuclear-explosive device before the
end of 2003. However, those activities did not advance
beyond feasibility and scientific studies and the
acquisition of certain relevant technical competences
and capabilities. I also stated that we had no credible
indications of activities in Iran relevant to the
development of a nuclear-explosive device after 2009.

The Agency has been verifying and monitoring
Iran's implementation of its nuclear-related
commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA) since January 2016. I have stated in my
regular reports to the Board that Iran is implementing
those commitments. It is essential that Iran continue to
fully implement them. Our inspectors have had access
to all the sites and locations in Iran that they needed to
visit. The Agency continues to verify the non-diversion
of nuclear material declared by Iran under its NPT
Safeguards Agreement. Evaluations regarding the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities
in Iran continue. The implementation in Iran of the
Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement, the Additional
Protocol and additional transparency measures under
the JCPOA amounts to the most robust verification
system in existence anywhere in the world.

It is almost 10 years since IAEA inspectors were
required to leave North Korea. The Agency continues
to monitor the Democratic People's Republic of Korea's
nuclear programme and evaluate all safeguards-relevant
information available to it, including open-source
information and satellite imagery. The Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's nuclear programme has
significantly expanded over the past 10 years. The
country announced in 2009 that it would start uranium
enrichment and build a light-water reactor. It announced
in 2013 that it would take measures to readjust and
restart all the nuclear facilities in Yongbyon.

The Agency has since then observed indications of
the operation of the 5 -megawatt reactor and reprocessing
plant, the extension of the building housing the reported
centrifuge enrichment facility, and the construction of
the light-water reactor. Since 2009, the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has announced on five
separate occasions that it had conducted a nuclear test,
in addition to the one announced in 2006. Activities at
some facilities continued or developed further over the
past year, while some other facilities appeared not to
be operating. I report regularly to our Board on those
activities. Without access, however, the Agency cannot
confirm the nature and purpose of those activities.

The IAEA closely follows international developments
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea nuclear
issue. We hope that these processes will lead to an
agreement and to the implementation of concrete
denuclearization measures. The Agency does not have
a role in political negotiations among the countries
concerned. However, it is very important that any
agreement on denuclearization be accompanied by an
effective and sustainable verification mechanism. With
its long experience and well-established practices, the
IAEA is the only international organization that can
verify and monitor denuclearization in an impartial,
independent and objective manner. That would help to
make the implementation of any agreement sustainable.
It would also contribute to the denuclearization of the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea in a complete,
verifiable and irreversible manner, as required by
numerous resolutions of the Security Council.

Since 2017, the Agency has intensified its efforts
to monitor the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
nuclear programme and enhanced its readiness to
undertake verification and monitoring activities in the
country if a political agreement is reached among the
countries concerned. Subject to the approval of our
Board of Governors, we could respond within weeks to
any request to send inspectors back to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea.

Let me note briefly that the IAEA makes an
important contribution to the establishment of a world
free of nuclear weapons in a number of ways. We
assist States in creating nuclear-weapon-free zones,
which already cover vast regions of the world. In
2012, for example, the Agency provided background
documentation to the facilitator for the United Nations
conference on the establishment of a Middle East zone
free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction. It described the work undertaken by the
IAEA and the experience gained concerning modalities
for a zone free ofnuclear weapons in the Middle East. If
requested by Member States, the IAEA can play a role
in nuclear disarmament by sharing its experience in the
implementation of verification.

The IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme is
the main vehicle for the transfer of nuclear technology,
based on the Agency's Statute and on requests from
Member States. While the focus of our technical
cooperation work is on developing countries, we
provide assistance to all IAEA member States. The
Agency helps to improve the health and prosperity
of millions of people by making nuclear science and
technology available in the areas of health care, food
and agriculture, industry and many others.

An extensive modernization of our nuclear
applications laboratories at Seibersdorf, near Vienna,
is nearly complete, thanks to generous contributions
from many Member States. That will enable us to
deliver improved services to member States to make
food safer, improve control of harmful insect pests and
maximize the benefits of new radiation technology for
cancer treatment, to name just a few examples. Helping
countries to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGS) by using relevant nuclear technology is
an important part of our work. In fact, the IAEA helps
countries to use nuclear science and technology to meet
at least 9 of the 17 SDGs directly.

The IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative, which was
launched in 2010, provides additional funds for our
technical cooperation activities. It has helped to raise
over €140 million for around 300 projects that benefit
more than 150 countries. I am grateful to all the
countries that support that valuable initiative.

Nuclear power can help address the twin challenges
of ensuring reliable energy supplies and curbing
greenhouse gas emissions. Today, nuclear power
produces 10 per cent of the world's electricity, but
when it comes to low-carbon electricity, nuclear power
generates almost one-third of the global total.

The Agency's latest annual projections show that
nuclear power will continue to play a key role in the
world's low-carbon energy mix. However, without
significant progress on using the full potential of
nuclear power, it will be difficult for the world to secure
sufficient energy to achieve sustainable development
and mitigate climate change.

Utmost attention to safety and security is essential
in all uses of nuclear and radiation technologies. Nuclear
safety and security are national responsibilities, but
the IAEA plays the central role in helping countries
to cooperate effectively in those areas. We continue to
assess the effectiveness ofthe Agency's peer reviews and
advisory services in nuclear safety and security so that
they can better support Member States in the application
of IAEA safety standards and security guidance.

Our work in nuclear security is one of our high-
priority issues. By helping prevent nuclear and other
radioactive material from falling into the hands of
terrorists or other criminals, the Agency makes an
additional important contribution to international
security. The next IAEA international conference on
nuclear security will take place at the ministerial level
in Vienna, in February 2020.

By undertaking the activities that I have outlined,
the IAEA delivers concrete results for the benefit of our
171 member States. Effective and efficient management
has been the driving force behind the many achievements
in which we take pride. I am working hard to increase
the representation ofwomen, especially at senior levels,
with a view to further strengthening our capability.

I am confident that the States parties to the NPT,
most of whom are also IAEA member States, will
continue to derive great benefit from the work of the
Agency. I hope that the 2020 NPT review conference
will be a success and make an important contribution to
strengthening international peace and security.

