Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Ijoin others in thanking
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his participation in
this important meeting, convened pursuant to resolution
2286 (2016), which Malaysia strongly supports.

I also wish to join other sponsors of that resolution
and Council members in expressing special thanks and
appreciation for the participation of Mr. Peter Maurer and
Ms. Joanne Liu, representing the esteemed organizations

the International Committee of the Red Cross and the
Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF), respectively. Their
briefings provided a harrowing glimpse into the daily
struggles and increasing challenges and risks faced by
health-care providers in situations of armed conflict.
We pay our deepest respects and highest tribute to those
health-care providers who risk their lives and selflessly
devote themselves to this noble cause.

Documented evidence of attacks, deliberate or
otherwise, on the wounded and the sick, medical
personnel and health facilities across many ongoing
conflict areas underscores the grim reality that
international humanitarian law has been wilfully
ignored and, in some cases flagrantly violated on
multiple occasions by belligerent parties. Resolution
2286 (2016), as Ms. Liu noted, has failed to change
anything on the ground. Therefore, the Council now
has the obligation to evaluate and mainstream the
Secretary-General's recommendations (see S/2016/722, annex) on measures to prevent acts of violence against
the wounded and sick, as well as health-care personnel,
in situations of armed conflict. We see today's meeting
as an important small step towards realizing that
commitment. That is an urgent and priority task for
the Council.

As an illustration, despite the 9 September
ceasefire agreement reached by Russia and the United
States, health-care providers and facilities in Syria
continue to be targeted. In addition, the challenges
faced by medical personnel seeking to treat victims are
enormous and compounded as the attacks and fighting
escalate. Just two days ago in Aleppo, a hospital was
struck during an air assault on the area. More than a
week ago, an Aleppo-bound 31-truck humanitarian
convoy carrying medical supplies, among other things,
was also attacked.

Unfortunately, Syria is not the sole conflict where
there is an abhorrent lack of respect for the principle
of medical neutrality. As Ms. Liu clearly mentioned,
the conflict in Yemen has also seen attacks against
fully functioning hospitals as recently as mid-August.
We regret to learn that, due to escalating hostilities
against medical facilities, the situation has become so
untenable that MSF was forced to withdraw from six
hospitals in northern Yemen.

That disturbing situation merits deeper, urgent
concentration and response through concrete actions
that go further than mere condemnation. To that end, the
Secretary-General's recommendations should provide a
guiding framework. As a first step, the Council should
muster the will to implement recommendations on the
need for a full, prompt, impartial, independent and
effective investigation into attacks against health-care
systems in situations of armed conflict. As attacks
against medical personnel and facilities in many conflict
situations continue unabated, the establishment of an
international fact-finding mission or recourse to the
International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission,
in line with the Geneva Convention, to investigate
allegations of those serious violations would allow us
to pursue accountability and deliver justice.

Impunity will only compound the atrocities
committed against health care. Malaysia therefore
reaffirms its support for both resolution 2286 (2016)
and the Secretary-General's recommendations, which
call for investigations into all allegations of violations,
as well as taking measures against the perpetrators. All
perpetrators must be held accountable.

Before I conclude, my delegation would like to pay
tribute to the fallen medical personnel devoted to saving
others and to express our gratitude to the noble role
played by those who continue to do so under dangerous
and trying circumstances. As we seek to shield the very
persons protecting the civilians at large, the protection
of medical personnel and health facilities should be
high on the Council's agenda. The Security Council
must persist in defending and protecting the safety of
medical personnel and health facilities in situations of
armed conflict - an undertaking to which Malaysia is
fully committed.

