Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like to congratulate you, Madam President, your
delegation and the New Zealand Minister for Foreign
Affairs on your country's assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of July. We
trust that, under your presidency, the Council's work
will be crowned with success during this important
phase in the history of the Middle East, which has seen
dangerous, fast-moving and, unfortunately, negative
developments.

Allow me to focus on the role of the United Nations
in general and of the Security Council in particular in
addressing the Palestinian question and finding a just
solution to the cause of its people. This situation is
particularly close to the hearts and minds of all Arabs
and all peace-loving countries. It is a cause for which
the Council has adopted several resolutions that have
so far gone unheeded, for reasons known to everyone.
The occupation continues; the larger part of Palestinian
territory is under the longest-known military occupation
in modern history. No solution has been found for the
issues involved in a definitive solution, especially that
of the refugees. Millions of Palestinians live in refugee
camps or as guests in countries that are not their own,
which is a stain on the international community.

We must protect the credibility of the Council,
which must work to implement its resolutions, taking a
firm approach to support principled diplomacy. This is
essential if we are to reach the solution that we hope for.
We must pursue negotiations to find a definitive and
lasting solution. We need to move away from the path
of the last two decades by finding a new creative and
innovative solution and ensure that the occupying Power
finds the political will to support the negotiations, rather
than hindering them. They seem to be hindering them
so that they can complete their plan to grab the land of
the Palestinian people through their settlement policy,
which has been repeatedly denounced as undermining
any attempt to find a fair and lasting solution to the

problem and to establish a contiguous Palestinian State.

We need to revitalize negotiations, and there
must be genuine political will to find a solution. If we
continue to adopt measures that we sought to adopt in
the past, we will see no concrete and tangible result. As
I have said, that will undermind the credibility of the
parties, especially those who sponsor negotiations. It is
essential to be innovative, to avoid increasing the levels
of frustration felt by the Palestinians, which opens the
door to the extremism that is one of the root causes of
the terrorism that threatens the stability and well-being
of many countries in the region and the broader world.

The continuing crisis in the fraternal Syrian Arab
Republic is a major challenge for regional security.
To date, we see no glimmer of hope for reaching a
lasting solution to the crisis. To that end, I would like
to reiterate our call for the continuation of Egyptian
efforts, together with all parties to the Syrian conflict,
in which we will try to enable them to find a legitimate
and lasting solution. We call for an end to the Israeli
occupation in the Golan, in accordance with the
international resolutions.

