Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank His Excellency Mr. Okada, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Japan, for being here with us today,
and Japan for having organized this open debate on the
wide-ranging subject of peacebuilding. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the Minister of Defence of Sierra Leone,
the Minister of Justice of Timor-Leste and the
Managing Director of the World Bank for their
presence and statements this morning.
10-31721
France associates itself with the statement to be
made by the representative of the European Union.

The United Nations is devoting all its political,
military, humanitarian and development instruments to
developing an effective strategy to prevent countries
that have been weakened by war from reverting to
conflict.

First of all, peacebuilding strategies should be
defined on the ground in cooperation with local
authorities. National ownership is an essential aspect of
their success. As emphasized by the Secretary-General
in his report of June 2009 (S/2009/304), these efforts
should be based on the efforts of the countries
involved, taking into account local, national and
international capacities available.

The London Conference on Afghanistan in
January thus restated the international community's
long-term commitment to the Afghan people and
authorities on the basis of a road map to accelerate
their assumption of sovereign responsibility.

The establishment of lasting peace in a country
emerging from conflict involves greater consistency in
strategies and the participation of all peacebuilding
actors, including United Nations agencies, international
financial institutions, non-governmental organizations,
national Governments or civil society organizations.

However, the coordination role falls first and
foremost to the Peacebuilding Commission, which we
created five years ago. This subsidiary advisory body
should ensure that actors and resources can be better
coordinated. Today, we must note that the outcomes
achieved in this regard could and should be improved,
and that will be the challenge of the review process
that we have initiated.

Indeed, the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture should be able to respond to the realities
on the ground and to meet the expectations of Member
States by setting out the priorities areas to be dealt with
by all of the actors on the ground. The Peacebuilding
Commission should become this central, recognized
element that we all hope for, both in New York and on
the ground, and both within the United Nations and in
the international community as a whole.

The Peacebuilding Fund, which was established
in parallel with the Commission, could play a
catalysing role by mobilizing bilateral and multilateral
donors. However, we must meet not only immediate
needs but also more long-term ones, and that is one of
the main difficulties that faces us in terms of
peacebuilding. We must be able to simultaneously
anticipate, act and develop our strategies in order to
ensure that countries do not relapse into conflict.

Beyond the cases that the Commission has before
it, we can work on improving coordination between all
the actors within the United Nations family,
particularly in countries where peacekeeping
operations or special political missions are deployed.
This is the case with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for instance. New, custom-made tools, such as
integrated strategic frameworks, enable us to better
coordinate the efforts of all actors for the benefit of the
countries where peacebuilding remains necessary.

To conclude, I would like to recall that
peacebuilding does not necessarily depend on an
official emergence from conflict. The unfortunate
example of Timor-Leste has revealed that drawing
down a peacekeeping operation too rapidly and not
managing the transition process carefully enough can
lead to a resumption of conflict. In order for durable
strategies that are applicable in the immediate and long
term to be implemented, peacebuilding should be
clearly understood as one dimension of peacekeeping
and not just as the step that follows it.

The Council debate that France organized on
12 February 2010 highlighted the importance of
including the peacebuilding dimension from the outset
of a peacekeeping operation. Stepping up relations
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council might also bring about a
strengthening of the relationship between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding. The Commission review process
will make it possible to enhance the Commission's
efforts and furnish the United Nations with a truly
effective tool to ensure that countries do not relapse
into conflict.

