Mr. McNee (Canada): Canada welcomes this
opportunity to address the Council on Afghanistan, a
country that remains a central priority for the
international community, including for Canada. We
also welcome the Secretary-General's September report
(S/2007/555) on the situation in Afghanistan and
Mr. Koenigs' very helpful presentation today.

Canada was pleased with the outcomes of the
high-level meeting in New York on September 23. The
meeting demonstrated the strength of the international
community's commitment to Afghanistan, but also
revealed the need for additional work in three key
areas: a need for renewed focus on the Afghan National
Police; better donor coordination; and greater
Afghanization of the international community's
actions.

Today the Government of Canada would like to
recognize the gains that have been made in Afghanistan
over the past year, and also to identify outstanding
obstacles and emerging challenges to the international
reconstruction effort.

With respect to the security situation, Canada
applauds the increasing effectiveness of the Afghan
National Army to bring stability to the lives of
Afghans. The security situation of course remains
challenging, but we are beginning to see real progress
in key areas.

In Kandahar, for example, where Canadian troops
are stationed, the Taliban have been dislodged from
former strongholds such as Kandahar City and
Panjwayi District. No one is benefiting more from
these gains than the people of Kandahar Province.
They are increasingly able to reclaim their lives and
build a better future for their children and
grandchildren.

Tangible progress is being achieved across the
country. For example, 4,000 new hospitals have been
built since 2004; access to basic health care has grown
from 9 per cent in 2004 to 83 per cent this year;
1.2 billion square metres of land have been cleared of
mines since 1989; infant mortality rates have dropped
22 per cent since 2000; 40,000 more Afghan newborns
now survive their first year; 6,000 kilometres of road
are being built or refurbished nationwide.

These statistics are telling. Every Afghan child
inoculated against polio is a child who will live a
longer, happier life. Every kilometre of road represents
better access to markets, schools or relatives in
neighbouring districts. Every mine-free metre of land
is another area where Afghan children can play football
or run freely. These achievements contribute to the
vision of the future of the Afghanistan Compact.

To succeed, international efforts must be mirrored
by the consistent commitment of the Afghan
Government. Corruption must be squarely confronted.
Making active the senior appointments panel, a key
Compact benchmark, would demonstrate the
Government of Afghanistan's commitment to anti-
corruption. I should note that Canada remains
committed to working with the Government of
Afghanistan to make the panel operational. We will
continue to work with the Government of Afghanistan
and our partners in the international community to
consolidate the rule of law, an essential condition for
sustainable development, lasting peace and stability.

A robust police force is also a critical element of
the rule of law. In this regard, Canada currently
provides training, infrastructure and salary support. We
look forward to continuing to support the Government
of Afghanistan as it develops a comprehensive
approach to the establishment of an effective Afghan
National Police force. Canada also remains committed
to working closely with European partners in the
European Union Police Mission.

The Government of Afghanistan should be
commended for its progress on developing a national
justice system strategy. We were pleased to be part of
this process and look forward to finalizing the Strategy,
under Afghan leadership.

Canada applauds the recent establishment of the
independent department of local administrations. We
remain committed to help the Afghan Government
develop the capacity of subnational governance
institutions.

The Government of Afghanistan's opposition to
legalizing opium production needs our support. The
issue is complex and multifaceted. Recently reported
progress in the northern and central provinces is
encouraging, but we must redouble efforts to assist the
Afghan Government in combating the narcotics
industry in the south. This requires a comprehensive
approach, including the consolidation of an effective
justice system and the provision of sustained economic
opportunities. Canada remains committed to supporting
the Government of Afghanistan in its efforts to address
the threat of narcotics.
A securely managed border between Pakistan and
Afghanistan is of course critical. Canada welcomes the
positive outcome of the cross-border peace jirga in
August. We must build on the momentum the jirga has
generated.

Canada is pleased to be working with the
Government of Afghanistan and in support of the work
of United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA), International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) and the Group of 8 (G8) to foster Afghan-
Pakistani cooperation in security and economic
development, and to help develop Afghan capacity in
border management.

(spoke in French)

The situation in Afghanistan clearly demonstrates
the need to address the security, development and
governance elements of reconstruction simultaneously.
It is imperative that the United Nations and the
international community get this right, not just for the
people of Afghanistan, who deserve a better future, but
also for global stability and prosperity.

Achieving our goals in Afghanistan will require
the collective effort, imagination and innovative
thinking of everyone involved in the international
reconstruction effort. To this end, Canada compliments
UNAMA on recent efforts to enhance collaboration
with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the World
Bank and other key actors in the Afghan reconstruction
effort. We encourage the United Nations and Member
States to continue to identify new ways to maximize
the impact of our collective efforts in Afghanistan.

Canada strongly supports the work of UNAMA
and of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Koenigs. We would like to thank him and
his team for the important work they are undertaking in
often very difficult circumstances. We welcome and
strongly support UNAMA's request for increased
international positions in 2008, particularly in the
south.

Earlier this month, when Canada's Minister for
Foreign Affairs addressed the General Assembly,
Canada proposed the establishment of a high-level
United Nations special envoy for Afghanistan as part
of Canada's continued support for, and commitment to
the leadership role of the United Nations in
Afghanistan.
To conclude, Canada remains committed to
supporting UNAMA and the broader United Nations
family in their efforts to ensure the success of the
reconstruction operation in Afghanistan.
