The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as Permanent Representative of the United
States.

I thank High Representative Ashdown and
Foreign Minister Ivanie for their briefings to the
Council. The situation that the High Representative
described is remarkable in many ways. Nine years after
a war that killed and wounded hundreds of thousands
and displaced nearly 2 million, almost all properties
have been returned to those who were displaced. More
than 1 million refugees and displaced persons have
returned to all parts of the country, even to the sites of
the worst war crimes. Armies that fought each other
now serve under unified command and control.
Intelligence services that plotted against each other are
being unified. That progress is a tribute to the work of
the High Representative and to the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, who have shown determination to
overcome their past.

All of those achievements, however, are in
jeopardy. They are placed at risk by the failure to bring
to justice those accused of genocide, of operating rape
camps and of holding United Nations officials hostage.
The transformation of Bosnia and Herzegovina into a
stable and prosperous country cannot be complete until
indicted war criminals - especially Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic - face justice.

Recent reforms have brought Bosnia and
Herzegovina to the cusp of membership in NATO's
Partnership for Peace, yet NATO has rightly said it will
not accept a State in which one part aids and abets
international fugitives from being brought to justice.
The failure to arrest war criminals rests squarely on the
shoulders of Republika Srpska, which has not made a
single war-crimes arrest in the nine years since the end
of the war. Republika Srpska remains in violation of
the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords and of various
resolutions adopted by this body.
In the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords, the parties
made a solemn commitment to turn over indictees to
the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). That commitment must be fulfilled
if the achievements of Dayton - which included the
creation of the Republika Srpska itself - are to be
secured.

The people have borne the heaviest consequences
of the failure to apprehend indicted war criminals:
greater poverty, insecurity and international isolation.
But the ones who should bear the consequences are the
political leaders who have failed to fulfil their
promises and the individuals who have helped the
fugitives to evade justice. We therefore commend the
High Representative for his ongoing actions to identify
and penalize individuals and organizations supporting
indicted war criminals. The consequences of the failure
to arrest indicted war criminals can only grow. It is
long past time to bring them to justice.

On a final note, I would like to congratulate
NATO on the successful conclusion of its current
mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina and to welcome the
incoming European Union-led force. While the
European Union assumes the lead peacekeeping role,
the continuing presence of a NATO headquarters
underscores NATO's continuing political commitment.
The United States remains committed to helping the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina move forward, and
we will remain deeply engaged.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The next speaker on my list is the representative
of the Netherlands. I invite him to take a seat at the
Council table and to make his statement.

