Mr. Wittig (Germany): Let me join my
colleagues in congratulating you, Mr. President, on
Lebanon's assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month. Our best wishes accompany you. Let
me equally thank our neighbours and colleagues from
India for their leadership last month. I thank
Ambassador Osorio for his briefing.

As the report of the Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) points
out, Iran is in continued violation of its international
obligations. New sanctions violations have been
reported. Iran is increasing its enrichment capacities
and transferring centrifuges to its enrichment facility
near Qom. It is unfortunate that we have to observe
further Iranian activities disregarding the Council's
resolutions. Together with our partners France, the
United Kingdom and the United States, we have
reported yet another violation. The launch of the
Rassad-l satellite on 14 June was a clear breach of
paragraph 9 of resolution 1929 (2010).

The latest report of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) highlights
in no uncertain terms that the Agency is increasingly
concerned about the possibility that Iran may have
conducted undisclosed nuclear-related activities
involving military or related organizations. My country
is concerned about the fact that the Agency continues
to receive new information with regard to the
development of a nuclear payload for a missile. The

Agency reports that it has received new information on
the weaponization from various sources. According to
the IAEA, the information is broadly consistent and
credible. We call on Iran finally to engage with the
Agency on the resolution of all outstanding issues in
order to make sure that there is no military dimension
to Iran's nuclear programme.

The dual-track strategy offers two options. We
continue to be ready to engage Iran in meaningful
negotiations on its nuclear programme in the
framework of the engagement track. That is our
preferred choice. However, as long as Iran does not
cooperate to the extent necessary, we see no other
option but to pursue the pressure track.

My country attaches great importance to the
proper implementation of sanctions, as agreed by the
Council. Germany believes that that remains vital in
order to keep up the pressure on Iran and make it come
back to the negotiating table. The 1737 Committee
continues to play a vital role in pursuing the dual-track
strategy vis-a-vis Iran.

Let me thank the Panel of Experts for its valuable
work. We particularly welcome the five
implementation assistance notices that are currently
under consideration by the Committee. We believe that
those documents can provide more clarity on how to
better implement sanctions and avoid new violations.

On 7 May, the Panel of Experts presented its final
report. We deeply regret that that comprehensive report
is yet to be published. For the sake of transparency, my
delegation reiterates its call for the report to be
published.

Germany continues to be concerned about the
numerous cases of weapons exports from Iran to other
countries, often to Syria, which are in violation of the
Council's resolutions. We call on all Member States to
carefully implement the weapons embargo, as
stipulated in paragraph 5 of resolution 1747 (2007).

Let me reiterate that, together with our partners in
the international community, in particular in the
framework of the E3+3, we remain committed to
finding a sustainable and peaceful solution to the
Iranian nuclear file. We affirm our unity of purpose and
determination, working through direct diplomacy. We
call on Iran to respond in a positive and constructive
spirit to our offers of engagement.

