Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I wish to thank
Mr. Shearer for his briefing just now and for all of his
excellent work.

We are meeting two months after President Kiir
recommitted to a ceasefire in South Sudan, two months
after the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2017/4) with very clear steps. We
should be reflecting today on two months of peace, two
months of life-saving aid reaching those in need, two
months of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS) protecting civilians. Instead, we meeting
today as South Sudan spirals deeper into crisis.

As we have heard so many times, the humanitarian
and human rights situation is worsening, the economy
is collapsing, and fighting has continued unabated.

People are no longer fleeing in the tens of thousands but
in the hundreds of thousands. More than 900,000 South
Sudanese have now sought refuge in Uganda. Those
figures underlie not only how severe the situation has
become but also how hollow those promises sounded to
the people of South Sudan when President Kiir made
them two months ago. We all know what needs to
happen - President Kiir must take the long-overdue
steps to which he agreed in the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) statement in March
and which we called for in our presidential statement.
That means granting sustained humanitarian access,
allowing the deployment of the regional protection
force, enabling UNMISS to fulfil its mandate and,
above all, bringing an end to the fighting - not just in
words but through actions that make the people of South
Sudan feel safe in their homes in their own country.

On Monday, President Kiir once again declared
a unilateral ceasefire and said that he had once again
agreed to consider the release of political prisoners.
We welcome those statements, but the onus is now on
him to prove that they are meaningful commitments,
not just words reflecting convenient timing with the
start of the rainy season when fighting is made more
difficult. I note with scepticism but not surprise that on
the day that the ceasefire was announced, Government
offences continued in Yei, and attacks by militia groups
continue still. We need to see an end to offensive
operations and disproportionate responses. We need to
see true inclusive engagement with the opposition and
civil society, and, in turn, we need to see a commitment
to a ceasefire from opposition groups as well.

President Kiir must begin withdrawing troops
from parts of the country, disband ethnic militias and
ensure that humanitarian assistance can reach those in
desperate need. Sadly, the Government has repeatedly
ignored the request ofthe Security Council,just as it has
repeatedly ignored the requests of the African Union
and IGAD. Instead of allowing humanitarian access,
the Government has endangered the most vulnerable
by denying aid to those facing famine in Unity state.
Instead ofbeing allowed to fulfil its mandate, UNMISS
has faced sustained harassment and worse, with the
Sudan People's Liberation Army threatening to shoot
United Nations peacekeepers if they moved any further
towards Wunkur in Unity state. Such moves are not
designed to inspire confidence in the commitments of
President Kiir.

It is long past time for the Government of South
Sudan to show genuine commitment to peace and
stability, including by reaching out to the opposition.
We will, of course, support political efforts that are
truly inclusive, but we must learn from the past and
not make the same mistake of relying on the promise
of dialogue alone. We will also need to keep up the
pressure. By that, I mean that we must use all of the
tools at our disposal to encourage the Government
of South Sudan to take the steps required, and the
opposition must follow suit. We need to show that there
are consequences should they fail to do so. Earlier
today we renewed the sanctions regime that enables us
to do just that. We should be willing to use that regime
to send a clear message to anyone who continues to fail
to deliver peace. As I have said on numerous occasions
in this Chamber, we also need to restrict the flow of
weapons into South Sudan.

The Council has a responsibility to do all it can to
bring peace to South Sudan. It is a responsibility that
we are not yet fulfilling. All of us in this Chamber, in
the United Nations and across the region must redouble
our efforts. We owe it to the people of South Sudan.

