Mr. Petersen (Denmark): 1 have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, namely,
Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and my own country,
Denmark.

On this World Humanitarian Day, we welcome
Argentina's initiative to hold an open debate on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict, ahead of the
upcoming report of the Secretary-General.

Let me, at the outset, reconfirm our unwavering
commitment to respecting and promoting international
law. The laws and obligations that apply during armed
conflict must be respected everywhere, regardless
of who is fighting and where the fighting goes on.
We call on parties to armed conflicts around the
world - States as well as non-State actors - to fully
respect international humanitarian law, human rights
and international refugee law. In particular, the need to
protect vulnerable groups in conflict, such as women,
children, elderly people and persons with disabilities,
must be respected at all times.

Civilians affected by armed conflict need
immediate humanitarian relief. Under international
humanitarian law, the parties to an armed conflict have
a legal obligation to allow and facilitate the rapid and
unimpeded passage of humanitarian assistance, and to
ensure safety from attacks for humanitarian aid workers
and accountability for attacks against such workers.
We call on all parties to armed conflicts around the
world to respect that humanitarian obligation without
exception or precondition. In particular, we recall the
obligation to respect the wounded and sick, health-care
personnel and facilities and medical vehicles and to
take all reasonable measures to ensure safe, prompt and
unhindered access for the wounded and sick to health
care.

When addressing the global legal framework for
the protection of civilians, it is important to mention
the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) . We view the ATT as a
means to reduce illicit trafficking and alleviate human
suffering in armed conflicts, and we call for rapid
ratification and implementation of the ATT by all States
Members of the United Nations.

During armed conflicts, the risks faced by civilians
will always differ depending on the context and on
whether they affect boys or girls, men or women. Sexual
assaults during warfare have horrendous implications
for victims and entire communities and must simply
stop. We re-emphasize the commitment by all Member
States to end sexual violence in armed conflicts, and
we welcome recent steps taken at the international level
to that end. The inclusion of gender-based violence in
the Arms Trade Treaty serves as an example. Women
and girls who become pregnant after being raped as
part of warfare in an armed conflict must have access
to adequate sexual and reproductive health services,
including access to emergency contraception and safe
abortion. We need to eliminate the widespread impunity
ofthe perpetrators of sexual violence in conflict, and we
strongly support the work of Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Bangura and other international
initiatives to that effect.

We must insist that those who commit war crimes,
crimes against humanity and other violations of
international law must be held accountable before the
law. Impunity must not be an option. We recall that in
every situation the State has the primary responsibility
to maintain the rule of law and ensure accountability.
If the State is unwilling or unable to investigate and
prosecute these international crimes, the international
community should offer its support. The International
Criminal Court (ICC) and other international tribunals
play a crucial role. In that context, we especially want to
remind those in Syria who are responsible for atrocities
and human rights violations and abuses that they will
be held accountable.

The Security Council must do its part to ensure
accountability when violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law have occurred,
as they have in Syria. On that note, we welcome the
first open debate in the Security Council, held on
17 October 2012, on peace and justice and the role of
the ICC (see S/PV.6849). We look forward to seeing
regular follow-up on this topic, in particular on how the
Council can lend stronger support to the Court in cases
of non-cooperation with the ICC.

Accountability requires facts and investigations.
We welcome the international commissions of
inquiry and fact-finding missions carried out under
the auspices of the Human Rights Council and those
initiated by the Secretary-General. They are important
mechanisms to verify and investigate allegations of
serious violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law. Attention should
also be drawn to the International Humanitarian Fact-
Finding Commission, which regrettably has remained
virtually unused by parties to armed conflict. In that
connection, we welcome the initiative by Switzerland
and the International Committee of the Red Cross
concerning the possibility of establishing a mechanism
to improve compliance with international humanitarian
and human rights law.

In order to protect civilians and promote
accountability in post-conflict situations, securing
documentation during and after an armed conflict is
essential. Parties to a conflict should ensure proper
documentation of the conduct of military operations,
for example by mapping areas that may be contaminated
by unexploded ordnance and by conducting systematic
casualty recording. States and other parties to an armed
conflict must also ensure, as our Chilean colleague just
stated, that journalists' right to protection as civilians
be respected at all times. They should find ways to
improve the protection of journalists and other media
actors reporting from conflict areas and respect their
right to carry out their important work.

The requisite preventive measures and full respect of
international law are essential for ensuring that civilians
are protected in armed conflict. The responsibility to
protect populations from genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and ethnic cleansing has emerged as
an important global principle since the adoption of the
2005 World Summit Outcome. The principle makes
clear that sovereignty can never be used as a shelter
for committing mass atrocities, that all Governments
have an obligation to protect their own population, and
that the international community has an obligation to
assist Governments in doing so and to react ifa State is
manifestly failing to protect its population.

In that regard, preventive actions and support
to Governments in need from the international
community will increase the protection of civilians.
Capacity development in host countries is an important
preventive tool. Comprehensive rule of law strategies
for peacekeeping and peacebuilding missions should
include assistance in the areas of access to legal
institutions and legislative reform, alongside with
support in the areas of policing and the justice chain.
To make this effective, the peacekeeping operation in
question must also receive the relevant resources and
adequate training.

In conclusion, the Nordic countries look forward
to the upcoming report by the Secretary-General on
this topic, and we would like repeat our previous call
for the Secretary-General to regularly report on the
state of play, improvements and implementation of the
recommendations made in relation to the protection of
civilians in armed conflict.

