Mr. Suh Dae-won (Republic of Korea): I would like
to begin by expressing my delegation's appreciation to you,
Minister Axworthy, for your efforts to generate greater
participation in the work of the Security Council. I likewise
commend you for once again providing a forum for the
interests and concerns of the international community
relating to security issues of a humanitarian nature,
including in the open debate of the Council on "general
issues relating to sanctions" on 17 April 2000. My
delegation also offers thanks to the Secretary-General and
his staff, and Mr. Kellenberger, the new President of the
International Committee of the Red Cross, as well as the
informal working group of the Security Council, for their
indispensable work on this issue.

Since my delegation introduced the issue of the
protection of humanitarian assistance to refugees and
others in conflict situations to the Council during its
Security Council presidency in 1997, we have been
following the Council's successive measures on this issue
with deep interest. We note with satisfaction that the
Council has held a number of meaningful discussions
dealing with the protection of civilians in conflicts, which
resulted in the adoption of resolution 1265 in September
1999. We applaud the Council's continued efforts to fulfil
its responsibilities in this regard in a more concrete and
action-oriented manner.

In his report in document S/1999/957, the Secretary-
General rightly emphasizes the close connection between
widespread violations of the rights of civilians and
breakdowns in international peace and security. The
Security Council has also confirmed through many
resolutions that violations of international humanitarian
law constitute a continuing threat to international peace
and security. Today's alarming breaches of international
humanitarian norms therefore flout both the authority of
this Council and the spirit of the Charter of the
Organization.

My delegation supports the Secretary-General's
recommendations contained in document S/1999/957 and
the Council's decision to consider appropriate steps to
implement his recommendations at this juncture. The
ever-widening gap between our international humanitarian
norms and an often dreadful reality calls for not only the
Security Council, but the whole international community
to act decisively and promptly.

Let me address several points to which my
delegation attaches particular importance.

First, despite an ever-expanding legal corpus, there
is still room for improving the protection of civilians in
conflicts within our international legal framework. Indeed,
the existence of international law does not mean that it
can be upheld only by effective measures to ensure
compliance. It is imperative that a culture of compliance
begin to prevail so that legal protection and physical
protection are no longer two separate matters.

It is in this context that my delegation echoes
previous speakers in expressing its expectations for the
future role of the International Criminal Court (ICC). I
am pleased to announce that my Government signed the
Statute of the ICC last month, and we invite others that
have not yet done so to become signatories. My

 

delegation also supports the Secretary-General's view that
there is a need to consider using enforcement measures to
facilitate the arrest and surrender of those persons accused
by ad hoc tribunals and to devise judicial and investigative
mechanisms with national and international components
pending the establishment of the International Criminal
Court.

The Statute of the Court stipulates that attacks against
humanitarian or peacekeeping personnel constitute war
crimes. With a view to better ensuring the safety of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel, we join the
Secretary-General's call for an early ratification of the 1994
Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel. We also believe that the proposal to extend the
scope of the 1994 Convention to cover wider categories of
humanitarian personnel, including local staff, deserves
favourable consideration.
Secondly, my delegation concurs with the
Secretary-General's recommendations for a more proactive
use of preventive monitoring in areas of potential conflict
and in the deployment of preventive peacekeeping missions,
which have already proved to be effective. In this context,
we would like to join in appealing to all Member States to
participate more actively in the stand-by arrangement
system. Today the Secretary-General made an important
suggestion: to create a rapid deployment force. This idea
certainly merits further discussion.

Furthermore, in view of the multifaceted nature of
recent conflicts, there is an urgent need to strengthen the
United Nations rapid-reaction capability to cover more than
the traditional mandates of peacekeeping. It should also
cover a number of other functions, such as the protection of
humanitarian assistance to civilians. It goes without saying
that mandates for peacekeeping operations should be more
precise and comprehensive in order to provide effective
direction and clarity.

Thirdly, my delegation appreciates the attention that
has recently been given to improving sanctions. The
Security Council, for its part, has made consistent efforts to
refine the use of sanctions. While we recognize the
difficulty of achieving effective "targeted sanctions", we
also believe that there is a continuing need to minimize
collateral - albeit unintended - humanitarian suffering
through the imposition of more specifically targeted
sanctions and periodic substantial review mechanisms.

While we all continue to seek more effective and
smarter sanctions, tighter arms embargoes should be sought
in all situations where the parties to the conflict target
civilians. In this regard, effective measures must be taken
to control the flow of small arms and light weapons to
conflict areas. My delegation strongly supports the
suggestion made by Under-Secretary-General Prendergast
at Monday's Council meeting that sanctions regimes
should be endowed with more effective monitoring
capabilities, including the necessary resources and
expertise. We will continue to support the efforts of the
Council and the Secretary-General to strike a balance
between upgrading the credibility of sanctions and
minimizing human suffering.

Fourthly, it is worth giving serious attention to the
Secretary-General's suggestion that we provide States
with political and financial support to facilitate
compliance with the Ottawa Convention. Mine clearance
is an urgent precondition to a minimum level of safety for
civilians. A donor to the Mine Action Support Group, my
Government has also been contributing since 1996 to the
Voluntary Trust Fund for Assistance in Mine Clearance
in support of demining activities in Cambodia, Tajikistan,
Guatemala and El Salvador. We will continue to make
such contributions and invite others to do the same.

Finally, we would like to re-emphasize the primary
importance of maintaining the civilian and humanitarian
character of camps for refugees and internally displaced
persons. We fully support a number of practical
suggestions in this regard, in particular the deployment of
international military observers and the relocation of
camps to a safe area away from war zones. While
recognizing that primary responsibility for the protection
of internally displaced persons rests with the Governments
concerned, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendation for a wider use of the Guiding Principles
on Internal Displacement in the work of the United
Nations.

Let me close by reiterating my delegation's hope
that the Security Council will continue to expand its
involvement in the protection of civilians in conflict
situations in the months to come. The Republic of Korea,
for its part, will continue to be actively engaged in this
important process and to contribute to its success.

