Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, let me express our great satisfaction at
seeing you, Sir, preside over our Council. You are a
skilful diplomat well known throughout the United
Nations. I am pleased to see France, a friendly country,
at the helm of the Council.

Although Colombia is no longer a member of the
Security Council, I should also like to take this
opportunity to convey our thanks and appreciation to
the friendly delegation of that country and to
Ambassador Valdivieso for his presidency of the
Council last month and to wish him every success.

We also thank the former members whose
membership lapsed at the end of the year, congratulate
the new members and wish them every success.

Over the past 28 months, the children of Palestine
have been subject to systematic murderous action by
Israel, the occupying Power. During this period, the
occupying forces of Israel have committed war crimes
and acts of State terrorism, as well as systematic
violations of the rights of Palestinian children and of
the Palestinian people in general. The occupying
forces, both deliberately and through the indiscriminate
or excessive use of force, have killed over 650
Palestinian children and wounded thousands more,
hundreds of whom have been permanently disabled.
Through the use of force, widespread destruction and
the collective punishment of the entire Palestinian
community, the occupying forces have also inflicted
psychological disorders and emotional and social
damage on huge numbers of Palestinian children.
Above all, Israeli measures and practices have
impoverished Palestinian children, who consequently
suffer malnutrition and lack of health care, and have
halted and destroyed the educational system, leading to
the spread of ignorance among future generations.

All of this is occurring against the backdrop of
Israel's ongoing occupation of our land for over 35
years, during which the occupying forces have not only
oppressed and suppressed the population, but have also
practised settler colonialism, one of the worst possible
war crimes. The settler colonialism, which denies our
people's rights to exist and survive and to national
independence, further inhibits the Palestinian child's
right to a natural and normal future, such as that
enjoyed by any child throughout the world.

To all of this we must add Israel's uprooting of
half our population - including children and
women - from their lands and homes since 1948 and
its prevention of their return for over 50 years. We can
thus realize the magnitude of the great humanitarian
crisis and plight of Palestinian children at the hands of
the leaders and forces of Israel, who are war criminals
and the colonialists of the twentieth century.

The efforts of the Security Council in the field of
children and armed conflict complement the great work
of the General Assembly. In this respect, we express
our appreciation for the efforts of the General
Assembly in addressing the situation of Palestinian
children. The Israeli Charge d'affaires, with all his
well-known arrogance, earlier attacked and criticized
the General Assembly resolution concerning
Palestinian children. Only four members, whom I shall
not name, voted against that resolution. It may be
possible in a professional context for the representative
of the occupying Power to seek to defend the illegal
and illicit behaviour of his country, but it is intolerable
and disgusting that he should try to tell Member States
what to do and to portray the occupying Power as a
State that obeys and observes international law and
loves peace.

We welcome the improvement of the Security
Council's position concerning the question of children
and armed conflict through its acceptance of the legal
necessity of addressing the issue of children under
foreign occupation. This logically leads to the issue of
Palestinian children under Israeli occupation. We also
welcome the improvement of the Secretary-General's
report in this context and the reference made therein to
Palestinian children and their suffering, although the
reference inadequately covers all the essential aspects
of the issue. The same can be said of the statement
made this morning by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Children and Armed Conflict,
Mr. Olara Otunnu, in which he added to the relevant
paragraph of the Secretary-General's report another
paragraph on the use of suicide bombings in Israel.

Although we do not disagree in principle, we
nevertheless do not understand part of the text in that
additional paragraph. More important, we believe that
the two paragraphs do not clearly reflect either the
situation or its legal aspects; nor do they reflect the
tragic situation experienced by Palestinian children for
many years now. Nevertheless, this is a beginning that
we hope will develop in an appropriate manner,
including a visit by the Special Representative to
occupied Palestinian lands, including Al-Quds Al-
Sharif. We convey our welcome to him in advance.

We hope that the Security Council will take the
steps needed to provide the necessary protection for
Palestinian children living under Israeli occupation, not
only in accordance with the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and its relevant Optional Protocol but also
with the legal commitments emanating from the Fourth
Geneva Convention - which must be respected in all
circumstances, as must its Additional Protocol 1.

