Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Special
Envoy De Mistura for his briefing. At the outset, on
behalf of Kazakhstan, I would like to express our
most sincere gratitude for his efforts and those of his
team in their commitment to peace in Syria. Most of
all, we express our recognition for the Special Envoy's
outstanding engagement, as demonstrated in the
intensive consultations to make it possible to convene
a constitutional committee that is credible, balanced,
United Nations-facilitated, Syrian-owned and Syrian-
led.

We believe that United Nations mediation towards
the resolution of the Syrian crisis is very crucial and
needed. As the Astana format remains relevant, we
would be honoured to see both the outgoing and
incoming Special Envoys of the Secretary-General
at the meeting on the settlement of the Syrian crisis
to be held in Astana on 28 and 29 November. Many
critical issues need immediate attention. Therefore,
we must proactively continue to support the goals of
the Astana and Geneva negotiations in order to see
positive outcomes.

At present, the contours of a peaceful life in
Syria are becoming increasingly clear. We therefore
consider it very important to continue to work on the
establishment of the constitutional committee. That
will allow for the drafting ofa new basic legal for Syria.
In our opinion, the Istanbul summit, which included the
participation of the Heads of France, Germany, Turkey
and Russia, outlined the prospects for creating the
constitutional committee by the end of 2018. The first
summit on Syria to bring together the representatives of
the Astana process and the small group demonstrated
that we may be close to finding a solution to the crisis,
with new approaches to both political and humanitarian
issues. In that regard, we hope that outcomes will be
reached at the summit, including those relating to the
establishment of the Syrian constitutional committee.
Kazakhstan underlines the need for such a committee
as a starting point in the revitalization of the process
of political settlement in Syria, where it would work
in compliance with the Charter of the United Nations,
international law and United Nations resolutions.

Kazakhstan supports all initiatives aimed at
resolving the violent conflict in the Syrian Arab Republic
as soon as possible. We consider the protection of
Syrian people, civilians and property as a high priority.
Only a political-diplomatic approach in the spirit of the
Charter and Security Council documents on preventive
diplomacy and sustaining peace can bring appropriate
results. Kazakhstan will work with the international
community to support all parties to the inter-Syrian
negotiation process, aimed at strengthening the path
to a peaceful solution to the crisis and the mitigation
of the humanitarian situation. Moreover, given that the
situation in Syria is gradually stabilizing, we hope that
humanitarian assistance will reach the population in
need through direct routes as soon as possible.

We welcome the positive changes in Idlib after the
creation of a demilitarized buffer zone, in particular
with the restoration of transport and communications.
We believe that the Sochi agreements should be
promptly implemented in full compliance with the
norms and principles of international humanitarian law.
The agreements will consolidate the progress achieved
and provide an opportunity to begin much-needed
political negotiations. At the same time, we condemn
the provocative actions of terrorist organizations. We
concur unanimously that the international community
should not allow terrorist groups to undermine
the agreements.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
Security Council has a special responsibility to end this
tragic period in Syria. We urge the Council to unite
around that common political goal, voice support for
the Geneva and Astana processes and, most of all,
for the Special Envoy to help the country achieve a
comprehensive political settlement.

