Ms. Kuburovic' (Serbia): I am grateful for the
opportunity to address the Security Council on behalf
of the Republic of Serbia today.

As a potential witness to the completion of the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in the foreseeable
future, I take this opportunity to share some of the key
moments in Serbia's cooperation with these institutions.
I shall shed light on certain tendencies taking shape in
the work of the Mechanism at this juncture, which may
foreshadow future developments.

The provision for the Mechanism to close in June
2020 is at odds with the assessments ofthe Mechanism's
officials that some cases will not be completed by
the end of that year. This fact calls into question the
Mechanism's ability to complete the remaining cases
prior to the projected closure and brings into focus the
question of the institutional framework within which
the issues unresolved at the deadline will be considered.

However, certain assertions contained in the
progress report of the Prosecutor for the period from
16 November 2018 to 15 May 2019 (S/2019/4l7, annex II) are unfounded and a cause for concern. In paragraph
29, the report says that the European Union's policy
of conditionality, linking membership progress to
full cooperation with the ICTY and the Mechanism,
remains a key tool for ensuring cooperation with the
Mechanism. This position seeks to shape the political
context of Serbia's cooperation with the European
Union, replacing legal arguments with political ones.
The Mechanism is seen as a tool for exercising political
pressure. Neither the Prosecutor nor the Mechanism are
entrusted with such a mandate.

Serbia's cooperation with the Mechanism has been
successful and received wide acclaim. It has fulfilled
the obligations it assumed and given the Mechanism
free access to all evidence, documents, archives and
witnesses. All the Mechanism's requests have been
attended to with timely replies, and the documentation
requested from the archives of Serbia's State organs
have been forwarded to the Mechanism's Prosecutor,
Chambers and Secretariat. Furthermore, witnesses
have been allowed to testify, waiving their right not to
with respect to State, military or official secrets.

In the last reporting period, Serbia made progress
in its activities related to the so-called legacy of the
Tribunal by responding to the call made for the
establishment of a Belgrade information centre to
house ICTY materials and make them accessible to the
general public. Since the inception of the Tribunal, my

country's cooperation has yielded positive results, and
its ownjudicial system has been changed and improved
in the process. Making Serbia's progress to European
integration conditional on extraneous issues would
send a message that all those years of hard work and
exceptional results have not been enough.

Furthermore, the report suggests that higher-
ranking perpetrators have not been prosecuted,
even though the President of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia, the President of the Republic of Serbia,
the Vice-President of the Federal Government, the
Vice-President of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia, three former Chiefs of the General Staff of
the Army of Yugoslavia, the former Head of the State
Security Service and many military and police generals
were among the persons transferred to the Tribunal. No
such requests were made of any other country. Others
were spared for political reasons, even if there were
surely legal reasons to prosecute them. This approach
clearly falls outside the international legal order on
which the United Nations is based.

Undoubtedly, the countries of the region needto work
together to achieve mutual understanding, cooperation
and reconciliation. Our future stability and economic
development should be predicated on the normalization
of relations rather than on political conditionality. The
report's insistence on conditionality, especially against
the backdrop of Serbia's extensive achievements in
terms of cooperation with the Mechanism, is therefore
unfair and ultimately unacceptable.

Cooperation in our region is on the rise and best
illustrated by the following. Serbia's cooperation with
Bosnia and Herzegovina in the field of legal assistance
is at a high level. In the period from 1 November 2018 to
1 July 2019, exchanges of requests for legal assistance
between our countries took place. The Prosecutor's
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina submitted 29
requests, 25 of which were fulfilled, while the Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia
submitted 45 requests, 28 of which have received
replies. Serbia's Prosecutor's Office has taken over
three indictments from the competent authorities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

It is our hope that our cooperation with Croatia
will also improve. Following a meeting of Justice
Ministers between our two countries in March 2018,
two commissions were established to exchange lists
of persons indicted or sentenced for war crimes and to
draft a bilateral criminal trials agreement. The first of
the two commissions completed its task, while the other
continues to hold meetings, the last of which took place
in Belgrade last week. In addition, a ministerial meeting
was held in Zagreb in February. These meetings and
the work of the commissions are important steps being
taken by Serbia and Croatia to address outstanding
bilateral issues between our two countries.

Specifically, the State's Attorney Office of
the Republic of Croatia submitted 21 requests, of
which 9 have been fulfilled, while 11 are still under
consideration. The Office of the War Crime Prosecutor
ofthe Republic ofSerbia submitted 18 requests, ofwhich
6 have received replies, leaving 12 requests without a
reply. These numbers show the progress achieved in
comparison to the previous reporting period, when
we received no reply from Croatia to any request for
evidence and information.

Furthermore, meetings of the War Crimes
Prosecutor of the Republic of Serbia with her colleagues
in the region is proof of Serbia's ongoing efforts aimed
at regional cooperation. The regional prosecutors
conference on cooperation, benchmarks and standards
in the prosecution of war criminals was held in
Belgrade in May. In addition to high-ranking officials
from the War Crimes Prosecutor's Offices of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and Serbia,
the International Residual Mechanism's Prosecutor,
Mr. Brammertz, took part in the conference. We
therefore find it difficult to subscribe to the report's
assessment that "regional judicial cooperation in war
crimes matters in not satisfactory" (S/2019/417, annex 11, para. 81). On the contrary, in comparison to the
previous reporting period, regional cooperation today
is much broader than before.

The adoption of the Prosecutorial Strategy for the
Investigation and Prosecution of War Crimes in Serbia
recognized the Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor
as the primary organ for improving efficiency and
effectiveness in prosecuting war crimes. Further, the
Serbian Government has provided resources to improve
the Office's capacities and increase the number of
employees, in particular deputy prosecutors.

The Prosecutor's Office of the Mechanism also
rendered support to improving the work of the Office
of the War Crimes Prosecutor. The Mechanism's
prosecutors were invited as instructors to a five-day
training course for deputy and assistant prosecutors
in Belgrade last April. The course was organized by
the Serbian Judicial Academy and provided practical
training on investigating and prosecuting sexual
violence in conflict as an international crime.

The Office of the War Crimes Prosecutor sought
six indictments in the period from 1 November 2018 to
1 July 2019. Three of them were taken over from the
competent authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Currently, 20 cases are being tried, while 54 persons
in six cases are being investigated. In the reporting
period, the Higher Court in Belgrade delivered
judgments in five cases, while the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor reached a guilty plea agreement
with one person. All persons involved are Serbs.
Serbia continues its practice of no trial in absentia with
respect to war crimes committed against the Serbian
population. Twenty-seven cases, involving 132 persons,
have been suspended on that basis.

In the light of efforts to make my statement
informative and to bring before the Security Council
my county's cooperation with the Tribunal and the
Mechanism, which is second to none, I feel disappointed
by the contention in paragraph 83 of the report, in
which it is stated:

"Nonetheless, it is of significant concern that
[as of the present], no senior or mid-level official
has yet been held accountable [...] for the ethnic
cleansing of 800,000 civilians in Kosovo in March
and April 1999."

The allegations of ethnic cleansing and of 800,000
civilian victims thereof have been made in very
poor taste. The allegations are wrong, while number
games lead to blind alleys of bias and partiality and
are often fraught with far-reaching and unforeseeable
consequences. Those narratives have been churned out
by propaganda mills to vindicate the 78-day bombing
of my country exactly 20 years ago. The brutalization
took place without any reason and was carried out, as
the Council knows very well, without its decision.

No one seems to be held to account for or found
guilty regarding the victims of that monstrous act and
the loss of thousands of human lives, in which evidence
has been collected through the judicial system of
Serbia, except that the highest-ranking Serbian officials
have been sentenced by the very Tribunal for criminal
offences committed in the territory of Kosovo and
Metohija. Their crime was the defence of their country.
Let me remind the Council that, under resolution
1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, Kosovo and Metohija
have been under the protectorate of the United Nations,
the institution in which we convene today. Due to
the widely known circumstances, the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo has judicial
competences over this part of Serbia's territory. Yet
each and every attempt of my country to have the war
crimes committed against its population in Kosovo and
Metohija investigated and their perpetrators brought
to justice has yielded no result. No one has been held
accountable for the persecution and killing of Serbs
and other non-Albanians. Justice for the victims of
war crimes in Kosovo and Metohija continues to
be unattainable.

Since their establishment by the Provisional
Institutions of Self-Government in Pristina, the
Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor's Office
in The Hague have made no progress whatsoever.
Likewise, the European Union's Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) Prosecutor's Office in Pristina extended
no request for assistance to the Office of the War
Crimes Prosecutor in Belgrade in the reporting period.
However, under the mutual legal assistance procedures,
the Serbian Prosecutor's Office extended 16 requests to
the EULEX Office, out of which only one request has
received a reply. That prevents the crimes committed
against Serbs and other non-Albanians from being
prosecuted and tried and is surely one of the reasons
that no one is called to account for the persecution of
the Serbs of Kosovo and Metohija.

Persons who have been sentenced before the
Tribunal and served their sentences cannot be the
topic of the Mechanism Prosecutor's report to the
Security Council. Upon presentation of an indictment
and, finally, upon the delivery of a judgment, the
Prosecutor's job is ended. After serving a sentence, no
one can be further sanctioned for whatever reason, nor
can he or she be deprived ofa personal or civil right.

Let me bring to the Council's attention another
very important matter. As I said at the beginning of my
statement, certain tendencies taking shape at the time
the Mechanism is about to end its work may change
the decades-long practice of serving the sentences
handed down by the Tribunal and the Mechanism. It is
my opinion that the issue should be resolved before the
Mechanism completes its mandate.

The indications that certain changes will occur in
respect of early release affect, in an indirect way, the
initiative of Serbia, launched more than 10 years ago, to
have its nationals sentenced before the Tribunal serve
their sentences in Serbia. That initiative was motivated
by Serbia's resolve to assume the responsibility for
the serving of prison sentences handed down to its
nationals by the Tribunal. The purpose of punishment
includes, among other things, the resocialization of the
sentenced persons. I believe that it is difficult to expect
that that purpose will be achieved if the persons serve
their sentences in faraway countries, whose language
they do not speak and in which the possibility for them
to receive visits from, and contact with, relatives is
reduced to a bare minimum.

The situation in Serbia has changed drastically
since the wars in the former Yugoslavia. I highlighted
that fact in my previous statements to the Council
and during the visits of the Mechanism's officials to
Belgrade. Last November, I was reassured by the then
President of the Mechanism, Judge Meron, that there
were no obstacles to the realization of Serbia's initiative.
I was advised to refer the issue of the initiative to the
Security Council, which established the Tribunal and
the Mechanism.

In my statements in June and December 2018
(see S/PV.8278 and S/PV.8416), I proposed that the
Secretary-General request the Mechanism to prepare
a comprehensive assessment of the problem in
order to make it possible for the Security Council to
proceed and review the existing practice relative to
the serving of prison sentences and take a decision on
requisite changes.

Serbia is ready to accept strictly defined
international monitoring and to provide clear guarantees
that the sentenced persons will not be released early,
short of an appropriate decision by the Mechanism
or another organ of the United Nations entrusted
with the matter in the future. I once again call on the
Mechanism's representatives and on the representatives
of the relevant institutions that the Secretary-General
may appoint for the purpose to visit Serbia, tour its
penitentiary institutions and inspect them themselves.

We would welcome it if this esteemed institution
presented its position regarding the serving of sentences
by the persons sentenced before the Tribunal. It would
be a very good sign. I therefore call on the Security
Council to become actively involved. By realizing
the initiative, a positive message would be sent that
perpetrators can resocialize by serving sentences in
their country of origin.

In conclusion, let me point out that Serbia's
cooperation with the Mechanism continues to be
successful and that my country has no outstanding
issues with the Mechanism. I continue to believe that
our efforts will be recognized and reflected objectively
in the next reports. I hope that I am not overly optimistic
in that belief.

