Ms. Benitez Lima (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
We are grateful for the briefings delivered and
commend Peru for having taken the initiative to convene
today's open debate on a hugely important topic that
is particularly relevant at a time when we are seeing
the proliferation of threats that did not previously exist,
exposing us to new risks and vulnerabilities.

Activities related to organized crime, such as drug
trafficking, illegal arms trafficking, money-laundering,
human trafficking, corruption and cybercrime, among
others, all contribute to the proliferation of domestic
crime, intensify its effects, damage the economic,
social and cultural development of the State, destroy
its social cohesion, damage its international image and
even threaten the stability of its democratic institutions.

Organized crime and terrorist acts are among
the obstacles that Uruguay could face in the 2014-
2030 period. Our national strategy to combat money-
laundering, terrorism financing and the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction for the period 2017-
2020 highlights that among the illicit cases of money-
laundering and terrorism financing perpetrated within,
in connection with or from Uruguay, the most relevant
were those related to the trafficking of narcotic and
psychotropic drugs. It also indicates that international
criminal organizations, particularly those dedicated
primarily to drug trafficking, constitute a threat to our
country. Although they have not managed to establish
permanent bases within our territory, they have local
partners responsible for domestic distribution and
collaboration across multiple logistical and support
aspects. Moreover, owing to the nature of our borders
and geographical location, Uruguay is attractive as a
transit country.

With regard to terrorism and its financing, at
the time of carrying out the evaluation reflected in
the aforementioned national strategy, no terrorist
organizations acting locally were identified and we did
not find that the Uruguayan financial system had been
used to carry out financial transfers linked to terrorist
organizations acting abroad. The main threat identified
was that posed by terrorist organizations that had been
able to operate in other countries of the region.

Over the past few years, Uruguay has been
preparing to tackle these scourges, which corrode
peace and the social welfare of the population and have
a destructive potential to affect a country's sovereignty,
territorial integrity, development and resources, thereby
undermining its future. We are aware that in order
to effectively prevent and combat organized crime,

terrorism and the nexus between them, it is necessary to
have in place effective police and judicial systems, with
updated legislation and inter-institutional coordination
within the State. For that reason, various national actors
are engaged in addressing and tackling the various
threats through a multidimensional approach with a
view to providing a multisectoral response.

In terms oflegislation, in recent years Uruguay has
been incorporating new standards into its legislation
that allow us to confront the evolution of threats. Several
laws have been adopted regarding the prevention and
control of money-laundering and the financing of
terrorism, the latest being Law 19,749, of 15 May 2019,
and its regulatory decree 136/2019, of 16 May 2019. In
another area, in 2013 Uruguay enacted Law 19,172, on
State control and regulation regarding the importation,
production, acquisition, stockpiling, commercialization
and distribution of marijuana and its derivatives. The
law states that, through State intervention, it will seek
to tackle the devastating health, social and economic
consequences of the problematic use of psychoactive
substances, as well as to reduce the incidence of drug
trafficking and organized crime. It stipulates measures
aimed at controlling and regulating psychoactive
cannabis and its derivatives, as well as providing
education, raising awareness and preventing the health
risks of cannabis use in society, particularly with regard
to the development of addictions.

For its part, Law 19,513, of 2017, on combating
drug trafficking and transboundary organized
crime, established the Commission to Combat Drug
Trafficking and Transboundary Organized Crime as
well as the Security Committee for Border Crossings,
and it also includes criminal provisions. Also in 2017,
Uruguay adopted a national counter-terrorism strategy
that established the National Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Centre with the aim of improving the
country's response capacity within the context of
respecting the rule of law and human rights. The
strategy pursues four main objectives, namely, to
prevent, protect, evaluate and respond, thereby seeking
to implement solutions with a comprehensive approach.

Given the transnational nature of organized crime
and terrorism, we cannot limit ourselves to national
actions but should instead encourage and strengthen
bilateral, regional and international cooperation. In
that regard, Uruguay maintains its firm commitment
to cooperating with other actors in the international
community in the fight against both of these scourges
and their pernicious links. Our actions carried out
at the national level reflect that commitment. We
appreciate the recommendations that were made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
during its most recent visit to Montevideo, on 16 and
17 March 2017.

Our country continues to work to overcome its
vulnerabilities and is grateful for the support for those
efforts to adapt to the new demands of the international
context, within the framework of respect for the Charter
of the United Nations and international law, including
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law.

