Mr. Ladsous (spoke in French): I wish at the
outset to thank you, Mr. President, for giving me this
opportunity to outline for the Council the situation in
the Abyei Area.

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/74l),
which was submitted to the Council on 27 November,
provides a detailed account of the evolving situation
over the past two months. I shall therefore briefly
update the Council on the situation on the ground and
focus my briefing on the deployment status of the
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) as well on the latest political developments,
including the recent discussions held in Addis Ababa.

First, the security situation in the Abyei Area
remains fragile. The armed forces of the Sudan and of
South Sudan have still not withdrawn from the Area, in
contravention of the 20 June Agreement. North of the
Kiir/Bahr al-Arab River, units of the Sudanese Armed
Forces (SAP) and police remain present in Abyei town,
Goli and Diffra. South of the river, on 9 November the
Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA) transferred its
brigade staff to Mijan Kol, approximately three
kilometres south of the Area boundary. However,
2

personnel of the South Sudan Police Service remain
present within the Area, and it would seem that the two
parties are in the process of replacing their military
staff with police officers. That, too, contravenes the
letter and the spirit of the Agreement on Temporary
Arrangements for the Administration and Security of
the Abyei Area (S/20ll/384, annex), signed on
20 June.

In spite of the significant efforts of the African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel, led by
President Thabo Mbeki, and of the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for the Sudan and South Sudan,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, very little progress has been
achieved in the establishment of the Abyei Area
Administration. In recent weeks, the African Union
High-Level Implementation Panel has proposed a
compromise for the nomination of candidates for posts
within the Administration and the Legislative Council.
This led the Government of the Sudan on 1 November
to propose a new candidate for Chair of the Legislative
Council. Unfortunately, the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel has informed us that the
Government of South Sudan has rejected that
candidate. It is of the view that the chairmanship of the
Council will have influence over voter registration and
participation in the referendum that is provided for
under the Comprehensive Peace Agreement to resolve
the Abyei issue. The resultant deadlock does not augur
well for the stabilization of the Abyei Area or the
implementation of UNISFA'S mandate, both of which
depend on the establishment of a functional
Administration and the withdrawal of the armed forces
of both parties.

The ongoing presence of armed forces and the
lack of political progress pursuant to the 20 June
Agreement are all the more disturbing as we near the
end of the rainy season and the start of the Misseriya
migration through the Abyei Area. This year, the
migration has begun rapidly. Large numbers of nomads
have been seen in Abyei and its environs for over a
month. This is an unexpected turn of events, given the
heavy rainfall this year and the availability of
pasturelands further north. At the same time last year,
while there were similar levels of rainfall, the
migration did not even reach the village of Goli, which
lies exactly 40 kilometres north of Abyei. Even in 2008
and 2009, when the paucity of rain made southward
migration necessary, by early December of those years
the migration had reached Goli but not the environs of
11-62803
Abyei town. The Head of Mission, Lieutenant General
Tesfay, is in contact with the Misseriya chiefs and has
encouraged them to slow down their migration.

(spoke in English)

The presence of arms among elements of the
migrating population, while consistent with past
migration seasons, is also of concern in the absence of
inter-community negotiations on the migration this
year. To prevent the entry of armed militias into Abyei
town, UNISFA has changed its posture in the town and
established around-the-clock checkpoints.
Unfortunately, when UNISFA refused a SAP request to
remove one of these checkpoints, the SAP reinforced
its position in the town with one platoon from the
Abyei Area. In addition to maintaining a robust
posture, UNISFA continues its direct engagement of
both communities, including through the establishment
of a liaison office in El Muglad, to address tensions
over resources and arms.

In the context of the migration, the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reports that there
is now considerable anxiety on the part of the displaced
population to return to their villages, despite the
ongoing presence of the SAF. In addition, the
replacement of the Banton bridge by Ethiopian
engineers has improved conditions for the returns
process and movement of the humanitarian community.
At the present time, between 40 and 80 people are
crossing the bridge each day to inspect or work on their
properties. In addition, during the past 10 days,
UNISFA has observed more than 1,000 displaced
persons crossing the river at various locations. UNISFA
and United Nations agencies continue to engage with
representatives of the Ngok Dinka community to
facilitate a smooth returns process, including through
joint security assessments in returns villages.

In this complex and challenging environment,
UNISFA continues its efforts to implement its mandate.
As of today, 2,853 troops are on the ground, following
the deployment of the second battalion in October. Two
standing police capacity personnel have also been
deployed to plan for implementation of the mission's
police mandate once the Abyei Police Service has been
established. Supplementing existing bases in Abyei
town, Diffra and Agok, new bases have been
established in Todach, Noong, Um Khariet, Dokura,
Marial Achak and Banton. This widespread presence
and rapid response capacity, combined with intensive
11-6280}

patrolling and joint security assessments with both
communities, has enabled UNISFA to establish a
security umbrella in Abyei. To further increase its
capacity to mitigate tensions in the Abyei Area,
UNISFA will start deployment of a third battalion on
11 December.

In light of the significant threat posed by mines,
the UNISFA force has also recovered and disposed of
more than 100 unexploded ordinance and mines in
advance of a dedicated United Nations Mine Action
capacity. I am pleased to inform the Council that this
dedicated capacity began deploying on 2 December.
Further to the commitment made by the parties in
September, an SPLA team has been deployed to help
identify mined locations. However, the SAF has not yet
provided such assistance or maps of its mined
locations, and I urge it to do so.

As Council members will recall, there are
significant logistical challenges involved in supporting
the deployment and operations of UNISFA. These
include the long supply chains from Port Sudan and
South Sudan, constraints on the operational availability
of a logistics space, and gaps in essential support
personnel. We have also faced difficulties replacing
outgoing military observers and staff officers who are
critical to the operations of the Mission. We continue to
address these issues as far as possible, in consultation
with the Governments of the Sudan, South Sudan and
Ethiopia.

I would also like to update the Council on the
negotiations between the Governments of the Sudan
and South Sudan that were held in Addis Ababa from
21 to 30 November, under the auspices of African
Union High-Level Implementation Panel. These
negotiations focused on oil and transitional financial
arrangements, as well as on border issues. On the
former, the positions of the parties proved too far apart
for an agreement to be achieved. However, the parties
did agree to hold additional talks in Juba and Khartoum
through December and January. Similarly, the border
discussions ended without agreement on the next phase
of the border demarcation process for the agreed areas
or on the process required to resolve differences over
the disputed ones. In addition, no progress has been
made on the adoption of an operational map defining
the safe demilitarized border zone.

In that context, the security of the border between
the Sudan and South Sudan remains of concern. We
3
continue to believe that the establishment of the joint
border monitoring mechanism, already agreed by the
parties on 29 June and 30 July, is needed to build
confidence between the parties by verifying reports of
violations by both armed forces. It is important,
therefore, that Council members urge the parties to
reach agreement on the mapping of the border zone and
locations for the monitoring mechanism technical
details, under the auspices of the African Union Panel.
In addition, I hope that the Council will favourably
consider the expansion of UNISFA's mandate to
incorporate support for the border mechanism, as
proposed by the Secretary-General in his 29 September
report (S/2011/603).

Many of the ostensibly procedural problems
currently faced by UNISFA, from disagreements over
the establishment of the Abyei Area Administration to
the withdrawal of armed forces from the Area, are
indicative of the lack of trust between the parties. A
return to the negotiating table is absolutely essential to
prevent a further descent of the two new countries into
violence, which would inevitably have an impact on
the whole region. In that regard, I urge Council
members to engage both parties on the implementation
of UNISFA's mandate, the long-term status of Abyei
and the resolution of all outstanding issues between
them.

