Mr. Rowe (Sierra Leone): Mr. President, my
delegation would like to join others in welcoming you
to New York to chair this debate on the consolidation
of peace in West Africa, which is still one of the most
volatile regions in the world in terms of peace and
security. We regret that, due to unavoidable
circumstances, my Foreign Minister was unable to
attend and participate in this important meeting.

We note that virtually all the speakers in this
debate have made reference to my country, Sierra
Leone, including, just a few minutes ago, my
colleagues, the Permanent Representative of India and
the representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. We
thank those who acknowledged the progress that we
have made in becoming, perhaps, a model in post-
conflict recovery.

Due to time constraints, I will try to summarize
my statement.

Peacekeeping is an essential element, but not the
only one in the process of creating the conditions for
lasting peace in West Africa. Peacekeeping, in our
view, must be undertaken in conjunction with
peacebuilding, which has become synonymous with the
consolidation of peace. In our View, the benefits of
peacekeeping will be lost unless peacekeeping is
accompanied by a comprehensive programme of
measures for peace consolidation. The newly
established Peacebuilding Commission, to which
delegations have referred today, marks an
acknowledgement of the necessity to build on the solid
foundation laid by its peacekeepers, particularly those
of the United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNAMSIL). We are grateful that Sierra Leone is one
of the two post-conflict countries on the agenda of the
Commission, and we hope that our sister republics of
Guinea-Bissau and Liberia, which are also recovering
from devastating armed conflict, will also be
considered by the Commission in the not-too-distant
future.

This morning, we heard several views on what
constitutes the consolidation of peace. In our View,
peace consolidation should not be seen merely as an
effort to ensure that our countries do not slide back into
conflict. The primary objective of the consolidation of
peace, in our view, should be to attain sustainable
development. This involves the mobilization of
resources for economic and social reconstruction,
including, of course, repairing the infrastructural and
institutional damage resulting from conflict. The
consolidation of peace, in our View, is a development
exercise, one which must be seen and addressed in the

06-46 124
context of our poverty alleviation programmes in the
subregion.

We consider ECOWAS to be an important and
effective instrument for the consolidation of peace as
well as for peacekeeping in the subregion. In spite of
its limited logistical and other resources, ECOWAS,
through its Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) has already
demonstrated its capacity to help keep the peace. Who
can forget, for instance, the important role that
ECOMOG played in Sierra Leone before the
deployment of United Nations peacekeeping forces?
We note also that the Security Council itself
commended ECOMOG and ECOWAS for what they
had done. It also took an unprecedented decision under
Chapter VIII of the Charter to authorize ECOWAS to
enforce an arms embargo against the rebel junta in
Sierra Leone in 1997.

ECOWAS needs the support of the United
Nations and the international community to fulfil its
primary objectives of economic cooperation and
integration aimed at ensuring sustainable development
in its member States. We appeal to the United Nations
and the international community to strengthen their
relations with ECOWAS and its specialized agencies
and programmes.

While it is the responsibility of each State in the
subregion, including ours, to devise and implement
policies and programmes aimed at the consolidation of
peace and sustainable development, we strongly
believe that the United Nations and the international
community could make a tremendous contribution to
our efforts by, first, mobilizing resources, as a matter
of urgency, in support of the reconstruction and long-
term development programmes of the countries of the
subregion, most of which, including Sierra Leone, are
among the least developed in the world; recognizing
and responding to the linkage between the eradication
of poverty, sustainable development and the
maintenance and consolidation of peace; and
recognizing the linkage between the consolidation of
peace and the implementation of agreed guidelines and
commitments in international trade and financing for
development, including debt relief.

As we have witnessed, conflicts in the West
African subregion have been exacerbated by cross-
border movements of illegal small arms and light
weapons and their ammunition, as well as of
mercenaries. Many speakers, including my colleague
from Senegal, have referred to this today. Indeed, the
hard-won peace in countries such as Sierra Leone is
threatened by increasing flows of these weapons. The
United Nations and the international community can
contribute effectively to the consolidation of peace in
the ECOWAS subregion also by intensifying efforts to
eradicate the illegal trade in small arms and light
weapons, which have devastated the human and
physical resources of the subregion.

I think it is a shame that the recent United
Nations Conference to Review Progress Made in the
Implementation of the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in
Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects
collapsed last month. We were also disappointed that
following its recent debate on small arms (see S/PV.5390), the Security Council did not adopt any
resolution on the issue. Those facts do not augur well
for the consolidation of peace in the ECOWAS
subregion, which is awash with those illegal and
deadly weapons. However, we trust that there will be a
change of attitude when the matter is brought before
the Council again.

Meanwhile, we look forward to the adoption of
the draft presidential statement that will be issued at
the close of this meeting.

