Mr. Al-Abdallah (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first to congratulate you, Madam President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council this month. Let me also thank Mr. Robert Serry
for his briefing. I should like to stress my delegation's
support for the statements to be made later on behalf of
the League of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Non-Aligned Movement.

The current year, 2014, is a major landmark when
it comes to the question of Palestine. It is a year of
solidarity with the Palestinian people. That reaffirms
the importance for the international community and
the world's conscience in general to pay attention to
the rights of the Palestinian people. However, Israel
persists in its policies that run counter to the will of
the international community. It is the very course that
Israel has persistently taken for the past six decades.

Israel persists in its attempts to judaize the
holy city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif and to change its
demographic characteristics. We have all witnessed
Israel's settlement policies, its holding of thousands of
detainees, its disrespect for holy sites, and its expulsion
of Palestinian citizens, particularly from Al-Quds. We
have witnessed its ongoing apartheid policy and policy
of ethnic cleansing. All such violations run counter to
international law and international humanitarian law
and the most fundamental of human rights. All of those
practices are taking place under the very nose of the
Security Council without any attempt to put an end to
them.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, as a guardian of
Islamic holy sites, strongly condemns the attacks and
continuing acts of provocation in holy sites and attempts
to prevent the faithful from reaching Al-Aqsa Mosque,
which is tantamount to denying the fundamental
right to worship. Israel is entirely responsible for the
deterioration of the situation in East Jerusalem and for
any negative consequences caused by the acts of the
Israel Defence Forces or of settlers. We condemn all
attempts to change the historical or religious nature
of the various holy sites in the city. We call for an
immediate end to all acts that lead to demographic
changes in Al-Quds Al-Sharif, including the settlement
campaign, the demolition of Palestinian homes and
the collective expulsion of Palestinians, all of which
contravenes international law.

Israel continues to challenge the will of the
international community and all efforts to hold
successful negotiations. It flouts all the agreements
that surround the peace process, beginning with its
refusal to release all the detainees it had agreed to
release, extending settlement activities and changing
the demographic nature of the city. As hopes for efforts
to hold successful negotiations were raised over the
past few months, the occupation forces were doing
their utmost to undermine those efforts. For example,
according Israeli Government statistics, the rate at
which settlements were built increased by more than
23 per cent this year compared to last.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia welcomes the
accession by Palestine to a number of international
treaties, conventions and organizations, thereby
demonstrating its respect for international law and its
readiness to fulfil its obligations thereunder. It also shows
that it respects international law as it seeks to fulfil the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people, its freedom
and right to self-determination. The Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia also welcomes Palestinian reconciliation, which
unifies Palestinian decision-making. The Palestinian
Authority has thus reasserted its respect for all its
international commitments.

It is truly ironic and bizarre that Israel should
complain about such reconciliation when its own
Foreign Minister is calling for ethnic cleansing and
some members ofits Cabinet have repeatedly expressed
doubt about the two-State solution. In the past, Israel
used the conflict between Hamas and the Palestinian
Authority as a pretext not to cooperate; it is now using
the pretext of agreement between the Palestinian
factions to do the same thing. Those pretexts are empty.
Israel hides behind them because it has no desire to
see negotiations that would end the settlement and
occupation succeed.

The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is committed to the
Arab Peace Initiative set forth by the Kingdom itself.
We call on the Security Council to compel the Israeli
Government to end to its acts of aggression, which run
counter to international law, international humanitarian
law, the Fourth Geneva Convention, and the resolutions
of the Security Council on the occupied territories
in Palestine, Lebanon and the Syrian Arab Golan,
including settlement activities in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
and other occupied territories.

We call for the complete lifting of the siege
against Gaza and for measures to ensure a boycott of
all products coming from Israeli settlements. We call
on the United Nations and the Secretary-General to
make every effort to bring pressure to bear on Israel
to release all Palestinian detainees in accordance with
international law, international humanitarian law and
the Fourth Geneva Convention, and particularly to
immediately release Palestinian children from Israeli
prisons pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and other
relevant resolutions. We call for the release of all Syrian
detainees in Israeli prisons who are sons and daughters
of the occupied Golan.

A few minutes ago, the Israeli representative
launched a pathetic attack on my country, which
shows how illogical the Israeli Government's position
is when it comes to peace in the Middle East. It is
turning right and left, throwing accusations to and fro,
and attempting to divert the attention of the Council
and the international community from its breaches
of human rights and international humanitarian law
in the occupied Palestinian territories; its treatment
of detainees, peaceful demonstrators, women and
children; its siege on Gaza; and numerous other
violations that make the lives of Palestinians miserable
and that suppress their rights.

The situation in Syria is the greatest humanitarian
tragedy of this century. The situation continues to
deteriorate as the Syrian authorities use any and all
means in the war, including a policy of starvation and
scorched earth. Horns and other parts ofthe country are
besieged as indiscriminate artillery is used to force the

people to their knees. Resolution 2139 (2014) calls on
all parties to cease all attacks on civilian areas, as well
as on the Old City of Horns, does it not? The Security
Council has expressed its determination to take more
steps in case of non-compliance with that resolution,
has it not? Was the resolution not adopted two months
ago, since when thousands upon thousands have been
killed?

Now the Syrian authorities are violating resolution
2139 (2014) under our very noses, but the Council is
unable to even agree on a simple statement condemning
such acts? We call on the Council to take the necessary
further measures in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014), because the Syrian regime
continues to flout that resolution. Furthermore, given
the Syrian regime's continued use of chemical materials
against its own people, we also call for the immediate,
unreserved and unconditional lifting of the sieges of
Homs, Aleppo and all other areas under siege in Syria.

My delegation has already warned of the Syrian
Government's lack of responsiveness to the very bases
on which the Geneva Conference on Syria was built.
The agreement called for a transitional body with full
authority to fulfil the aspirations and hopes of the
Syrian people. Now the Syrian authorities are showing
the international community that they do not care for
the aspirations and hopes of their people by calling for
so-called presidential elections. How can the parties in
Syria meet in Geneva to set up a transitional Government
while one of the parties is at the very same time calling
for false elections to impose a fait accompli on the
ground for an additional seven years. The insistence on
holding presidential elections in the current situation
is confirmation of the fact that the Syrian authorities
will continue to suppress the aspirations of the Syrian
people and to deprive them of self-determination.

The Security Council is unable to implement even
those of its resolutions that were adopted unanimously.
That truly undermines the credibility of the Security
Council, any hope placed in the United Nations, and
indeed any respect from world public opinion for United
Nations resolutions and decisions. More importantly,
over the past three years thousands upon thousands
of Syrians have been subjected to barrel bombs and
the worst forms of killing and torture, yet the regime
enjoys full impunity. Those who do not take a stand
against such acts are complicit in them.
