Mr. Serry: I am honoured to brief the Council
two days after the adoption of resolution 1850 (2008).
The Secretary-General welcomes this timely and
important resolution, which embodies the principles on
which Israeli-Palestinian peace must rest. The
resolution came a day after the Quartet affirmed the
need to intensify the political process and address acute
challenges on the ground. The Secretary-General also
chaired a meeting of the Quartet with members and
08-65913
representatives of the League of Arab States in a
framework of collaboration that is essential to the
search for peace in the region. The international
community has sent a clear and united message of its
commitment to the irreversibility of the process leading
to the creation of a Palestinian State living in peace
alongside a secure Israel.

Preparations for the Israeli general election
scheduled for 10 February 2009 have continued, with
many political parties holding primaries. A new United
States administration takes office on 20 January. There
are also internal challenges on the Palestinian side. We
are therefore in a period of transition. The immediate
priority is to sustain the process during transition by
building a solid bridge to carry us through the fragile
period ahead. In this regard, a priority must be to
ensure calm in and around Gaza and to urgently
improve humanitarian conditions. The decision of the
Arab League to ensure no vacuum on the Palestinian
side, support the legitimate Palestinian Government
and pursue Palestinian unity demands support. It is
critically important to pursue specific action items to
continue improving conditions on the ground in the
West Bank. We must protect, preserve and, where
possible, advance the three tracks of the Annapolis
process - negotiations, institution-building and
phase 1 Road Map implementation - and set the stage
for a decisive push for peace in 2009.

Let me turn first to the situation in and around
Gaza. Six months ago today, a tahdiya, or calm,
brokered by Egypt came into effect. After a period in
which civilian casualties had reached alarming
proportions, Palestinians and Israelis enjoyed a respite
from daily terror and violence, and many civilian lives
were doubtless saved.

But for the past six weeks, this calm has been
gravely challenged. Since Mr. Pascoe briefed the
Council on 25 November, a further four Palestinians,
including two children, have been killed in Gaza and
18 others have been injured. Eight Israeli soldiers and
four civilians have been injured by rocket and mortar
attacks, more than 130 of which, including 30 in the
past two days, were fired from Gaza towards Israeli
towns and at the crossings through which civilians,
United Nations and other humanitarian workers and all
goods entering the Strip must pass. We condemn rocket
attacks and call for their immediate cessation.
08-65913

Egyptian efforts to secure the preservation and
extension of the calm are continuing. Through ongoing
contacts in Cairo, Israel and Gaza, we are strongly
supporting these efforts. There have been heightened
rhetoric and continued violence in recent days, with an
increase in rocket-firing and a resumption of Israeli air
strikes. I am extremely concerned by statements from
Hamas that the calm expires today and questioning its
renewal. A major escalation of violence would have
grave consequences for the protection of civilians in
Israel and Gaza, the welfare of the Gazan civilian
population, and the sustainability of political efforts.
On behalf of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, I make
today a direct and urgent appeal for the calm to be
respected and extended.

I also strongly appeal for basic humanitarian
principles to be continuously observed. During the
reporting period, access has been restricted for goods
coming into the Strip, as well as for diplomats, United
Nations staff and humanitarian workers and
international press. Between 23 November and
17 December, 614 truckloads of supplies entered
Gaza- a daily average of 29. The daily average in
October was 123, and in May last year it was 475.
Small amounts of supplies have been brought into
Gaza by sea.

The unprecedented level of closure of crossing
points into Gaza has caused unacceptable hardship to
the civilian population. As of today, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA) has had again to suspend, for the
time being, all food distributions. Price increases have
resulted in Gazans now spending approximately two
thirds of their income on food. There are also reported
shortages of some food items, as well as cooking gas.
Limitations on cash allowed into Gaza have left
beneficiaries of humanitarian organizations, Palestinian
Authority employees and pensioners unable to collect
salaries, pensions and welfare payments, and forced
UNRWA to suspend cash assistance to 94,000
beneficiaries. A one-time transfer of 100 million new
Israeli shekels has alleviated this crisis for now, but as
stressed in a recent letter from Quartet Representative
Blair and the Presidents of the International Monetary
Fund and the World Bank, a predictable mechanism for
the transfer of cash is required.

Reductions in the import of fuel have resulted in
regular power outages across Gaza. Half of Gaza City's
population receives water only once a week for a few
3
hours, and other areas of Gaza receive water for a few
hours on alternating days. United Nations projects
worth over $150 million, including six priority projects
identified by the Secretary-General in May, remain
suspended due to a lack of materials.

The Secretary-General outlined his concerns on
conditions in Gaza in a letter delivered to his Quartet
colleagues last week. We welcome the call of the
Quartet for the provision of humanitarian supplies -
including food, fuel, pharmaceuticals, water and
sewage maintenance items - to the people in Gaza to
be assured continuously. The Quartet also reiterated its
previous call for Israel to allow into Gaza sufficient
materials to facilitate the resumption of stalled United
Nations and other donor projects. We continue to seek
more effective communication and cooperation with
the Government of Israel to ensure that the United
Nations is able to execute its mandated programmes to
the civilian population.

We also reiterate the call of the Quartet for the
immediate release of Corporal Shalit. No progress has
been reported on efforts to secure his release in
exchange for Palestinian prisoner releases, and the
International Committee of the Red Cross has not been
granted access to him during his 28 months in
captivity.

No Muslim pilgrims from Gaza were able to
attend the hajj in Mecca prior to the Bid al-Adha
holiday this year as a result of internal Palestinian
divisions. The Palestinian Authority secured visas for
some 3,000 pilgrims, but Hamas denied their exit
through Rafah crossing.

I have detailed the security, humanitarian and
development dimensions of the Gaza crisis, but it is
also a deep political crisis, threatening the unified basis
on which a future Palestinian State, and the two-State
solution itself, must rest.

Last Sunday, on the occasion of the twenty-first
anniversary of Hamas, Hamas leader Haniyeh
challenged the continuation in office of President
Abbas pending a resolution of the internal divide.
While calling for Palestinian reunification, he did so on
a basis that rejected agreements signed and
commitments undertaken by the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO). President Abbas has publicly
raised the possibility of calling elections if
reconciliation is not achieved.
When foreign ministers of the League of Arab
States met in Cairo on 26 November in Cairo, they
called on President Abbas to continue his mandate until
such time as Palestinian reconciliation is possible and
presidential and legislative elections can be held
simultaneously in both the Gaza Strip and the West
Bank. They affirmed basic terms for such reunification
and their continued support for efforts to achieve it, so
as to reunite Gaza and the West Bank within the
framework of the legitimate Palestinian Authority.

The Quartet noted that position when it met on
Monday, reaffirming its well-known principles and
stressing that restoring Palestinian unity, based on the
commitments of the PLO, would be an important step
forward. Security Council resolution 1850 (2008) did
likewise. I urge Hamas to respond positively to those
exhortations. It cannot be in the interests of the
Palestinian people for essential cornerstones of
Palestinian legitimacy and national aspirations to be
challenged.

I now turn to the situation in the West Bank,
where, during the reporting period, two Palestinian
militants were killed and 79 civilians injured in Israel
Defense Force and settler violence. Most of those
injuries were incurred during anti-barrier
demonstrations. Despite the adversities on the ground,
the efforts of the Palestinian Authority, together with
unprecedented donor support and improved Israeli-
Palestinian security cooperation, are enhancing
security and creating prospects for economic
improvements. I continue to work closely with Prime
Minister Fayyad to support those efforts of Palestinian
self-empowerment and to promote further-reaching
measures by the Israelis to enable those efforts, so as to
produce a paradigm shift on the ground.

Palestinian Authority security forces continue
their efforts to impose law and order and meet the
Road Map commitments on security throughout the
West Bank. Efforts are continuing in Jenin and Nablus,
forces were deployed in Hebron several weeks ago and
deployment in Bethlehem has begun ahead of the
Christmas celebrations.

Despite the 620 obstacles to movement and
access that remain across the West Bank, an easing of
restrictions around the Nablus area was instituted on
7December. We strongly encourage further steps to
ease movement and access, given the significant
improvements in security on the ground. We also
welcome the release on 15 December of 227
Palestinian prisoners as a gesture to President Abbas.

Between 27 and 29 November, a trade fair took
place in Jenin, attended by approximately 200,000
Palestinians. Around 4,500 Palestinian citizens of
Israel came to Jenin on that occasion - the largest
such influx to Jenin for over seven years. An
investment conference in London on 15 December,
hosted by Prime Minister Gordon Brown and attended
by Prime Minister Fayyad, Quartet Representative
Blair and Palestinian and international business people,
showcased new business partnerships formed since the
Bethlehem Investment Conference in May, and forged
more such partnerships.

The Palestinian Authority has finalized and
presented its budget for 2009, which foresees
continued fiscal adjustment and reforms and envisages
a shift in expenditure from recurrent items towards
development projects, especially community projects.
There is an urgent need to secure adequate and
predictable financing from donors to finance the
recurrent deficit for 2009.

The overall challenge is to take the incremental
steps that have been implemented, intensify and
multiply them and make them transformative. One key
element is further action to implement the measures of
Quartet Representative Blair, including full observance
of the moratorium on house demolitions, additional
steps in the northern West Bank, further removal of
specified movement restrictions, actions to build
confidence in East Jerusalem, and further measures in
Area C.

Another key element is action on the Road Map
commitments. In the reporting period, illegal Israeli
settlement activity continued in the majority of
settlements in East Jerusalem and the rest of the West
Bank, and Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem
remain closed. Contrary to the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice, construction of the
barrier continues in deviation from the Green Line
within occupied Palestinian territory.

We continue to call on Israel to implement its
Road Map commitments. We urge any new Israeli
Government to decisively address the question of
settlement expansion, which threatens the two-State
solution itself. Israel must also refrain from unilateral
actions in Jerusalem that alter the status quo or
undermine trust.

We welcome the evacuation by Israeli security
forces of settlers from a house in Hebron on
4 December. We urge further action by Israel to remove
settler outposts in accordance with the Road Map and
address the growing threat of settler extremism. That
threat was made clear in the aftermath of the
evacuation in Hebron, when settlers and their
supporters rioted through areas of the city under
Israeli, and later Palestinian, security control, attacking
Palestinian civilians, torching and damaging cars,
houses and public buildings, desecrating mosques and
graves and uprooting olive trees. We unequivocally
condemn that violence, in which 14 Palestinians were
injured. I welcome the reaction of the Security Council
on that issue and remind Israel of its obligation to
protect the civilian Palestinian population under
occupation.

I was in contact myself with the governor of
Hebron and the Israeli authorities during the crisis to
support efforts to end the violence. I commend the
restraint of Palestinian Authority security forces and
the efforts made by the parties to ensure that that
incident was contained, and I note the forceful
denunciation of the settler attacks by Israeli Prime
Minister Olmert.

I turn now to the search for regional stability and
peace, on which I have held consultations in
Damascus, Amman and Cairo during the reporting
period. No further rounds of indirect Israeli-Syrian
talks have taken place, but we look forward to their
continuation and intensification. The situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan remains quiet, but Israeli
settlement activity continues.

Important efforts to promote comprehensive
regional peace were made in the reporting period,
including a joint letter from Prince Saud Al-Faisal of
Saudi Arabia and the Secretary-General of the League
of Arab States, Amre Moussa, to United States
President-elect Obama, underscoring the commitment
of the Arab world to the comprehensive proposal made
in the Arab Peace Initiative.

In Lebanon, the situation has been relatively quiet
during this past month. The various initiatives taken by
political leaders at national and local levels to bring a
measure of stability to the country have, in general
terms, continued to hold. Nevertheless, a limited
number of isolated security incidents took place
throughout the country, all of which were contained
without sparking further violence.

On 11 December, Lebanon and Syria exchanged
official documents on the locations of their future
respective embassies in Damascus and Beirut. Visits by
Lebanese officials and party leaders to Syria have
continued. On 10 November, the Lebanese Interior
Minister held talks with his Syrian counterpart in
Damascus on matters of security coordination. The two
Ministers agreed to establish a committee to follow up
and coordinate security issues between the two
countries. On 28 November, Lebanese Army
commander, General Kahwaji, paid a visit to Syria and
discussed cooperation between the armies of both
countries with his counterpart and with President
Assad. Lebanese Member of Parliament Michel Aoun,
leader of the Free Patriotic Movement, went on a five-
day visit to Syria.

As called for by the election law adopted earlier
this year, the 10 members of the Election Campaign
Supervisory Commission, charged with ensuring
compliance with regulatory provisions on campaign
spending and media coverage, were appointed during a
cabinet session on 13 December. In the context of the
run-up to the 2009 legislative elections, prominent
Lebanese political leaders have continued reaching out
to one another in an effort to ease tensions. For
example, on 27 October, a meeting took place between
the leader of the majority bloc, Member of Parliament
Saad Hariri, and the Secretary-General of Hezbollah
for the first time in 30 months.

While rubble removal and reconstruction in the
Palestinian refugee camp of Nahr el-Bared continue,
underfunding of the current appeals for relief of the
displaced and for reconstruction of the camp remains a
serious concern. Recent pledges include $1 million
from the United Nations Central Emergency Response
Fund.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
has been generally quiet during the past month.
UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces have
continued coordinated operational activities throughout
the area south of the Litani River. Israeli air violations
continued during the past month.
To conclude, after nearly a year as the Secretary-
General's envoy based in Jerusalem, I and my team at
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator

for the Middle East Peace Process continue to actively
pursue contacts with the parties in the region and with
Quartet colleagues, in order to contain crises and find
solutions to immediate concerns on the ground,
particularly in Gaza. We are continuing to promote
compliance with commitments and obligations, support
dialogue and negotiations on the core issues, and
advance the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515
(2003) and, now, 1850 (2008).

An important platform for peace has been
established in 2008 thanks to the efforts of the parties
and the support of the international community. The
challenge now is to build on that platform and turn the
promise of peace into reality. I am convinced that that
can, and must, be done. The diplomatic process and
improvements on the ground must reinforce each other
and move swiftly forward. A comprehensive peace in
the region, with an end of occupation and the creation
of a Palestinian State living at peace with Israel at its
heart, is possible, necessary and urgent.

