The President: I thank all those who have
contributed to this very full debate today. Thank you
very much for your participation and above all for the
continued attendance and focus that the Under-
Secretaries-General have applied throughout the day.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following rather long statement on behalf of the
Council. I quote:

"The Security Council reaffirms the
recommendations made in its resolutions 1327
(2000) and 1353 (2001) and in the statements of
its President dated 3 May 1994 (S/PRST/ 1994/22),
4 November 1994 (S/PRST/1994/62), 28 March
1996 (S/PRST/l996/13), 31 January 2001
(S/PRST/2001/3) and 17 May 2004
(S/PRST/2004/16) and the note by its President
of 14 January 2002 (S/2002/56) and confirms its
intention to strengthen further efforts to
implement fully these recommendations. The
Council recalls in particular from its statement of
its President of 3 May 1994 the appropriate
factors that should be taken into account when
the establishment of a new peacekeeping
operation is under consideration.

"The Security Council believes that United
Nations peacekeeping is a unique global
partnership that draws together the contributions
and commitment of the entire United Nations
system. The Council is committed to strengthening
this partnership. The Council recognizes the
important work conducted by the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, the
Security Council Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations, the Fifth Committee of the General
Assembly and the United Nations Secretariat to
ensure that peacekeeping efforts provide the best
possible results.

"The Security Council has endeavoured in
the past six months to improve its dialogue with
the Secretariat and with troop- and police-
contributing countries on the collective oversight
of peacekeeping operations and to develop the
following practices:

(i) Regular dialogue with the Secretariat
on the general challenges of peacekeeping;

(ii) Efforts to deepen consultations with
troop- and police-contributing countries,
including through the Security Council's
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
and the debates organized on 23 January
and 29 June 2009;

(iii) Organization of political-military
meetings on specific operations to improve
the shared analysis of operational challenges;

(iv) Encouraging regular updating of
planning documents by the Secretariat to
ensure consistency with mandates;

(v) Improved monitoring and evaluation,
through the use of benchmarks, as and
where appropriate, that enable progress to
be charted against a comprehensive and
integrated strategy.

"The Security Council has identified several
areas where further reflection is required to
improve the preparation, planning, monitoring
and evaluation, and completion of peacekeeping
operations:

(i) Ensuring that mandates for
peacekeeping operations are clear, credible
and achievable and matched by appropriate
resources. The Council stresses the need
09-44473

regularly to assess, in consultation with
other stakeholders, the strength, mandate
and composition of peacekeeping operations
with a view to making the necessary
adjustments where appropriate, according to
progress achieved or changing circumstances
on the ground;

(ii) Better information sharing, particularly
on the military operational challenges,
through, inter alia, systematic consultation
by the Secretariat with Member States in
advance of deployment of a technical
assessment mission on its objectives and
broad parameters and debriefing on its main
findings on return. The Council encourages
the practice of holding meetings between
Council members and the Secretariat at
political-military expert level prior to
discussion of mandate renewals. The
Council recognizes the need to improve its
access to military advice, and intends to
pursue its work on mechanisms to that
effect. The Council will continue to review
the role of the Military Staff Committee;

(iii) The Council intends to increase its
interaction with the Secretariat in the early
phase of mandate drafting and throughout

mission deployment on the military, police,
justice, rule of law and peacebuilding
dimensions of an operation;

(iv) Earlier and more meaningful
engagement with troop- and police-
contributing countries before the renewal or
modification of the mandate of a
peacekeeping operation. The Council
welcomes practical suggestions to deepen
such consultations. It recognizes that
through their experience and expertise,
troop- and police-contributing countries can
greatly contribute to effective planning,
decision-making and deployment of
peacekeeping operations. In this regard, the
Council welcomes the interim report of the
Security Council Working Group
(S/2009/398) and encourages it to continue
to address the issue of cooperation with
troop- and police-contributing countries and
other stakeholders. The Council commits to
making progress on this issue, and to
reviewing its progress in 2010;

(v) Greater awareness in the Security
Council of the resource and field support
implications of its decisions. The Council
requests that where a new peacekeeping
mission is proposed, or where significant
change to a mandate is envisaged, an
estimate of the resource implications for the
mission be provided to it;

(vi) Enhanced awareness in the Security
Council of the strategic challenges faced
across peacekeeping operations. The Council
welcomes the briefings to that effect received
from the Department for Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field
Support since January 2009, which should
continue on a regular basis.

"The Council recognizes the need to weigh
the full range of responses when addressing a
situation which may endanger international peace
and security, and to deploy United Nations
peacekeeping missions only as an accompaniment,
not as an alternative, to a political strategy. The
Council recognizes the importance of mobilizing
and maintaining the political and operational
support of all stakeholders.

"The Security Council recognizes the urgent
need to increase the pool of available troop and
police contributors and welcomes efforts of
Member States to coordinate bilateral assistance
to them. The Council supports efforts to improve
cooperation and coordination through the life of a
mission with relevant regional and subregional
organizations and other partners. The Council
recognizes the priority of strengthening the
capacity of the African Union, and the role of
regional and subregional organizations, in
maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with Chapter VIII of the United
Nations Charter.

"The Security Council welcomes efforts by
the Secretariat to review peacekeeping operations
and to provide enhanced planning and support,
and encourages the Secretariat to deepen these
efforts. In this regard, the Council takes note of
the assessments and recommendations provided
24

in their non-paper 'A New Partnership Agenda:
Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping' and the support strategy contained
therein, and intends to give them careful
consideration.

"The Security Council recognizes that
further debate is required among Member States,
including in the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, to develop a wider
consensus on a range of issues, including the
robust approach to peacekeeping and the

implementation of protection of civilians
mandates. The Council reaffirms the relevant
provisions of its resolution 1674 (2006), and in
this regard, looks forward to reviewing the
implementation of protection of civilians
mandates later this year.

"The Security Council recalls the statement
of its President of 22 July 2009 (S/PRST/2009/23)
on peacebuilding and in particular re-emphasizes
the need for coherence between, and integration
of, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding
and development to achieve an effective response
to post-conflict situations from the outset. The
Council requests the Secretary-General to provide
in his reports on specific missions an indication
of progress towards achieving a coordinated
United Nations approach in-country, and in
particular on critical gaps to achieving
peacebuilding objectives alongside the mission.
"The Security Council remains committed
to improving further the overall performance of
United Nations peacekeeping and will conduct a
further review in early 2010."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2009/24.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.15 p.m.
