Mr. Kalomoh: First of all, I would like to
express our appreciation for the understanding and
appreciation expressed today with regard to problems
related to the situation in Central Africa and to respond
very briefly to some of the questions raised.

First, I would like to thank the delegation of
Germany for its continued interest in the Central
African Republic. I would like to assure it that we
have, indeed, visited the Central African Republic - a
country that is emerging from conflict.

Secondly, I wish to respond to some of the issues
raised by the Ambassador of Cameroon. First, with
regard to whether any countries were opposed to the
establishment of a permanent office in the subregion, I
think it would be wrong to say that there was
opposition - as paragraph 9 of the Secretary-General's
report indicates. The question was not raised in that
fashion. As can be seen, all countries except one
expressed the very strong desire for an enhanced
United Nations presence in the subregion in the form of
an office. I would not want to say that there was
opposition, but only that one country did not raise that
issue.

Concerns have been expressed about how the
Secretary-General intends to respond to the desires
expressed by the countries members of the Economic
Community of Central African States. The Secretary-
General has outlined two immediate steps that he
proposes to take. One is to request a further review of
the programmes and activities of the United Nations in
the region with a view to better coordinating those
activities. He will form further views following the
report on that review. He also intends to appoint a
special envoy to continue further discussions with the
leaders in the region on the complex issues of
economic integration and political cooperation and on
all other issues identified in the report.

I note with encouragement that, notwithstanding
some divergence in viewpoints on the immediate
course of action that needs to be taken, there is general
agreement and recognition of the need for the
international community to remain engaged and
support the efforts of the countries of the subregion.

I also wish to affirm one point that was made
clear to us: the countries are not seeking the support of
the international community as a substitute for their
own efforts. They were very clear and insistent on that
point. But they want their efforts to be supplemented
by those of the international community. They are very
much aware that they are primarily responsible for
development in the region.

I believe that we should continue to support the
efforts of the countries of the subregion and the efforts
of the Secretary-General as we continue to bring those
countries closer and put to an end to the poverty and
instability in the region.

I think that I have been able to respond briefly to
some of the key issues that were raised. Once again, I
express my deep appreciation for the support and
understanding that has been expressed for this
important region of the African continent.

