Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for convening this
meeting. We are grateful to the Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of the State of Qatar, His Excellency
Sheikh Hamad bin J assim bin J abr Al-Thani, and to the
Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, His
Excellency Mr. Nabil Elaraby, as well as to the
Permanent Representative of Syria, His Excellency
Mr. Bashar J a'afari, for their briefings.

Azerbaijan is deeply concerned by the continuing
destabilization and widespread violence in Syria, which
have led to the death of many people. On 3 August
2011, the Security Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRS/2011/ 16) condemning the widespread
violations of human rights and the use of force against
civilians by the Syrian authorities. The Council, inter
alia, called for an immediate end to all violence and
urged all sides to act with the utmost restrain and to
refrain from reprisals, including attacks against State
institutions. Related resolutions were adopted also by
the General Assembly and the Human Rights Council.

Despite all those steps and repeated calls of the
international community, the situation in Syria
continued to deteriorate, causing scores of deaths and
injuries. The suicide terrorist attacks that occurred in
Damascus on 23 December 2011 and 6 January 2012,
which the Security Council condemned in the strongest
terms, were a striking illustration of dangerous
escalation with unpredictable consequences.

From very beginning, Azerbaijan has supported the
efforts of the League of Arab States. We look forward
to their continuation with a view to ending the Violence,
overcoming the crisis and achieving stabilization by
peaceful means and through dialogue. We pay tribute
to the League's observer mission to Syria and to all its
members for fulfilling their functions in the face of
complex challenges. It should be noted that the
Mission's presence in Syria had some positive effects
and that it contributed to addressing a number of issues.
We note with regret that, under the circumstances, the
League was compelled to suspend its mission, and we
hope it will resume its function soon.

As the Security Council pointed out in its
presidential statement of 3 August 2011, the only
solution to the crisis in Syria is through an inclusive
and Syrian-led political process, with the aim of
effectively addressing the legitimate aspirations and
concerns of the Syrian people. That process should
include democratic and free elections and enable the
participation of all political forces of the country.

It is indisputable that unity and a coordinated
approach within the Security Council are vital if it is to
fulfil its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. Proceeding from this
understanding, Azerbaijan has been and continues to be
supportive of and open to timely consultations with all
members of the Security Council on initiatives
concerning the situation in Syria. We look forward to
constructive dialogue and discussions on the relevant
draft proposals, as well as to the report of the League
Arab States observer mission, and we believe in
achieving the compromise that will contribute to
ongoing efforts aimed at overcoming the crisis in Syria
and at putting an end to human suffering there.

It is clear that the international community must
not only demand certain steps from the Syrian
Government, but also focus its efforts on persuading

the opposition to reciprocate. Only measures adequate
to the situation, that conform with Chapter VI of the
United Nations Charter and pay due regard to the role
of the League of Arab States, can be considered.

Whatever the differences, it is crucial that
obligations with respect to the sovereignty, territorial
integrity and political independence of Syria and all
other States of the region be fully observed and
respected. We note the position unambiguously
expressed in that regard by the Security Council and
the General Assembly, as well as by the League of
Arab States, which in its Council resolution on Syria of
22 January 2012 supported efforts towards ending the
Syrian crisis without foreign intervention.

