Mr. Tanin: Today is the Security Council's first
meeting on Kosovo in 2016. It is taking place at a
moment of significant developments, not least of
which is the fractious, but successful, election ofa new
President on Friday. This is a year in which Kosovo will
face countless complex challenges. Accordingly, today
I will take time to assess key developments emerging
from 2015 and, most important, to look ahead.

In recent months, the polarization of the Kosovo
political landscape has reached levels where progress
is being impeded despite considerable Government
efforts to pursue an ambitious reform agenda. The
extreme political antagonism has clearly transgressed
basic democratic norms. The most obvious examples
of this has been the repeated use of violence by the
opposition to prevent the Kosovo Assembly, as well as
other Government institutions, from conducting their
work.

I have joined many of my colleagues in the
international community to stress that adherence to
the basic democratic rules of the game is more than
simply a responsibility of all political leaders. It is also
what empowers the voices and messages of all genuine
political actors in the democratic process, including
those of the opposition, which otherwise could be
squandered and lost.

With matters having reached this point, I believe
this is an opportune time for everyone to stand back
and evaluate, and perhaps also to shift local and
international focus away from political battles towards
more fundamental issues. The intrinsic links among
post-conflict development and the enforcement of the
rule of law and human rights should be at the centre
of a proactive and results-oriented agenda for Kosovo.
Political leaders should be more outward-looking in
exploring opportunities for regional cooperation - as
exemplified by the Western Balkans Investment Summit
in London one week ago - rather than focusing on
limited political interests. With so much already
invested in building stability in Kosovo and the region,
continued attention to core issues and more focused
deployment of resources can help make the difference
between setting a course for progress or decline.

Throughout all this, it is important to acknowledge
that many essential commitments made by Kosovo's
political leadership have remained firm. Those include
continuing to normalize relations with Belgrade
through the European Union-facilitated dialogue,
meeting the fiscal and financial obligations set forth
by international creditors and ensuring the conditions
necessary for full establishment of the special court.
The additional and emerging challenges underscore the
importance of working with all leaders in Pristina to
ensure that those essential commitments do not waver.

Several fundamental steps were taken last year
towards strengthening Kosovo's European perspective.
At the same time, they were accompanied by detailed
and at times critical assessments by European bodies
of the condition and efficiency of public institutions,
especially the Kosovo judiciary. I refer in particular to
the European Commission's Kosovo 2015 report and
to the recent report of the Council of Europe on the
situation in Kosovo, among others.

Building respect for the rule of law and ensuring
adequate enforcement are great challenges in many
parts of the world. In Kosovo those crucial goals are not
always as high on the agenda as they should be. A strong
legislative framework is already in place, including
several key laws enacted just in the past year. However,
its application is inconsistent, the administration of
justice is unacceptably slow and instances of political
interference are common. Corruption at many levels
increases the public's frustration, impairs the daily
life of everyone in Kosovo by reducing economic
development and opportunity and undermines faith
in the political system. Steadily improving the
coordination of support for the rule of law should, I
believe, remain a central objective this year, and it is
one in which the United Nations remains ready to play
a part, within the available resources and our mandate.

At times, the security and political issues take too
much attention away from Kosovo's serious economic
development challenges. As the Government has
acknowledged, intensive efforts are needed to create
more economic growth and opportunity, which in turn
would ease political tensions. Despite extensive natural
and human resources, few opportunities are opening
up for major investment. Unemployment is high.
Education needs to be modernized and depoliticized.
And harmful environmental practices that significantly
affect public health should be systematically addressed.
As the Secretary-General has so often stressed, the close
nexus between peacebuilding and development requires
coherence and complementarity with all the United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes in Kosovo,
as well as with the broader range of multilateral and
bilateral development initiatives. That will be another
central focus of our efforts this year.

Kosovo's legal framework guarantees the protection
of human and fundamental rights, but implementation
is uneven and directly influenced by political and
inter-community tensions. Although Kosovo cannot
directly associate itself with international and
European human-rights instruments and institutions
without facilitation by the United Nations, that has
never prevented it from enacting robust human-rights
legislation. I welcome the Government's willingness to
engage with the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) on human-rights
reporting to the special procedures of the Human
Rights Council. I also welcome the positive working
relationship we have established with the Government
on policy development, including on the Kosovo
human rights strategy. We and many international
partners remain committed to working closely with the
authorities to encourage positive trends, particularly in
the full implementation of the established legislative
framework. The recent agreement signed on new
premises for the Kosovo Ombudsperson, in line with
the Paris Principles, and the appointment of a new
Chair for the Pristina delegation of the Joint Working
Group on missing persons, are welcome developments.

Laws and programmes designed to uphold the rights
of minority groups and to protect cultural heritage, along
with the realization of property rights and women's still-
limited access to property ownership, remain matters
of real concern. The returns programme for displaced
persons has faltered, partly due to the significant
shortcomings in those areas. Without ensuring the
necessary conditions for people's reintegration into
social, economic and political life, even limited returns
are unlikely to become more sustainable.

Cooperation between the Serbian Orthodox Church
and the Kosovo authorities suffered several setbacks
last year. Unresolved issues related to church property
and the enforcement of legal protection have strained
relations. We continue to receive reports of incidents,
including thefts, in households owned by Kosovo
Serbs, which are causing concern. We are joining with
the European Union and other partners to improve
facilitated dialogue at all levels, from the central
authorities to civil society.

In the next few months, Kosovo and the entire region
are likely to face substantial external shocks that will
test the resilience of their institutions. The vast refugee
and migrant flows through the Balkans are unlikely to
abate, and they constitute both a human tragedy and
a political crisis. Kosovo's planning for contingencies
should benefit from international resources and
planning support, as well as regional cooperation. It
is important to emphasize that any measures taken
should not restrict the universal rights of refugees and
asylum-seekers, and that our understanding of their
plight as individuals should remain at the forefront of
all policy considerations.

Assuring adequate institutional capacity and
responses to the problems of radicalization and
extremism, terrorist training and financing, and the
associated trafficking in human beings and weapons
is likewise becoming more pressing. The presence of
groups driving radicalization and the phenomenon of
foreign terrorist fighters are challenges that demand
a close and efficient partnership between the Kosovo
authorities and regional and international bodies.
Kosovo's strategy and action plan on the prevention of
violent extremism should benefit from wide-ranging
international support commensurate with the
extensive bilateral assistance already being directed to
intelligence and law-enforcement bodies.

While politicians usually focus on near-term and
insular priorities, regional partnerships mark the real
path to progress. The Pristina-Belgrade dialogue is
essential, While its ultimate success must be grounded
in collaboration among all leaders across the region.
Where the international community is concerned,
safeguarding the considerable investment already
made in Kosovo requires a proactive attitude both to
the current challenges and to additional emerging ones.
Political progress and institutional resilience in the
region are both essential. However, they are by no means
assured. Accordingly, our work in UNMIK is aimed
at, and must be part of, an international, as well as a
local, partnership to address problems that realistically
cannot be tackled in isolation. By working with all
those who recognize and embrace the aims of peace,
security and prosperity, we can actively support
Kosovo and the entire region in meeting the formidable
challenges ahead.

I wish to conclude my remarks by expressing my
deep appreciation to the members of the Council for
their suppor, which is indispensable to success.

