Ms. Samar: I am very much delighted to brief
the Security Council on Afghanistan. I would like to
thank you, Sir, and Security Council members for their
support to my country, Afghanistan, and the mandate of
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA). I hope that the mandate of UNAMA will be
extended and expanded by the Council, and should also
like to stress that the full and strengthened presence
of the United Nations and the international community
is vital for peace, stability, security and the protection
of human rights in Afghanistan. I would like to thank
UNAMA for its presence and its work in support of our
people, institutions, security and peace.

I am pleased to say that Afghanistan has
transformed in many ways. The achievements and
progress of the country have been immense and beyond
my capacity to describe in this meeting in the allotted
time. Nonetheless, we should celebrate our progress and
transformation and acknowledge the bravery, shared
responsibility and sacrifices we have made through the
course of our progress.

One of the areas that I want to highlight is that of
my responsibility as Chair of the Afghan Independent
Human Rights Commission, human rights and women's
rights in Afghanistan. We all remember - colleagues
who have been supporting Afghanistan remember-that
16 years ago the Taliban ruled Afghanistan. They
ruled the country with violence, extrajudicial killings,
threats and intimidation and barbaric execution of
people. They ruled by denying the Afghan people's
rights, freedom and dignity, and they were proud of
violating women's rights - lashing women in public
and closing schools and offices to women. Women
were not even allowed to go shopping without male
members of their family. The Taliban still do the same
to the people who live under their rule and influence.
But in most of the country we have transformed that
situation, where freedom, human rights and equality
for women and men are constitutionally guaranteed.
Afghanistan's Constitution established an Independent
Human Rights Commission to monitor, promote and
protect human rights, and obligated the State to observe
human rights and international treaties Afghanistan
has signed and become a party to. The country acceded
to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women and the Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and signed onto
the International Criminal Court (ICC), in addition to
five other main international human rights instruments.

With a strong and modern Constitution, we have
also achieved a real and meaningful review of our laws,
have adopted new laws in support of human rights and
have put in place policies and programmes that promote
and protect human rights in the country. The following
are examples of the progress we have made on human
rights, and also challenges and threats that we face in
the country. I spoke of progress and challenges, and I
would now like to elaborate further.

On women's rights, we celebrated 8 March in
Afghanistan by issuing a report on violence against
women. We have noted that progress has been made
on addressing violence against women, which includes
the approval and implementation of the law on the
elimination of violence against women and numerous
policies, including the national action plan on women
and peace and security. The report also acknowledges
that the Government has taken concrete steps in giving
women an opportunity to apply for high office, and
the number of women in key Cabinet and Government
positions has increased. Women are striving for equality,
justice, recognition and meaningful participation in
Government, and they have had some success.

However, I am sad to say that, despite all the progress
we have made, women are not yet treated equally.
Women are victims of violence, and that remains a
very sad story of our time. Violence against women
is committed at home and in society, and by terrorist
groups in very barbaric ways. Many women have been
killed, stoned or mutilated by the Taliban - among the
horrible incidents that women hear of and fear every
day. On the other hand, the lack of a strong rule-of-
law system, harmful traditions, corruption and a
continuing culture of impunity continue to be factors
that contribute to violence against women.

Access to education has been the most important
progress in Afghanistan. More than 8 million children
are now enrolled in schools, and more than 30 per cent
of them are girls. Education is key to a prosperous and
strong Afghanistan. However, war and threats from
terrorist groups remain a real barrier to the expansion
and improvement of access to education. They continue
to close girls' schools and do not allow modern education
for boys. Terrorist groups attacking cities and villages
deprive our children of access to education.

Four decades of war and conflict have destroyed
the foundation of justice, the rule of law and good
governance. We still have a weak judiciary and rule-of-
law institutions, while the concept of good governance
is a new phenomenon in the country. Support forjustice,
the rule oflaw and good governance is a key issue for the
United Nations to focus on. Supporting the Government
to ensure justice and the rule of law by respecting the
independence of the judiciary and fighting corruptions
is a key for a democratic Afghanistan.

Democracy and democratic space for everyone must
be preserved and enhanced. Elections and electoral
processes have always been chaotic in our country. As an
early-warning system and for preventing any disputes,
it is important that UNAMA play its role to assist and
support the electoral system. We would like to see
the Government of Afghanistan and the international
community support and ensure transparent, free and fair
elections. The new Independent Election Commission
needs support, and the Government must prevent any
interference in the electoral process in order to build
the confidence of the public in democratic processes.

The security and safety of Afghans is a prerequisite
for everything in Afghanistan. I am sad to announce
here that we - both the international community and
Afghans - have not been able to secure Afghanistan.
The lack of security in Afghanistan results in huge
displacement, refugees and increased poverty. Roads
and villages are not safe, and people are taken hostage
and killed. We hope that the international community
will continue to contribute to our security. The presence
of the United Nations and the international security
forces is needed as a gesture of the world's commitment
to our security.

Civil society and human rights and women's rights
defenders play an important role in Afghanistan. They
try to hold the Government accountable and champion
the protection of the rights and dignity of Afghans.
Threats and intimidation against them are increasing.
We are happy to say that we have developed a national
action plan on protecting human rights defenders
in Afghanistan. I would like to urge the Security
Council to consider adopting a draft resolution on the
importance of civil society and human rights defenders
and their protection.

Economic development is key to a better, free and
democratic Afghanistan. The country has the potential
to be a prosperous country. However, currently over
40 per cent of Afghans live below the poverty line,
and more than 60 per cent are extremely poor and
face food insecurity. We hope that the international
community and the Afghan Government will continue
their investment in trade and the economy. The Council
could consider calling on our neighbouring country to
open its borders to economic transactions, and not limit
trade for political purposes. Unfortunately, the closure
of the border by Pakistan has had an immense effect on
the people and on humanitarian needs. UNAMA could
ease tensions in the region and support Afghanistan in
dealing with its regional issues.

The people of Afghanistan need and deserve to
live in peace. While we welcome any meaningful steps
towards achieving peace, we must note that the standard
of not talking to terrorists must be the same everywhere
in the world. If Da'esh and other terrorist groups are
not to be negotiated with, then why are some countries
talking to the Taliban? The Taliban are terrorists, and
we should deal with them in the same way as we do
Da'esh and other terrorist groups. In the meantime, the
lack of accountability and respect for justice and human
rights in the peace process is a failure; it does not lead
to sustainable peace and security. We are disappointed
with the Security Council's decision to take the name
of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar from the sanctions list, as
well as the blanket amnesty that the Government of
Afghanistan provided to him and his commanders. We
believe they have committed crimes and violated human
rights in the past four decades. Despite the adoption of
a national action plan on resolution 1325 (2000), our
country is lagging behind in implementation and in
significantly including women in peace and security
processes. UNAMA should support an inclusive peace
process, with emphasis on accountability and justice
for victims of human rights violations.

Attacks against the Hazara community is a tragic
fact in Afghanistan. That ethnic group has been
targeted systematically by both Da'esh and the Taliban.
The Government of Afghanistan must do more to
protect this ethnic group against the immediate threat
of Da'esh and the Taliban, and bring to justice those
who commit crimes against them.

Afghanistan is not a safe place for returnees. I
would like to emphasize that the world community
must pay attention to the need and the plight of Afghans
who seek refuge worldwide. Forcibly deporting and
discriminating against refugees based on their origin is
not in conformity with the international law.

Transitional justice is a very important factor
in ending impunity and promoting a culture of
accountability. The four periods of war requires an
established framework to deal with war crimes and
crimes against humanity. I strongly urge the Council to
expand the mandate of UNAMA to include transitional
justice, and also to facilitate the intervention of the ICC
in Afghanistan.

I come from Kabul, the capital. The city was
attacked last week, and again this week. Many people
died. The recent attacks in front of the Parliament
buildings, the Supreme Court, a police station and, two
days ago, on a hospital are inhuman acts and show that
terrorism and the supporters of terrorism in the region
continue to kill innocent people and have no regard for
any values or norms, let alone international laws and
basic human rights. Last year alone, over 11,000 people
were killed or injured in Afghanistan, most of them by
armed opposition to the Government. The continuation
of terrorism and conflict has placed Afghanistan
in danger. The danger to the very existence of the
country, its democratic system, human rights, freedom
and economy is immense and immanent. That causes
frustration and disappointment and inflicts pain on the
Afghan people on a daily basis.

International law and the Constitution require
Afghanistan to honour its obligation to respect, protect
and honour human rights. The country must combat
the human rights violations that occur daily and
are committed by influential people, and also fight
meaningfully and effectively against torture and the
inhumane and degrading treatment of people. It must
bring to justice all officials who violate human rights.

Good governance and strong institutions serving
to enforce the law and fight against corruption are
key to promote, protect and achieve human rights in
Afghanistan. I would like to call on the international
community to coordinate and cooperate with the
Afghan government in that regard. Establishing parallel
structures for short-term quick fixes, which undermine
the actual responsibility of formal institutions, will
not solve the problem. We all know that human rights,
development and peace and security are interconnected
and require stable, strong, transparent and accountable
institutions, with inclusive citizen participation.

Finally, I reiterate that the protection and promotion
of human rights are a shared responsibility, and the
people of Afghanistan need the Council's continued
support. In that context, Afghanistan is a candidate for
the Human Rights Council for the period 2018-2020.
I look forward to the full support for our candidacy
by Member States. I call upon the international
community and the United Nations to support the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission
to independently continue its job to monitor, protect
and promote human rights. The people of Afghanistan
deserve to live in full dignity.

