Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The hour is late. I
will try to be quick. In some ways, that is easier for us,
because many of the key points that we had wanted to
make have already been made by several speakers
today. They include the fact that the plundering of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
unacceptable. We must put a stop to it, and the Security
Council must find effective ways and means to do so.
There seems to be a clear consensus on this matter.

What can we say to add value to this process?
First, we want to welcome the high-level presence we
see here today. I was pleased that I was able personally
to listen to most of the speeches by the ministers who
have come here. I think we should take on board what
they have told us.

Secondly, there seems to be also a general
recognition that Ambassador Kassem and his team
have done good work, and - if I may quote what I call
the "buzz" in the United Nations corridors - that buzz
is that the Kassem report is better than the Ba-N'Daw
report. I think that it is important for the Panel to know
that.

The challenge now is for the Council to respond
effectively to the work of the Panel. Let me make a few
small procedural points here.

First, having served on the Council for a year, we
have noticed that several panels have been set up and
that each panel works in separate compartments, with
no transfer of best practices from one to another. We
hope that at some point this will be done, because I
think that some of the good work done by the Kassem
Panel can be shared with the other panels.

Concerning the second point in terms of
procedure, we share Norway's View that the Views
expressed today, both by the members and the non-
members of the Council, should be taken on board in
the preparation of the presidential statement to be
adopted following this debate. We understand the
desire of some to adopt the presidential statement as
quickly as possible. However, we have some concerns
about that, because we feel that we should reflect on
some of the views expressed here.

Sll'V.4437

 

I will give an example. The Deputy Foreign
Minister of Tanzania said earlier today, in another
important observation, that the report would have been
more comprehensive had it included also the end-users
of the natural resources plundered from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Points such as this one should
be taken on board when we decide how to respond to
the Panel.

Similarly, just listening to the members, we heard
a very interesting discussion of the pros and the cons of
the moratorium, which, as we all know, was an
innovative idea put forward by the Kassem Panel. We
note the division of views. Our own View, frankly, is
that this is a positive idea that should be taken on
board. However, we would suggest that, in order to do
all of that, we need more time for reflection. We hope
that there will not be a rush to adopt a presidential
statement, because, in our case, we have to refer it to
our authorities before we can make a decision.

It is also important to bear in mind the fact that
the issue of the plundering of resources, as everyone
has said, is linked to the continuation of the conflict. I
should like to quote a few words from a very important
study entitled "Greed and Grievance", which, in a
sense, is a landmark study which points out how
conflict and resources are linked. The study, carried out
by Mats Berdal and David Malone, notes that:

"The continuation of seemingly senseless civil
wars is sometimes linked to the rational pursuit of
economic goals by the warring factions."

Indeed, this paradox is highlighted in the Kassem
report, which notes in paragraph 60 that:

"Peace could bring added pressure from many
sides for greater transparency, oversight and
accountability, and could ultimately prove far less
profitable for some."
The paradox here, therefore, is that the incentives
are for conflict rather than for peace. If we want to end
the conflict, we have to think about how to remove the
incentives.

Finally, the Council may recall that, in the
discussions that we had in the informal consultations,
we suggested some principles that we hoped would be
taken on board by the Council in considering this issue.
I will go through them quickly, in the hope that they
will, in fact, be taken on board.

First, no outside parties or groups sponsored by
such parties should benefit from the exploitation of the
natural resources of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo at the expense of that country.

Secondly, the natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should not be used to finance,
or serve as an incentive to prolong, the conflict in the
country.

Thirdly, the resources should be used only to
benefit the country and the people. In this regard, we
welcome the recent steps taken by the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to attract
genuine foreign investment to restructure, modernize
and liberalize the mining sector.

Fourthly, any proposed measures against illegal
exploitation should take into consideration the
humanitarian and economic costs to the innocent
peoples affected.

I think that I will end here, with the observation
that many important points have been made in the
course of the debate this morning and that we hope we
will have sufficient time to reflect on them.

