Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Mr. Geir Pedersen, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria, for his first
briefing to the Council. The lessons he has learned
from his initial contacts and the insights he offers on
the next steps in the political process are particularly
enlightening. At the outset, I would like to assure the
Special Envoy of France's full support.

Let there be no mistake about the current situation.
It would be a serious error in judgment and a grave
political miscalculation to believe that the Syrian
tragedy is behind us. It is not, as the country begins
its ninth year of conflict. The terrorist threat has not
disappeared - far from it. The ceasefire in the north-
west is regularly violated by the regime, the risk of
regional escalation increases day by day due to the
presence of Iran and gross human rights violations by
the regime continue with impunity. The overwhelming
majority of refugees do not plan to return to Syria and
the humanitarian situation remains catastrophic. It is
no surprise then - and I return here to my previous
point - that the vast majority of refugees do not
wish to return to Syria. Statistics from the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
which estimated that 58,000 refugees returned to
Syria in 2018 - barely an increase from 50,000 in
2017 - are telling.

Nonetheless, given that forthright report, France
firmly believes that, for the first time in many years,
there is a small but genuine window of opportunity to
put an end to the Syrian conflict. We have the shared
responsibility to seize that opportunity via an inclusive
political solution because it is the only way to prevent
similar causes and effects of aftershocks of the Syrian
crisis. In other words, to prevent another grim decade in
Syria, it is the responsibility ofthe Council to overcome
its divisions - I repeat, overcome its divisions ~ on
the basis of our shared objectives and interests. On
behalf of France, I would like to make an urgent appeal
in that regard. With that objective in mind, I will focus
briefly on three main points.

First, our common priority must be to continue
the fight against terrorism and to work towards a
national ceasefire, in accordance with the provisions
of resolution 2254 (2015). The fight against Da'esh
continues in north-eastern Syria and in Iraq and, as the
Council knows, is a top priority for France, which will
maintain its involvement on that front. The imminent
fall of Da'esh in Baghouz will be an undeniable military
success but will in no way mark the end of the threat
that Da'esh poses to the region and to our national
territories. In that regard, France welcomes the United
States announcement that it will maintain a military
presence in north-eastern Syria. That is good news for
the ongoing fight against Da'esh and for stabilizing
region in order to prevent the resurgence of the terrorist
group in another form. Pursuing the fight against
terrorism in the north-east requires the protection of
our operational partners on the ground in the fight
against Da'esh. We all know that the coalition's success
against Da'esh would not have been possible without
the Syrian Democratic Forces.

With regard to the situation in Idlib, I reiterate
France's deep concern about the strengthening of the
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham group, designated as a terrorist
organization by the United Nations. Its neutralization is
our common objective but we must spare civilians and
bear in mind the possible catastrophic humanitarian,
migration and security consequences of an offensive.
France is concerned about the increase in the number of
ceasefire violations by the Syrian regime, including air
strikes. That is why it is now essential to do all in our
power to preserve the ceasefire. We call in particular
on Russia and Turkey to exercise responsibility as they
continue their efforts.
Lastly, the Council must unite to ensure respect for
international law and international humanitarian law.
Today, I call on members with influence on the parties
to the conflict to exert pressure in that regard. First
and foremost, that means ensuring the protection of
civilian and humanitarian and medical workers, as well
as free and unhindered humanitarian access. Obstacles
to humanitarian access and the use of torture, forced
conscription and arbitrary detention in areas reclaimed
by the Syrian regime are clearly unacceptable. It is also
imperative to discourage any use of chemical weapons
in Syria and to react firmly to any new cases of such
use. France's resolve in that regard remains unchanged
and uncompromising.

It is more necessary than ever to pave the way for
a credible political transition under the auspices of the
United Nations. That is our second priority and it is
inextricably linked to the first. The regime's military
victory, which was achieved thanks to the support of
its two allies and at the cost of considerable human and
material destruction, is in no way a prelude to peace
and reconciliation in Syria. Such an outcome will be
possible only ifthe regime agrees to sit at the table with
the opposition and negotiate in good faith.

To that end, France fully supports the Special
Envoy's efforts to establish a comprehensive road
map based on all elements of resolution 2254 (2015),
which is now more than ever our common compass.
That implies working in parallel with efforts on
the constitution to establish credible, inclusive and
non-sectarian governance, preparing for free and fair
elections under the supervision of the United Nations
and developing confidence-building measures that can
create the safe and neutral environment outlined in the
Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex), including by
addressing the issue of detainees and missing persons,
property rights and forced conscription.

The United Nations alone, through the work of the
Special Envoy, will be able to make genuine progress on
those converging priorities. In that regard, we welcome
the Special Envoy's efforts to establish a constitutional
package as an entry point to the process. That would
require reaching a credible and balanced agreement on
both the composition of the third list for the committee
and on its rules of procedure so that it can start its
work quickly, under the auspices of the United Nations
and within the framework of resolution 2254 (2015).
We lost valuable time last year and it is clear that the
Syrian regime is responsible for failing to establish the
committee, contrary to the commitments made by the
Astana group and at the Istanbul Summit.
This will be my last point, and I will make it short.
Today we are at a crossroads, and the Council must
therefore support the efforts of the Special Envoy. Only
an inclusive political solution can provide a lasting
response to the Syrian tragedy, the expectations for
reconciliation and the threat of terrorism. It is also
our responsibility to respond to Syrian victims' need
for justice, without which peace will be impossible.
That is the aim of our support to the United Nations
investigative mechanisms and to efforts to see justice
done, including in a national capacity, as I brought up
once again at the beginning ofthe week (see S/PV.8471).

The return of refugees will be essential in the long
run, but the key to return is in Damascus, not New
York, Brussels or anywhere else. It is up to the regime
to establish the conditions that will enable refugees to
return in complete safety and with all the guarantees
necessary to ensuring respect for their freedoms and
the restitution of their property. We all see clearly that
those conditions and guarantees are not in place today,
so we should understand that without irreversible and
credible progress towards a political solution, it will
not be possible to encourage refugees' return, pave the
way for reconstruction, contemplate any normalization
of our relations with the regime or lift the sanctions on
it. France and the European Union have affirmed that
clear and unambiguous position several times.

Lastly, based on that, France will continue to work
tirelessly with its partners to arrive at a credible political
solution in support of the Special Envoy's mission. On
behalf of France, I want to once again appeal to every
member of the Council to regroup on that basis, to
stop running on automatic pilot and to move on from
posturing to action. There is not a minute to lose, so let
us get to work.

