Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): On 21 and
22 January, the Security Council visited Burundi for
the second time in less than a year, following the
trip we organized under the French presidency of the
Council in March 2015. As one of the organizers of the
mission, along with the United States and Angola, 1
have the honour, as is customary, to give the Council
an informational briefing on our visit to Burundi. The
representative of Egypt, who oversaw the African
Union segment of the Council's visit, on 23 January,
will brief us on the visit to Addis Ababa. I will then
make a few remarks in my national capacity.

I would like to take this opportunity to thank the
Secretariat for the significant efforts it made to organize
this visit, enabling us to do it under good conditions
and make it as productive as possible. I would also like
to thank the Burundian officials and others whom we
met with there for making themselves available to us.

The visit falls into the category of follow-up on the
situation in Burundi, which continues to be a matter of
considerable concern to the Council. To start with, I
should note that the Security Council adopted resolution
2248 (2015) on 12 November and a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2015/18) on 28 October and made
a press statement on 19 December 2015; those served
as terms of reference and a guide for the messages the
Security Council wanted to convey to its interlocutors
during the visit. Essentially, the Council emphasized
the vital importance of refraining from any form of
violence, strengthening the political dialogue that
began on 28 December 2015, protecting the people by
ensuring better respect for human rights and improving
relations with the international community, whether
as represented by the East African Community, the
African Union or the United Nations.

The Council first met with a group that included
two elder statesmen, former Chairs of the United
Nations Expert Panel on the Regional Peace Initiative
in Burundi, and we were able to fully come to grips
on the importance of full compliance with both the
letter and the spirit of the terms of the Arusha Peace
and Reconciliation Agreement for finding a solution to
the current situation in Burundi. The Security Council
delegation then met with the Burundi representative
of the Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights, who gave us a thorough account of the situation
in Burundi and went over the negative developments of
the past few months.

We sat down with representatives of civil society,
whose accounts testified to their defiance of the
Burundian authorities, particularly the security forces,
and to the clear and urgent need for protection by
the international community. The Council also met
with various independent media representatives, who
described the very difficult conditions under which
they are still attempting to conduct their professional
activities; with various representatives of the political
opposition, including in the National Assembly and
the Government, from whom we heard quite pointed
criticism; and with members of the so-called radical
opposition, not represented in the official institutions,
who painted a very gloomy picture of the political and
security situation. In their view, genocide was either
already happening in Burundi or was about to.

We also had the opportunity to talk to three of the
principal members of the Burundian authorities, who,
unlike those whom I have just cited, who described
serious political and security problems, gave us a very
upbeat and optimistic picture of the current situation.
We held a meeting with Burundi's Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Alain Nyamitwe, to discuss the political and
security aspects of the current situation and Burundi's
relations with various elements of the international
community - the East African Community, the
African Union and the United Nations. Burundi's First
Vice-President, Gaston Sindimwo, received us in his
home for an exchange of views on the security and
political situation and relations between Burundi and
the international community.

Finally, Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, President of the
Republic, hosted a discussion with the Security Council
at his residence in Gitega. After he had heard what the
Council had to say, he went over recent developments
in Burundi with a positive and hopeful spin on the
current situation in the country. He said that as far as
he was concerned, the reports we have been seeing in
the international media were wrong. He welcomed the
fact that the dialogue in Kampala had been resumed
on 28 December, considering that in his view only the
Head of State of Uganda was in a position to support
the inter-Burundian process under way. President
Nkurunziza again reiterated his firm opposition to
any interference from outside, in particular from the
African Union. He thanked the Council for its attention
to Burundi over the years and said that he was fully
prepared to continue to maintain good relations with
the United Nations.

The Council then travelled to Ethiopia to meet with
the African Union, and I will hand that part over to
my Egyptian colleague, with the understanding that
it is clear that the Council has lessons to draw from
our trip to Burundi in the light of the decisions that the
regional actors will be making very soon. Before my
colleague takes the floor, I would like to make a few
brief comments in my national capacity.

As the Council knows, France has been following
the situation in Burundi closely and with great concern.
Since the crisis began we have been calling on all
the parties involved to halt the violence and begin a
dialogue aimed at reaching a consensus solution that
respects the Arusha Agreement, which now more
than ever constitutes the compass both for us and for
all the stakeholders in Burundi. France immediately
suspended its defence and security cooperation with
Burundi, and the African Union, the East African
Community and the Ugandan mediators have also
been working on the issue. France has given its full
support to encouraging efforts to open an inclusive
dialogue with the African mediation and has advocated
for the adoption of European sanctions against three
of the people close to power and one member of the
armed opposition, in order to increase the pressure
on the parties involved. Consultations between the
European Union and the Burundian authorities began
at the beginning of December. In Geneva, the European
Union got the Human Rights Council to request that
the High Commissioner for Human Rights assess the
situation. The statements made by various sectors of
the population have given rise to fears that the situation
is worsening, and France and its partners have given the
authorities and the radical opposition clear warnings.

On France's initiative, as I said, the Security
Council unanimously adopted resolution 2248 (2015),
condemning the violence and urging all the parties to
open a dialogue, on pain of sanctions. The resolution
also calls for strengthening the United Nations presence
in Burundi. France will continue to support the African
initiatives in Addis Ababa, Geneva and Brussels. Lastly,
we were concerned to learn of the arrest in Burundi of
a French journalist, Jean-Philippe Re'my, and a British
photographer, Philip Moore. We call on the Burundian
authorities to release them immediately, with the
understanding that diplomatic efforts are under way to
that end.

As I said, the fact that we have had to visit Burundi
for the second time in less than a year is testament to the
Council's concern and involvement and is a necessary
stage in that involvement. We should bear in mind
that we will put together all the lessons there are to be
learned from the visit and, in the light of the outcome
of the African Union Summit, we should shoulder our
responsibility to break the cycle of violence, encourage
the launch of a genuinely inclusive inter-Burundian
dialogue and ensure full respect for human rights in
Burundi.

