Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for the twenty-fifth report on the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the situation in
Darfur, as well as her briefing today and her tireless
efforts that we see each time she is in the Chamber.
Yesterday, in the Chamber, we discussed the
completion strategy for the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda and the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (see S/PV.7960). Italy stressed
the fact that the closing of the Tribunal did not mean the
end of the fight against impunity. Today, with specific
reference to the referral situation in Darfur to the ICC,
let me say that we have a collective responsibility to
ensure coherence with the requests that the Council has
made to the International Criminal Court.

Twelve years ago, the Council decided to refer
this situation to the Court. The Court has started to
do its part. This is something the Council requested
the Court to do - examine a situation, investigate
crimes that were committed and initiate proceedings.
However, we are faced with a situation of a prolonged
stalemate, which is not satisfactory and is linked to a
lack of cooperation. This is not new for international
criminal justice. Cooperation with the Court is
essential. It is an obligation under resolution 1593
(2005); it is an obligation under the ICC Statute.
Moreover, cooperation is a measure of commitment to
the fight against impunity, and it can also be extended
voluntarily, even when an obligation stricto sensu does
not exist. It would be simply coherent with a demand
for justice for international crimes that the Council
has made and with the commitment of the Council to
establish accountability for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. There is no good reason why
perpetrators of these offenses should not be brought
to justice.

In this specific situation, however, the legal
obligations are rather clear and derive from a resolution
adopted by the Council under Chapter VII of the Charter
of the United Nations. Fulfilment of this obligation is
required forjustice to be done. There can be differences
as to the scope of this obligation and there can be
discussion as to the modality and the mechanism for
cooperation to occur, but specific processes must be set
in place. The Council should find a way to engage with
these issues and address differences, identify possible
solutions and influence, and support the necessary
political will.

If justice is to be able to play its preventive role,
the accountability dimension must be fully integrated
into our engagement strategy, including dialogue with
situation countries. If we allow perpetrators to believe
that the crimes can continue to be committed with
impunity, not only are we betraying justice as a principle,
but at the more pragmatic level we are depriving
ourselves of fundamental tools in preventing conflict
and putting an end to the perpetration of atrocities.

I would also like to add that there is no doubt that
justice requires a strong element of national ownership.
States have the primary responsibility to ensure
that justice is done for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide. There can be discussion on
how to organize interaction between the international
community and national authorities, but there is no
doubt that domestic systems must be engaged in the
process. That engagement requires political will and a
shared commitment to ensuring justice for the victims
of international crimes.

The security situation in Darfur has improved over
the past year. The recent United Nations-African Union
joint strategic review of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (S/2017/437) clearly
calls on the Council to update its deliberations on the
matter. We have no doubt about the Sudan's political
willingness to cooperate so as to prevent illicit flows,
including human trafficking that connects Darfur to
Libya, and to counter terrorism. Despite the remarkable
improvement, the root causes of instability in Darfur
still lie in persistent impunity, which can be seen in
the violation of human rights, the serious humanitarian
conditions of internally displaced persons and the
moral wounds of the past that are still to be healed. As
long as such impunity persists, peace in Darfur will
remain fragile.

As far the Council is concerned, as we have stated
a number of times, we need a stronger and broader
collective engagement in international justice issues.
The Council must find a way to be united in the
fight against impunity. To do so, it should give itself
more opportunities, particularly in formal settings, to
discuss that issue and deepen its engagement with all
actors involved, including the States concerned in the
International Criminal Court.

