Mr. Barnes (Liberia): I would like to thank the
presidency of the Security Council for organizing this
meeting to discuss and debate this very important
matter. In view of the fact that my country, Liberia, is
just emerging from a tragic drama in which children
were devastatingly victimized in a brutal civil war, I
feel morally obligated to add my voice to the ardent
appeal for the international community in general, and
this body in particular, to find practical and effective
solutions to the issue of children and armed conflict.

For me personally, the problem of children and
armed conflict and the far-reaching consequences of
children being caught up in armed conflict - whether
as innocent victims or as conscripted armed fighters
trained and conditioned to perpetuate unspeakable
violence against their fellow human beings - is not an
abstract concept. As a result of our civil conflict, I am
personally acquainted with quite a few former child
soldiers whom I have observed to be physically and
emotionally damaged.

In many ways, the kids and young adults whom I
know and who are ex-combatants are just that: children
and young adults. Yet, upon closer examination, one
can see the scars of deep hurt and pain in their eyes. At
the slightest provocation, such individuals may be
prone to resort to violence because they have been
conditioned to respond to almost any situation with
brutality. Their humanity has been buried deep beneath
a tough, unfeeling exterior.

I encountered a young Liberian during a time
when there was a brief respite in the fighting. He asked
me for a job, and, although I had been warned that he
was an ex-combatant, I wanted to help. Thus, I hired
him. Most of my neighbours wanted nothing to do with
this unfortunate young man and treated him like a
pariah. Over time, we would talk and my young friend
told me how he had gotten into the killing business.

He was only about 10 years old when rebels
raided his village and killed his parents in front of him.
Orphaned, he was soon urged to join another rebel
group, as part of what was referred to as the "small
boys unit", to avenge his family and just in order to
survive. At first, his rebel commanders armed him with
a slingshot and a machete. As a novice, he would hit
his target with a stone slung from his slingshot and
then finish off the stunned victim by chopping him to
pieces with his machete. Eventually, as a sign that he
was a fully matured killer, he graduated to the prized
AK-47.

Most of my conversations with this young man
left me speechless, but once I did ask him if he had any
regrets. He said to me, "Only one. Once, an old man
begged me not to kill him, and I shot him anyway." My
young friend looked haunted. His humanity had been
taken away. While he is only one example, there are
countless other examples of children worldwide who
have been directly involved in and impacted by armed
conflict.

Our world is continually becoming a smaller
place thanks to the phenomenon we all call
globalization. I say that this globalization is a double-
edged sword. Humanity can choose to be on the cutting
edge or the bleeding edge of the globalization sword. If
we of this generation do not do right by our children -
who are the future - we can rest assured that the
bleeding edge will be the dominant force of the future
of our common humanity.

My delegation seizes this opportunity on behalf
of the children of the world to plead to the collective
conscience and morality of the United Nations -
which represents the best hope for a future that is safe,
free, just and prosperous - to take the bold and
courageous actions necessary to protect our children
and the future of our planet. We can choose to take
those bold and courageous steps now and correct this
scourge or pay the drastic price of a more violent and
uncertain future. Left to its own devices, the
phenomenon that produces children victims and killers
today will only yield adult victims and killers
tomorrow.

