Mr. Maurer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Madam President, I would first of all like to
congratulate you on the skill and commitment with
which your country has conducted the presidency of
the Security Council during the month of May 2005.

Over the last few years, the United Nations has
been strongly committed to preparing the ground for
establishing substantial autonomy and self-
administration in Kosovo. Although considerable
progress has been achieved, there is still much to be
done, in particular in the areas of the democratic
functioning of institutions, the rule of law and respect
for minorities and human rights. We fully share the
Secretary-General's analysis on this subject in the
report he has just submitted to the Security Council
(S/2005/335). We are delighted with the unswerving
work of the Special Representative and with the
statement he made this morning.

In order to achieve more concrete progress, the
international community must act in a more concerted
manner and with greater determination to put the basic
framework in place. But the Serb and Kosovar leaders
too must make greater efforts to assume their full
responsibilities. This is crucial now that the assessment
of standards is entering a decisive phase.

Since the NATO intervention in 1999, Kosovo
has been de facto separated from Serbia and
Montenegro, although de jure it remains part of that
country. That situation is neither satisfactory nor
desirable. Switzerland considers that the time has come
to launch, between now and the end of the year, a
discussion on the future status of Kosovo. For
Switzerland, several parameters should guide our
thoughts.

First, it is important to take into account two
equally legitimate desires: on the one hand, the demand
of the minorities to live in safety, to have the same
opportunities for economic development, to have the
same access to social services and education and to
exercise the right of return; on the other hand, the will
of the majority of the population to exercise its right of
self-determination.

Secondly, Switzerland welcomes the first steps
that have been made towards a dialogue between Serb
and Kosovar leaders. A return of Kosovo to Serb
sovereignty is neither desirable nor realistic.
Nevertheless, the evolution towards formal
independence of Kosovo must happen under close
international monitoring, as well as through
negotiations with the authorities in Belgrade, as this
independence cannot be imposed on them.

Thirdly, the question of Kosovo must be
addressed from a regional perspective. The
commitment of the international community to
maintain multi-ethnic States in South Eastern Europe is
fundamental. It is the only feasible long-term policy. A
division of Kosovo would be contrary to this approach
and must be ruled out. What is important is to promote
the decentralization of power in order to allow the
Serbs of Kosovo to enjoy real opportunities to pursue
their development and to take an active part in
determining the political future of Kosovo.

Switzerland welcomes the fact that the first steps
have been taken to establish a dialogue between the
leaders of Serbia and of Kosovo. The readiness to
conduct such a discussion at the highest level is a
necessary condition to unblock the current situation
and to advance the discussion on standards and status.

Switzerland has been closely involved in the
region since the outbreak of the conflicts in the former
Yugoslavia. It has used considerable resources, backing
its efforts with more than one and a half billion Swiss
francs since 1995. Switzerland is especially active in
Kosovo, at different levels.

My country's contribution is based on its own
historical experiences, but also, and above all, it
addresses real local needs in the areas of consolidation
of local democracy, decentralization and reinforcing
the mechanisms for the protection of minorities.
Switzerland wishes to make a useful contribution to the
efforts of the international community and is ready to
play a role as facilitator. It is already active in
supporting a dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade,
as well as between the various communities, and is
ready to pursue this role further.

Even if the status question is resolved in the near
future, the prevailing economic conditions and the still
poorly developed structures for the rule of law require
the continuation of a significant international presence
in Kosovo. Switzerland is determined to pursue its

commitment side by side with other members of the
international community.

