The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Cote d'Ivoire, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Djangone-
Bi (Cote d'Ivoire) took a seat at the Council
table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2005/661, which contains the text of a
draft resolution prepared in the course of the Council's
prior consultations. I should also like to call the
attention of members to document S/2005/639, which
contains the text of a letter dated 6 October 2005 from
the Permanent Representative of Nigeria addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
communique of the 40th meeting of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Algeria, Argentina, Benin, Brazil, China,
Denmark, France, Greece, Japan, Philippines,
Romania, Russian Federation, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America

The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1633 (2005).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.20 am.

