Ms. Brink (Australia): I would like to begin by
thanking Indonesia and Foreign Minister Marsudi
for the choice of the topic for this open debate, which
enables all of us to focus in a concrete way on achieving
the peace that we seek.

As the demands of modern peacekeeping grow
more complex, training and capacity-building must
keep pace with emerging requirements. Effective
partnerships, improved information-sharing and
reporting mechanisms are the foundation for better
peacekeeping performance. Peacekeeping is not a
static phenomenon. Today's missions operate in a very
different environment from 1948, when Australia first
deployed to support a United Nations peace operation.

Australia welcomes progress to implement the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which we see as
a blueprint for enhancing performance, safety and
security. We must continue momentum and translate
rhetoric into action. Sustaining peace demands
innovation. Today, successful mandate implementation
requires a continual evolution of training and significant
improvements to joint planning and analysis.

On partnerships, Australia recognizes their power
to improve peacekeeping capability and performance.
Strong partnerships at the bilateral, multilateral and
regional levels provide the best opportunity to address
key training and capability gaps.

Since 1993, Australia has deployed instructors to
support the development of peacekeeping capabilities
in other countries. Mobile training teams are a cost-
effective way of sharing the experiences of troop-
contributing countries and building capacity. The
Australian Defence Force Peace Operations Training
Centre also provides high-quality multinational
training. Australia has sought to increase the
participation of women in peacekeeping, and we fund
women from a range of countries to attend peacekeeping
training courses.

Australia's peacekeeping cooperation with Viet
Nam is one example of an effective partnership in
practice. Together, we have worked to improve language
capabilities to prepare medical personnel to deploy to
South Sudan. Our emerging partnership with Fiji and
New Zealand will also aim to strengthen capability
through training and shared expertise.

Improved information-sharing is also critical to
allocate resources effectively against the needs of
troop-contributing countries. The Secretariat's light
coordination mechanism is a welcome step towards
better coherence of training and capacity-building
efforts. Improved access to the latest developments
in peacekeeping policy and lessons learned will
allow Member States to provide more targeted and
mission-specific training.

Australia sees great potential in online training as a
mechanism to bring predeployment training to a wider
audience. We have supported the Peace Operations
Training Institute's development of an e-learning
programme, which we consider to be a valuable example.

Finally, Australia supports efforts to embed an
integrated performance framework across missions and
enhance data-driven reporting. A clear understanding
of mission effectiveness will highlight where training
efforts can be focused to improve performance.

Evidence shows that well-trained and well-equipped
personnel give peacekeeping missions a greater chance
to succeed. Australia looks to all Member States and
the United Nations system to work together to ensure
that training and capacity-building efforts meet the
demands of modern peacekeeping.

