Argentina thanks Germany for organizing this open debate of the Security Council, and the Secretary General; the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten; and the Executive President of the Association of Central African Women Lawyers, Ms. Nadia Carine Fornel-Poutou, for their briefings. Argentina endorses the statement made by the delegation of Canada on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security (see annex 20). We express our appreciation for the efforts made in recent years by Member States, the United Nations, intergovernmental organizations and local and international civil society organizations to prevent and respond to sexual violence. We also continue to strongly support the efforts of the Secretary-General and the Office of the Special Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and reiterate our support for their work, firmly rooted in the women and peace and security agenda, originated in resolution 1325 (2000). In the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, we appreciate the report prepared by the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on the implications of the pandemic for the prevention of and response to conflict-related sexual violence. In particular, we share the concern regarding the impact of COVID-19 on sexual violence survivors' access to essential health and support services, and we consider it essential that measures be taken to guarantee access to justice and relevant protection. Argentina categorically condemns acts of sexual violence in armed conflicts, supports efforts to prevent them and advocates accountability and punishment for perpetrators. It is essential that the use or threat of sexual violence by various actors and armed groups - State and non-State alike - be prevented and punished. Such actions are among the most serious of crimes and must be fought in the framework of the law and with the range of tools and mechanisms available, including Security Council sanctions regimes, which should include sexual violence as a specific criterion for the imposition of sanctions and referral to the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court. Argentina endorses the Secretary-General's recommendations seeking to promote access to justice for victims, based on a holistic concept of justice focused on such victims. Ensuring the implementation of a survivor-centred prevention and response approach, in accordance with resolution 2467 (2019), is essential. It is likewise crucial to forge greater cooperation and enhance the sharing of good practices on access to justice and accountability for crimes of sexual violence in order to end the climate of impunity that contributes to the proliferation of such crimes. It is therefore essential to establish mechanisms to protect, support, assist and reintegrate all survivors of such violations, in collaboration with women's organizations and other civil society organizations. Such assistance must meet the needs and protect the dignity and human rights of victims through measures to help eliminate the multiple forms of discrimination, marginalization and stigmatization they often suffer during the process of socioeconomic and cultural reintegration into their families. and communities of origin. These elements must be taken into account when setting the mandates for peacekeeping operations and special political missions, as well as in the peacebuilding efforts of the Security Council, in the context of resolution 1325 (2000) and its follow-up resolutions. As we mark the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), we firmly believe that national action plans for the implementation of that resolution should be seen as a tool for building peace and preventing sexual violence, especially in conflict situations. It was that spirit that inspired our country join the Women, Peace and Security Focal Points Network and support the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Initiatives, promoted by the Canadian Government, to ensure that more women are deployed in peace operations. Argentina would like to highlight the importance of equipping peace operations with women protection advisers with a view to improving coordination and information-gathering to monitor and prevent sexual violence in conflicts. The role peace operations play on the ground is crucial, and we welcome the recent development of the Handbook for United Nations Field Missions on Preventing and Responding to Conflict-Related Sexual Violence. In conclusion, sexual violence in conflict situations represents one of the most atrocious and terrible violations of human dignity, with implications that may hamper the building international peace and security. That is why we must step up our commitment to preventing, eradicating and ensuring accountability for such crimes, putting survivors at the centre of our actions and joining forces to address the underlying structural conditions that put women in a state of greater vulnerability and risk.
