Mr. Mahamat Zene (Chad) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Afghanistan and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), as well as Mr. Yury
Fedotov, Executive Director of the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime, for their briefings. I also
thank Ambassador Tanin, Permanent Representative of
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, for his statement
and wish him every success in his new capacities.

Less than a year after the presidential elections,
the new Afghan authorities have devoted significant
effort to political and administrative reform, national
reconciliation and combating drugs, although the
country continues to face those and many other
challenges concerning security and humanitarian
issues and the fight to reduce poverty. Chad wishes
to commend the efforts of the Afghan authorities and
urges them to continue the reforms already begun,
including those regarding the electoral system, and
calls on the international community to lend them
substantial financial and technical support.

Similarly, Chad welcomes and encourage the
initiatives of UNAMA, which made it possible, at a
provincial level, to organize a number of meetings that
brought together civil society, religious and traditional
leaders and others to implement new mechanisms for
dialogue and crisis resolution. Chad also welcomes the
new stage reached in terms of the peace and national
reconciliation process through direct negotiations
between the Afghan Government and representatives
of the Taliban, which was launched on 7 July in
Murree, Pakistan, under the aegis of the Pakistani
Government, the United States of America, China and
the international community.

The fight against terrorism, extremism and drug
trafficking, the challenges related to the porosity of
borders and the problem of water resource management
are all, inter alia, issues that require strong, full
cooperation among all the countries of the region.
Those issues also require multifaceted, broad support
from the international community. In that regard, we
welcome the convening on 8 and 9 June, in Dushanbe,
of a high-level international conference that enabled
the countries of the region to take important decisions
with respect to security, development and, of course,
water management, at a regional level. To that end, the
partnership between the Government of Afghanistan
and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime,
which aims to combat drug trafficking, should be
encouraged and further supported, both at the level
of capacity-building and by stepping up cooperation
with neighbouring States for better coordination in the
transborder fight against drugs and illicit trafficking,
in keeping with the presidential statement of 25 June
2014 (S/PRST/20l4/l2).

The fragile security situation in Afghanistan, along
with the presence of foreign fighters and elements of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, not only on
its territory but throughout the region, calls for joint
efforts at the regional level as well as heightened
vigilance on the part of the international community.
The growing number of terrorist attacks in Kabul and
throughout the country, which we firmly condemn,
clearly demonstrates the mobility of terrorist groups
and their ability to act as spoilers, underscoring the
need to reinforce the efforts of the Afghan security
forces.

Chad is seriously concerned by the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation and deplores the fact that
civilians are falling victim to anti-personnel land mines
and indiscriminate attacks carried out by the parties to
the conflict and international forces. All parties must
clearly distinguish between civilian targets and military
ones by adhering to the principles of international
humanitarian law as well as international human rights
law.

By way of conclusion, Chad wishes to pay deserved
tribute to all United Nations and humanitarian agency
staff serving in Afghanistan in extremely dangerous
conditions. We urge them to continue their work on
behalf of the Afghan people.

