Mr. Akram (Pakistan): I would like to join other
speakers in thanking Assistant Secretary-General
Kalomoh for presenting the Secretary-General's
progress report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Security Council mission to
West Africa.

The Council's mission to West Africa took place
during a particularly disturbing period. The peace
process in Cote d'Ivoire was experiencing serious
difficulties; Guinea-Bissau - still struggling to cope
with the challenges of post-conflict peace-building -
was mired in political uncertainties and socio-
economic problems; the security situation in Liberia
was deteriorating rapidly, with portents of a major
humanitarian crisis, thus the Council mission could not
visit that country; and Sierra Leone provided the only
reference for hope and relative stability.

Many of the country-specific recommendations of
the mission were therefore in relation to the respective
situations existing at that time. All were based on
problems that could be reasonably anticipated. These
recommendations were therefore relevant in the
subsequent months, which witnessed a considerable
evolution of the situation in all the countries concerned.

During this period, the overall trend has been
positive. The peace process in Cote d'Ivoire is getting
back on track after an almost total breakdown. New
proposals which could disrupt the process will,
hopefully, not be pursued. Liberia has undergone a
remarkable turnaround following the timely
intervention by the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) and the subsequent
deployment of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
(UNMIL). Progress in Liberia is expected to reinforce
peace and stability in Sierra Leone.

Guinea-Bissau has also regained relative stability,
despite intervening setbacks. However, its economic
problems, which remain largely unaddressed, still pose
a potential threat to a delicate peace.

Other Council members have already addressed the
specific country situations as well as some cross-cutting
issues - such as the proliferation of arms; mercenaries;
child soldiers; disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR); poverty; and unemployment -
and the need for a regional approach. The Security
Council mission's recommendations on those issues
remain relevant and should be pursued. We look
forward in particular to further work on those issues in
the light of the relevant reports to be provided by the
Secretary-General.

I should like to make a few points of a general
and cross-cutting nature. First, sustainable peace and
stability in West Africa can be achieved only if the
underlying causes of conflict and instability are
effectively addressed. Those causes involve, among
other things, the exclusion of regional, ethnic or
religious groups from participation in political and
economic power-sharing.

Secondly, sanctions - and even DDR
programmes - will not yield enduring results for peace
so long as the incentives of many of the fighting
militias - as well as regime elements - to persist in
promoting instability are not removed. Proverbially,
money is the mother of all evil. There is an obvious
and well-established linkage between the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and the fuelling of
conflicts in the subregion. There is a need to unearth
those who finance these wars by buying and trading the
products of the illegal exploitation of the region's
natural resources. The financial transactions involved
in both the illicit trade in arms and the illegal trade in
natural resources should be covered in any sanctions or
monitoring regime. The UNITA sanctions offer a good
model.

Thirdly, peace and security are inextricably
linked to sustainable development. West African
crises - like those in other regions - arise from the
politics of scarcity and poverty. The terms
"comprehensive, global and regional" are frequently
mentioned with regard to our approach; but without a
focus on development, no policy can be
comprehensive. There is a need for a genuinely
developmental approach to ease and resolve conflicts
and to permit political accommodation among rivals.
West African countries and peoples must be given the
opportunity to develop and to make progress.
Enforcement and peacekeeping measures should be
accompanied by adequate international assistance.
Guinea-Bissau is one illustration. In Sierra Leone, a
huge international effort has stabilized security, but,
without economic development, the process could well
be reversed. Likewise, in Liberia, reconstruction and
development will form a major element of the
restoration of sustainable security and peace.

Fourthly, a comprehensive approach to West Africa
and to each crisis situation is obviously essential. Recent
developments - especially in Liberia - have offered
the world community a good opportunity to adopt a
holistic approach to the problems confronting the West
African subregion. Peacekeeping is an important tool
in the hands of the Council. Pakistan is proud to have
played a major role in the success of the United
Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). We are
also participating in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia. We have gained experience and insight into the
problems confronting the region. Liberia, Sierra Leone
and C6te d'Ivoire require equal focus and harmonious
effort to ensure stability in the entire region. A
peacekeeping operation is required in Cote d'Ivoire. A
cautious and balanced approach must be followed for
the drawdown of UNAMSIL in Sierra Leone.

Fifthly, a regional approach will have to rely
essentially on regional partnership. That is emerging in
West Africa. We wish to place on record our
appreciation to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), which has played a key role
in addressing regional conflicts, both through its
engagement at the highest political level and through
the timely deployment of peacekeepers under difficult
circumstances. Such cooperation needs to be further
concretized. We hope that the United Nations will
respond to the need for capacity-building in ECOWAS.
Finally, the United Nations itself needs to act
coherently in West Africa, addressing diverse needs in
containing West African crises and building peace and
stability. It is imperative to achieve greater
coordination and synergy among the endeavours of the
three principal United Nations organs - the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council - in addressing the complex issues
confronting the region. At the same time, active
engagement by non-governmental organizations, other
United Nations agencies and, in particular,
international financial institutions is needed to bolster
the entire effort. The idea of establishing composite
committees to address such issues, suggested by
Pakistan, may be one answer for building a
comprehensive and coherent approach to complex
crises on the part of the United Nations and the rest of
the international community.

