Mr. Mootaz Ahmadein Khalil (Egypt): Egypt
associates itself with the statement to be delivered by
the representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, I would like to commend the
Azerbaijani presidency of the Security Council for
convening this open debate on the working methods
of the Security Council. I would like also to take
this opportunity to congratulate the countries that
were elected this month as members of the Security
Council for the next two years and to thank Azerbaijan,
Guatemala, Morocco, Pakistan and Togo for their
efforts during their membership during 2012 and 2013.

Today's open debate is the sixth debate on the
Security Council's working methods. We hope that the
views expressed by non-members of the Council will
be reflected in any outcome of this debate in order
to enhance the transparency and inclusiveness of the
Council's work. We also expect the Security Council to
add to its upcoming annual report - which the Council
is to adopt tomorrow - more detailed information on
the measures taken to improve the Council's working
methods in order to properly assess the progress
achieved in this regard.

The effective functioning of the Security Council
has a direct impact on the maintenance of international
peace and security. Article 24 ofthe Charter ofthe United
Nations indicates that the Council acts on behalf of the
entire membership of the United Nations. Therefore,
the Council's working methods do not belong only to
its 15 members; they are the collective responsibility of
the general membership. For that reason, reforming the
Security Council's working methods is one of the five
inextricably linked items to be negotiated in the overall
reform and expansion of the Council in accordance
with General Assembly decision 62/557.

Egypt appreciates the efforts by the Security
Council Informal Working Group on Documentation
and Other Procedural Questions under the chairmanship
of Argentina to improve the Council's working methods.
Yet, more efforts should be exerted to promote the full
implementation of the note by the President contained
in document S/2010/507 and subsequent notes.
We must also be more ambitious and advance our
discussions beyond those notes. For example, reaching
an agreement on the Security Council's provisional
rules of procedure, which have been in force for over
60 years, would be a major step towards improving the
working methods of the Council.

The working methods of the Security Council will
not be improved unless we effectively address the use
of the veto. In that regard, we note with interest the
proposal by President Hollande of France, which was
reflected in his statement in the general debate of
the General Assembly at its sixty-eighth session (see A/68/PV.5): that the permanent members collectively
refrain from using the veto in cases of mass atrocities.
Let me recall here that Africa is opposed to the veto
as a matter of principle. We believe that it should be
abolished. However, as long as it continues to exist, and
as a matter of common justice, it should be extended
to all permanent members of the prospective enlarged
Security Council, in full application of the principle of
equality between current and new permanent members.

Private meetings, informal consultations and
closed meetings should be kept to a minimum. Issues
to be covered at any briefing by the Secretariat should
be determined in coordination with the concerned State
and after the approval by all members of the Security
Council. Interventions after such briefings should not
be restricted to Council members. The concerned party
should be given the opportunity to express its views on
such briefings. Any decision by the Security Council to
initiate formal or informal discussions on a situation in
any Member State or other issues that do not constitute
a threat to international peace and security is contrary
to Article 24 of the Charter. We urge the Council to
strictly follow its mandate in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter.

Through note S/2013/515, Council members agreed
to make more effective use ofpublic meetings, informal
interactive dialogues and Arria Formula meetings.
These meetings should be used effectively by providing
for real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges
of view to take into account the contributions of
non-Council members, in particular those that may
be directly affected by decisions of the Council. A
mere quantitative increase in such meetings without a
qualitative benefit or outcome would be a waste of time
and resources.

The participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in decision-making concerning peacekeeping
operations must cover their establishment, review
and termination, including the extension or change of
mandates. We welcome as a step forward the recently
adopted note by the President S/2013/630 on enhancing
consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries.

Wrap-up sessions have proven useful in taking
stock of the activities of the Security Council at the
end of each month. We thank those Council members
that have held wrap-up sessions at the end of their
presidencies. This practice complements that whereby
Council Presidents brief the wider membership on the
programme of work at the beginning of each month.

Monthly assessments are important in providing
a more coherent account of the main aspects of
the work of the Council during that month. In note
S/2012/922, Council Presidents were encouraged to
submit the monthly assessments soon after the end of
their respective presidencies. We note, however, that
the latest monthly assessment posted on the Security
Council's website relates to April, under the presidency
of Rwanda.

We appreciate the continued efforts of the
Secretariat in developing the Security Council's
website, making it more informative and user-friendly,
as well as in publishing its programme of work and the
monthly forecast in a timely manner.

Finally, there is still much room for improvement.
We count on all members of the Council, in particular
its permanent members, to make greater progress
in improving the Council's working methods so as
to strengthen its ability to carry out its mandate
of maintaining international peace and security in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

