Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me also to welcome the proclamation
of independence for the Republic of South Sudan on
9 July. Gabon is pleased to have been a participant at
the highest State level, notably through the presence of
His Excellency Mr. Ali Bongo Ondimba at the
ceremony marking this historic event. We, too, have
officially recognized the new State of South Sudan. I
welcome the presence in the Chamber of the Vice-
President of the Republic of South Sudan and of the
Permanent Representative of the Sudan, and I thank
them for their statements.

The independence of South Sudan completes the
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, which is the foundation of the peace
process in the Sudan. It should put an end to the long
decades of tragic conflict that have led to the deaths of
millions and an enormous displacement of populations.

In the long and laboured quest for peace and
stability in the Sudan, the international community has
shown great unity and resolve. The Security Council
has played a central role in the international
mobilization aimed at achieving a lasting solution to
the Sudanese crisis, to which we should also link the
willingness of the parties to commit, through frank and
constructive dialogue, to seeking a negotiated political
solution to the conflict. That political will was recently
affirmed by the signing of the Agreement on Abyei,
following the violence that occurred in the Area.

Gabon, which has always enshrined dialogue and
political cooperation as basic values of its diplomacy,
welcomes that progress, which should be conducive to
peace and stability in this vast region of Africa. My
delegation especially commends the political
commitment and leadership of President Al-Bashir and
President Salva Kiir Mayardit, which have been so
essential to the implementation of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. We also commend the United
Nations, the African Union and the entire international
community for its mobilization and ongoing efforts to
promote peace in the Sudan.

The challenges that the new State faces in terms
of nation-building are enormous. South Sudan must
essentially begin at the beginning with security sector
reform and the establishment of democratic
institutions, the rule of law and respect for human
rights. Add to that the economic development of the
country, the provision of basic services for the people
and sound management of natural resources.

To that end, the creation of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan, established in
accordance with resolution 1996 (2011), is a basic tool
in the process of building this new State. The role of
the new Mission will be to assist the country in
strengthening peace and security and creating a stable
economic environment.

Euphoria over the birth of the Republic of South
Sudan should not lead us to overlook the fact that there
are still many outstanding issues. Both parties have yet
to agree on the post-secession arrangements. The
demarcation of the border separating the two States,
citizenship and wealth-sharing are essential issues that
must be resolved. Good-neighbourly relations and
peaceful coexistence between the two States will
depend on this.

The final status of the Abyei Area and the
ongoing fighting in Southern Kordofan are other
sources of concern. Nevertheless, Gabon particularly
welcomes the negotiations that took place in Addis
Ababa between the Government of the Sudan and the
Sudan People's Liberation Movement-North that led to
the establishment of a Framework Agreement on a
political partnership between the two parties and the
setting up of political and security arrangements in
Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states. Gabon urges
both parties to continue efforts to achieve final
solutions to all of these outstanding issues.

In view of South Sudan's efforts and work to
build a new State, our support on all issues should not
wane. For its part, Gabon looks forward to enhanced
diplomatic relations with the Republic of South Sudan.

