Mrs. Charrier (France) (spoke in French): We
would like to thank Special Adviser Karim Khan for
his informative briefing. In just a few months, he has
set up a high-quality team of Iraqi and international
experts that also includes an equal place for women.
In that context, we welcome Ms. Salama Hasson
Al-Khafaji, who is sitting beside him today, and the
Iraqi Ambassador. That is a sign that the international
community and Iraq, in response to Iraq's request to
the Security Council, are working hand in hand to fight
impunity for crimes committed by Da'esh.

France would like to thank Kuwait for having
organized, as part of its presidency, an exchange with
Mr. Khan during the Council's visit to Iraq. That
enabled us to affirm on the ground our full support
for the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote
Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD) two
years after the adoption of resolution 2379 (2017) and
to assess the challenges. Their work focuses today on
the crimes committed by Da'esh in Sinjar, Mosul and
Tikrit. That is a first step. Justice must be rendered for
all Victims of the most serious crimes committed by
Da'esh throughout Iraqi territory. It is essential that
regional leaders and commanders be brought to justice.

We welcome the initial operational progress made
by the Team in the collection of digital documents and
testimonies, as well as the excavation of mass graves
in Kojo, in Sinjar, in March and April. The Team's
meeting with the council of tribal leaders of Anbar in
June will contribute to deepening its close cooperation
with Iraqi society and its authorities. It is a step in the
right direction. We also encourage the Team to continue
its work independently. In that encouraging context,
France would like to convey three messages.

The first message is to UNITAD. It is important
that the Team continue to work with all actors: the
Iraqi authorities, local actors, victims groups and
non-governmental organizations, representatives of all
components of the Iraqi population, as well as Member
States. The United Nations, in particular the United
Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), has a
key role to play in supporting the Iraqi authorities in
reforming governance and strengthening the judicial
system and the rule of law. I would like to commend
the cooperation between UNAMI and UNITAD,
whose mandates in the fight against impunity are
complementary. We encourage them to continue along
those lines.

With regard to UNITAD sharing evidence with
national judicial authorities in proceedings, France
recalls that resolution 2379 (2017) and the Team's terms
of reference provide that evidence sharing should be
carried out in accordance with United Nations best
practices and international standards. In that regard, we
recall that France is opposed to the death penalty in all
places and under all circumstances.

My second message is addressed to all those who
may have relevant information for them to provide
it to UNITAD. In particular, we encourage States to
commit to cooperating with UNITAD in an operational
manner and, if necessary, to conclude cooperation
agreements. France intends to fully cooperate with the
Special Adviser and his teams. We welcome the fact
that contacts have already been established between the
relevant French authorities.

My third message is to the Iraqi authorities. Since
the territorial Victory over Da'esh, Iraq has fully
recognized the need to prosecute those responsible
for the most serious crimes committed on its territory.
We welcome the determination of the Iraqi authorities
to integrate the fight against impunity for all crimes,
regardless of the victims and the affiliation of the
perpetrators, into efforts to stabilize, rebuild and
reconcile all components of Iraqi society, which is key
to preventing any resurgence of Da'esh. We welcome
in particular the support of the Iraqi authorities and
the establishment of a Steering Committee appointed
by the Government to determine how the cooperation
should be carried out. It is important that Iraq continue
its close dialogue with UNAMI on strengthening the
rule of law. Finally, I would like to reiterate that France
will continue its efforts to combat impunity and support
the strengthening of the rule of law in Iraq. France is
providing multifaceted assistance for strengthening the
capacities of Iraqi institutions. We formalized that in
May with the signing of ajoint Franco-Iraqi road map.

France supported resolution 2379 (2017) in 2017
because we stand side by side with Iraqis in the fight
against Da'esh in all its aspects - security, political and
judicial. UNITAD is now in place, which is an essential
first step. However, there are still many challenges, as
noted in the second UNITAD report (see S/2019/407).
The evidence is numerous, but scattered. It needs to
be used in proceedings, first and foremost in Iraq, that
respect fundamental guarantees. The Council must
support the Iraqi authorities' efforts to address those
challenges. It is therefore important that UNITAD's
work be developed and sustained. That is how the
objectives of justice and reconciliation established in
resolution 2379 (2017) can be achieved.

