Ms. Moglia (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Bernard Kouchner, for the
briefing that he has given us.

Since the last time that Mr. Kouchner was in the
Security Council, last September, two events have
occurred that we believe are of special importance for
the future of Kosovo. Obviously, we are referring to the
local elections conducted on 28 October 2000 and also
to the fall of the Milosevic' regime by the decision of
the people. We are very gratified to hear that the
municipal elections were held without incidents and
that the rate of participation was very high. We would
like to express our appreciation to the organizations
involved in preparing these elections: the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of
Europe and, especially, the Kosovo Force (KFOR).

Although we obviously would have hoped that
the Kosovo Serbs would participate massively, we
understand that the decision not to do that was really
due to fear and intimidation rather than the taking of a
stand regarding the elections themselves. For this
reason, we believe that it was wise of Mr. Kouchner to
decide to appoint Serb representatives to certain
municipal councils and to call for elections at an
appropriate time so that those communities will also
have an opportunity to participate in an election
process.
We would like to take this opportunity to
congratulate the Democratic League of Kosovo and its
leader, Ibrahim Rugova, on their success in the
elections. We also congratulate the new members of the
municipal assemblies. We believe that the results are a
triumph of moderation, and we are very pleased.
Everyone involved now has serious responsibilities to
fulfil, and we hope they will be acting with tolerance,
to the benefit of community interests, and with the
awareness that they must not disappoint those who
placed their confidence in them. We also want to
appeal to those who did not get the results they desired
at the polls to join in the democratic process that begin
on 28 October.

We are aware that peaceful coexistence in Kosovo
depends to a great extent on the solution that will be
found to the problem of the Kosovo Albanians that are
detained or have disappeared in Serbia. We hope that
the democratic changes that have occurred in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia will make it possible to
resolve this question without delay. In any event, the
release of Ms. Flora Brovina and the recent statements
by President Kostunica are signs that we consider
encouraging.

The recent killing of four innocent persons who
had been internally displaced and had returned to their
place of origin, in Dosevac, reminds us once again that
extremist elements are still present in Kosovo. We ask
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR to spare no effort to
arrest and bring to justice those responsible for this
crime. All of those who act outside the law and in
violation of democratic principles and who undermine
the peace process have no place in Kosovo.

Lastly, we want to reiterate to Mr. Kouchner that
he can continue to be assured of the full confidence and
support of Argentina.

