Mr. Briz Gutierrez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Allow me to begin by thanking the Argentine
delegation for steering the work of the Council during
the month of August and to congratulate you, Sir, on
assuming the presidency of the Council for the month
of September. My delegation also thanks you for your
informative briefing and your work at the helm of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), as well as the work ofyour team.

With respect to today's briefing, it is difficult to
find anything new to contribute, not only because of
the particularly short time period covered by the report
and the lack of cooperation on the part of the Iranian
Government, but also due to the minimal progress that
has been made. While the topic is highly politically
sensitive, we regret the stalemate in considering the
recommendations set out in the Panel of Experts'
final report (S/2013/331, annex), submitted in May,
which my delegation supports. We also support the
Committee's programme of work for the period 1 July
to 31 December, which was adopted on 9 August.

It would appear that, today, the problem does not
involve publishing final reports as Security Council
documents but, rather, the Committee taking action
based on the reports' recommendations. We would
urge all members to redouble their efforts in order to
reach a consensus on the recommendations contained
in the final report. We hope that in upcoming informal
meetings, it will be possible to agree on possible steps
to be taken in order to implement the recommendations.

With regard to the question of public statements
attributed to Iranian officials and the alleged
beneficiaries of Iranian weapons transfers, as the
Council will recall, my delegation expressed its
reservations about taking action within the Committee
based on information collected from the media and
without taking into account additional testimony of the
Panel of Experts, based on exhaustive investigation into
the matter, including the verification of facts. We take
note of the additional information, and are prepared to
consider it in an objective manner.

In that regard, as indicated by other delegations in
the context of discussions of similar incidents in other
sanctions committees, while my delegation supports
any action taken by the Committee and Panel of Experts
to investigate all notifications of alleged violations
of sanctions, we do believe it necessary to carefully
analyse whether or not the news provided by the media
is a good basis for such action. My delegation finds it
difficult to accord the same degree of seriousness and
credibility to information obtained from the press or
the Internet as that obtained by an in-depth and broad
investigation into matters. We consider it important to
reach agreement on a consistent approach through the
different subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

We note the concerns expressed in the recent
report (GOV/2013/40) of the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) with
regard to the implementation of the safeguards regime
in the Islamic Republic of Iran, in accordance with the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT). The report again indicates that Iran is not
cooperating as necessary and that pending issues,
including those related to a possible military dimension
of its nuclear programme, remain unresolved. The lack
of results and progress in the dialogue between Iran and
the IAEA, despite 10 rounds of talks with the Agency
since January 2012, remains a source of frustration and
concern for the international community.

We again urge the Islamic Republic ofIran to adopt
measures for the full application of its Safeguards
Agreement and other obligations and commitments
undertaken under the NPT, especially with regard
to opening itself to inspections and to reaching an
agreement on a structured approach. We take note of
the round of conversations planned for late September
and ask the new Government to take advantage of that
opportunity to send a signal of good faith through
real and specific advances in its discussions with the
Agency.

