The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Excellency Mr. Boutros Assaker,
Acting Secretary-General of the Lebanese Ministry of
Foreign Affairs and Emigrants.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Assaker
(Lebanon) and Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) took seats at the Council table.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Detlev Mehlis,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mehlis to take a seat at the Council
table.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2005/662, which contains a letter dated
20 October 2005 from the Secretary-General,
transmitting the report of the United Nations
International Independent Investigation Commission.

I also draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2005/651, which contains a letter dated
14 October 2005 from the representative of Lebanon
addressed to the Secretary-General.

I now give the floor to Mr. Detlev Mehlis,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.


