Mr. Otunnu: I should like from the outset to pay a
very special tribute to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), and to Nigeria in particular, for the very
exceptional contribution and sacrifice that they have made
over these last several years on behalf of the children and
the people of Sierra Leone.

I visited Sierra Leone recently to assess first-hand
the conditions of children in the country following the
signing of the Lome Peace Agreement and to identify key
measures and initiatives needed to ensure the protection
and welfare of children in the aftermath of the war.

The people of Sierra Leone have two overriding
preoccupations. First, they desperately want to be sure
that this very evil war has finally ended for ever.
Secondly, they want to see the re-establishment of a
credible level of security in the country; above all, this
means disarming the combatants. Many Sierra Leoneans
believe that without disarmament, they will remain highly
vulnerable, as the armed groups might be tempted to
reverse the little progress made so far.

Apart from the immediate imperatives of ending the
war and re-establishing security, the most daunting
challenge facing Sierra Leonean society today is what
they call "the crisis of young people", the desperate
conditions of young children and adolescents.

The children of Sierra Leone have suffered beyond
belief. Many children have been deliberately maimed,
with their limbs brutally cut off. The youngest child I
met, Abu Sesay, who is now 10 months old, had his leg

 

cut off by the rebels when he was barely two months old.
In the month of January 1999 alone, over 4,000 children
were abducted during the incursion by the rebels into
Freetown; it is estimated that 60 per cent of abducted
children are young girls, the vast majority of whom are
reported to have been sexually abused. Thousands of
children have been serving as child soldiers in the three
main fighting groups: the Revolutionary United Front of
Sierra Leone (RUF), the Armed Forces Revolutionary
Council (AFRC) and the Civil Defence Force (CDF).

Over 3 million Sierra Leoneans - two thirds of the
total population - have been displaced by war within and
outside their country, more than 60 per cent of them
children. Some 10,000 children are estimated to have been
separated from their parents as a result of the war. Today
there are more than 3,000 "street children" in Freetown
alone; and many children are suffering from serious
psychological trauma, the particular trauma of children
within the generalized trauma of the entire society.

In view of what I have witnessed on the ground in
Sierra Leone recently and the discussions I held with the
national leaders, United Nations agencies and non-
governmental organizations, and drawing on previous
commitments made to me, I have proposed a special agenda
for action for the children of Sierra Leone. These are
extraordinary circumstances requiring special measures on
behalf of children. Children must not be short-changed
during this critical period of healing and rebuilding. To this
end, the lS-point agenda puts forward several measures and
initiatives. Among the principal elements are the following.

There is an urgent need to establish a national
commission for children to ensure that their protection and
welfare will be a central concern in the aftermath of the
war, and that this will be reflected in national priority-
setting, policy-making and resource allocation.

As to incorporating child protection into the mandate
and operations of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone (UNAMSIL), I have been advocating that, as a
general policy, child protection and welfare should
constitute an explicit priority in the mandate of every
United Nations peace operation, that a child-protection
advocate should always be attached to each operation to
promote the implementation of this component of the
mandate, and that appropriate training should be given to
peacekeeping personnel, both civilian and
military, concerning the protection of the rights of children
and women. I am pleased that these three new elements are
now being incorporated into the mandate and operation of
UNAMSIL. The first child-protection advocate will be
drawn from the ranks of the United Nations Children's
Fund.

On the subject of rehabilitation of amputees, a whole
new community of persons has suddenly emerged in
Sierra Leone - persons without limbs - as a result of
the diabolical practice of brutally cutting off the hands
and legs of victims. One of the most horrifying
experiences I had was my visit to the Murray Town
Camp for amputees in Freetown.

This is a completely new phenomenon, one to which
the community in Sierra Leone has no ready response. A
special programme is needed for this category of victims,
to provide trauma counselling, physical therapy and
technical and material support.

The extensive and systematic sexual abuse visited
upon young girls is one of the most painful and traumatic
legacies of the war in Sierra Leone. The victims' trauma
is compounded by social stigma and reticence to address
this issue. A special programme is needed to address the
special needs of this group of victims, including their
health needs, a campaign of sensitization of local
communities and trauma counselling.

A large number of children were abducted during the
war, most of whom still remain behind rebel lines.
Gaining access to them and obtaining their release is a
most pressing concern. Moreover, the health and food
situation behind rebel lines remains very poor.
Furthermore, based on the experiences of those children
who have been released, we believe that many children
behind rebel lines were reconditioned with hard drugs
following their capture.

The disarmament and demobilization of combatants
is at the heart of the Lome peace process. Within that
critical process, the demobilization and reintegration of
children needs special attention. The disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme about to be
implemented should therefore incorporate specific
components for children. Two days ago the Government
of Sierra Leone launched a programme to disarm and
demobilize rebel fighters. In a symbolic ceremony in
Freetown, rebel soldiers, many of them children, handed
in their weapons to the cheers of hundreds of civilian
onlookers. This is a very welcome development.

More than three million persons, over 60 per cent of
whom are children, have been displaced by the war in

 

Sierra Leone. More than 2.5 million are displaced within
the country in very difficult conditions, and more than half
a million have fled as refugees to neighbouring countries,
mostly to Guinea. More resources will be needed to
increase the capacity of the Government, relief agencies and
non-governmental organizations to organize the return and
resettlement.
With regard to rehabilitation of basic educational and
medical services, basic social facilities and services were
largely destroyed during the years of war. The rehabilitation
of services that benefit children, especially educational and
medical facilities, particularly in rural areas, should
constitute a clear priority in the post-conflict recovery
programme.

As to neighbourhood initiatives, it has become clear
that a number of cross-border issues, including small arms
flows, refugee movements, cross-border recruitment of child
soldiers, family tracing and reunification, impact on the
protection and rights of children within Sierra Leone. This
is why we have proposed a neighbourhood initiative for the
sub-region comprising Sierra Leone, Liberia and Guinea.
An inter-agency mission led by a task force under the
leadership of United Nations Children's Fund and the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) will soon visit the region to assess and
propose concrete initiatives for this purpose.

Translating this agenda into action will require serious
commitment and concerted effort on the part of both
national actors and the international community.

Now the particular fate of children is being played out
in a broader context of war and peace in Sierra Leone, and
in that connection, some of the more enduring and general
impressions I formed were the following.

First, the Sierra Leoneans are very lucid about the
very high moral price they have had to pay to end the war
and the attendant atrocities. Typically, they told me and
over again: "We had to swallow a bitter pill for the sake of
peace; we had to do whatever it took to end this war, or,
that was the price we had to pay to end the atrocities". It is
too early to tell how this will play out in the long run in
terms of the imperatives of both accountability and
reconciliation.

Secondly, the diabolical atrocities committed in Sierra
Leone were not the result of mass violence or
inter-communal upheavals along ethnic or religious lines, as
we have seen in other situations of conflict. Rather, it was
the work of a small segment of the population - well
armed, deeply alienated and bitter - unleashing
organized and indiscriminate terror on the rest of society.

Thirdly, I discovered that Sierra Leoneans at all
levels are remarkably well informed about Kosovo.
Everywhere I went, I was challenged to explain perceived
discrepancies in the attitude and response of the
international community with regard to the needs of
children in the two situations. I recall that in the
Massakoundou refugee camp in Guinea a young man
approached me and gave me figures in dollars and cents
of what the international community was spending on a
child in Kosovo as compared to a child in Sierra Leone.
I thought the lad must be bluffing, so I asked him "Where
did you get these figures?" He looked right at me and
shot right back: "I got these figures from the BBC". I
checked afterwards; he was right.

This experience underscores the critical need - in
order to maintain credibility and solidarity - for the
international community to be seen to be responding with
the same level of concern wherever children are in need
of protection and support. The deliberations of the
Security Council today and their outcome will go a long
way to address this issue.

Fourthly, Guinea is a small and relatively poor
country, but it has assumed a major responsibility for
refugees about which we hear very little. Currently it is
hosting more than half a million people from Sierra
Leone and Liberia who are officially registered with
UNHCR, in addition to a significant number of
unregistered persons who have also fled from
neighbouring countries. The population of officially
registered refugees now constitutes more than 10 per cent
of the population of Guinea.

I was so very struck in these circumstances by the
hospitality of the local population, by the excellent
rapport between the local population and the refugees and
by the cooperation extended to the UNHCR by the
Government of Guinea. In the prefecture of Kissidougou,
for example, I discovered that the local community had
decided on their own initiative to have their own children
attend school only a half-day, in the morning, in order to
allow refugee children to use the same school facilities in
the afternoon.

The sheer magnitude of this burden on Guinea has
begun to place significant stress on the economy, social
services, environment and security. Guinea deserves more

 

recognition and support for its role and solidarity, and the
UNHCR needs more resources to provide for the refugees
in the country.

Fifthly, in spite of the nightmare that the country has
gone through, Sierra Leone is not a basket case. Sierra
Leone is a country which has retained a number of hidden
strong points which have survived the war. Among them
are an elected Government that enjoys widespread
legitimacy within the population - a rare fact in the
aftermath of a war; a strong and active civil society; a
fabric of national cohesion, without significant polarization
along ethnic or religious lines; a land endowed with rich
soil and considerable mineral resources; and a tradition of
higher education. After all, Fourah Bay College was for
several decades a leading regional centre of excellence for
the whole of West Africa. Of course, none of these strong
points can kick in without the prerequisites of peace and
security being in place. The international community can
play an important role in creating that environment.

In conclusion, I should like to make the following
appeals on behalf of the children of Sierra Leone.

I appeal to the political leaders to demonstrate their
commitment to peace by taking bold and concrete measures
to implement the Lorne Peace Agreement. In this regard, I
welcome the return of Mr. Foday Sankoh and Mr. Paul
Koroma to Freetown. This was a matter of great relief for
the people of Sierra Leone and a critical element for
generating confidence in the peace process.

I urge the leadership of the RUF and the AFRC to
level with the children of Sierra Leone and to acknowledge
fully their role in the horrific atrocities committed during
the war, most of them directed against children and women.

Finally, I address a particular appeal to the
international community not to let the children of Sierra
Leone down by again adopting a wait-and-see attitude. The
Lome Peace Agreement is a fragile instrument of peace that
requires a lot of local and international support for its
implementation and consolidation.

It is now afternoon in Sierra Leone. I can see the
young people congregating around small transistor radios.
They are tuned in, eagerly awaiting the outcome of the
Council's deliberations. Thank you for taking steps that will
provide hope for the children and all the people of Sierra
Leone. Giving renewed hope to the children of Sierra
Leone is surely one of the best ways to ensure national
recovery for a country that has suffered so much for so
long.

