Mr. Kama] (Pakistan): It is a pleasure to address the
Council under your distinguished presidency, Sir.

The problem of refugees is one of the greatest
human tragedies that confronts the international
community in the contemporary development of
international politics. Despite the marginal decline in the
number of refugees during recent years, the overall
population of concern to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) still stands
at over 26 million people. Since refugee crises transcend
national boundaries, the United Nations needs to play a
more assertive role in preventing and resolving conflicts
that cause refugee movements. It should use its existing
mechanisms of preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping,
peacemaking and peace-building to avert humanitarian
disasters in a timely and efficient manner.

The present-day scenario with regard to protection
for humanitarian assistance to refugees and others in
conflict situations is not very encouraging. The drift and
selective avoidance that have characterized the
international community's post-cold-war approach to
victims of abuse and conflict have been devoid of a
steady commitment to the humanitarian principle.
Although the cold war is gone, its legacy of arms and
firepower still plagues the world.

Victims of conflict situations include refugees and
internally displaced persons, as well as people trapped
inside conflict zones.

The protection of civilians in armed conflicts is
clearly provided for by humanitarian law. The 1949
Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian

 

Persons in Time of War, along with the two additional
Protocols of 1977, provides international guidelines for the
provision of assistance to victims of armed conflicts. These
guidelines emphasize that help must be neutral, impartial
and humanitarian. Neutrality implies a refusal to take sides.
Impartiality implies that aid is given only on the basis of
need. Similarly, the humanitarian principle upholds the
protection of life and the relief of human suffering as the
sole purpose of interventions by the international
community.

There should be no discrimination or differentiation in
humanitarian assistance on the basis of religious affiliation,
gender or political persuasion. We remain seriously
concerned over current trends to link humanitarian
assistance to such extraneous issues as the social norms,
customs or religious views of the people concerned in or
affected by a conflict. Such a linkage violates humanitarian
principles and could seriously erode the credibility of
humanitarian agencies in the field.

Pakistan fully shares UN HCR's concern that adherence
to refugee protection in theory is not sufficiently matched
by observance in practice. The safe and adequate protection
of refugees, as well as the delivery of humanitarian
assistance to them, should continue to remain the core
concern of the international community.

The challenge before the international community is
therefore to come up with innovative ways and means to
resolve existing, long-standing refugee situations and to
prevent the proliferation of new crises of human
displacement. The complexity of refugee problems calls for
a more concerted response by the international community
to ensure lasting solutions.

The pros and cons of adopting such an approach have
been clearly demonstrated in Cambodia and Afghanistan. In
the success story of Cambodia, the provision of
humanitarian assistance was complemented by a
simultaneous effort by the international community to
resolve the root causes of the conflict. Conversely, in the
case of Afghanistan, the premature scaling down of
humanitarian assistance without simultaneously resolving
the root causes has currently resulted in a potentially
serious and explosive situation.

The pursuit of durable solutions should therefore be
reinforced through prevention, conflict resolution and post-
conflict peace-building. The quest for durable solutions can
succeed only if we go upstream, with a well-defined
political will, towards resolving the root causes of conflicts
and violence. Pakistan firmly believes that early
intervention is of Vital importance in resolving explosive
situations before they erupt and escalate into humanitarian
disasters. A system of early warning, meticulous planning
and close coordination between the Security Council, the
General Assembly, the Department of Humanitarian
Affairs, UNHCR and human rights machinery, within
their respective mandates, can, in addition to avoiding
duplication of efforts, effectively address situations which
result in massive refugee outflows.

Pakistan fully subscribes to the recently adopted
conclusion of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations, which emphasized the need to differentiate
between peacekeeping operations and humanitarian
assistance. We also strongly support the conclusion that
peacekeeping operations can play a role, subject to the
mandates established by the Security Council, in
contributing to the creation of a secure environment for
the effective delivery of humanitarian relief assistance.

The existing refugee situation in the Great Lakes
region of Africa deserves the urgent attention of the
international community if a real tragedy is to be
prevented. In instances where humanitarian agencies and
programmes can no longer guarantee protection for
humanitarian assistance to civilians in internal armed
conflicts, the international community must find ways of
ensuring the protection of life and the relief of human
suffering. Such interventions would reap multiple benefits,
such as the possible prevention of massive refugee flows
and, consequently, a lessening of the heavy financial
demands placed upon the international community as a
result of the refugee problem.

For its part, Pakistan fully subscribes to the View
that, despite the situation in Afghanistan, voluntary return
continues to remain the preferred durable solution for the
1.5 million Afghans who have currently sought refuge in
Pakistan. Pakistan has continued to pursue the most
generous and open-door policy towards Afghan refugees.
We have not only continued to provide them with shelter
and humanitarian assistance from our own meagre
resources, but have also allowed them a great degree of
free movement inside Pakistan. When international
assistance was drastically reduced, we did not implement
the easy solution of forcible repatriation, but continued, at
an enormous administrative, economic and social cost, to
assist the Afghans ourselves. Needless to say, this burden
has been substantial for a developing country such as
Pakistan.

 

In conclusion, protection for humanitarian assistance
to refugees and others in conflict situations must be
accompanied by a thoroughly planned, concerted and well-
coordinated effort, by all the United Nations agencies, to
resolve the root causes of conflicts. This effort must,
however, strictly abide by the fundamental principle of
neutrality through the mobilization and involvement of all
actors in civil society.

