Mr. Fall (Senegal) (spoke in French): For special,
emotional reasons with which you are familiar, the
delegation of Senegal is delighted to see you, Sir, the
Permanent Representative of Guinea, a friendly
fraternal country and neighbour of Senegal, following
in the footsteps of our colleague from Germany and
presiding over the destiny of the Security Council
during this crucial month of March 2003 - a time that
will be etched deeply in the collective conscience of
the peoples of the United Nations.

In taking part in this public debate, which the
Security Council is holding to discuss once more the
ongoing question of the situation between Iraq and
Kuwait, my country would like, in keeping with our
statement in the Council on 16 October 2002, to make
four urgent, timely points, which are among the
concerns of President Abdoulaye Wade and which our
head of State outlined during the recent summit
meetings of the Non-Aligned Movement in Kuala
Lumpur and of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference in Doha.

First, Iraq must be urged to abide by Council
resolutions. In this respect, we refer to the imperative
obligation for the leaders of Iraq scrupulously to
implement, without engaging in any delaying tactics or
procrastination, all of the resolutions adopted by the
Security Council since 1991.

What have the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) told
us? They have told us that, after many twists and turns
and much procrastination since the adoption of
resolution 1441 (2002), Baghdad had finally started to
increase its active - even proactive - initiatives,
which do not constitute the immediate cooperation
demanded by the Council. They do, however, conclude
that there is no proof or plausible evidence of the
resumption by Iraq of a programme of weapons of
mass destruction. Some have objected to that, stating
that "absence of proof is not proof of absence of all
weapons of mass destruction in Iraq".
There is therefore a widespread View that the
limited, hard-won progress cannot yet erase the general
negative impression of a lack of cooperation attributed
to Baghdad in certain areas. This prompts Senegal
solemnly to appeal to Iraq to demonstrate further its
full and unconditional cooperation.

My delegation would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the UNMOVIC and IAEA inspectors
for all their efforts and for the quality of the work that
they have accomplished under very difficult and
unpleasant conditions.

Secondly, the inspectors should be authorized to
continue with their mandate. In this respect, Senegal
reiterates its appreciation to UNMOVIC and the IAEA
for their willingness to continue scrupulously to
implement a mandate anchored in the relevant Security
Council resolutions and to carry out that task the
finalization of which, in terms of weeks or months,
should nonetheless - as one permanent Council
member suggested - be secondary to the
establishment of a hierarchy of disarmament tasks and
the presentation as soon as possible of the programme
of work provided for by resolution 1284 (1999).

If the drastic sanctions imposed on Baghdad are
slow in being lifted, and if the Iraqi people continue,
unfortunately, to pay a heavy price for them, the main
responsibility lies primarily with the Iraqi leaders and
their refusal, up until January 2003, to comply with
United Nations decisions. In that spirit, Senegal
encourages Iraq to resolutely take this umpteenth
opportunity offered to it to provide tangible evidence
and information that could show proof that it no longer
possesses weapons of mass destruction, or, if it does,
that it would be prepared publicly to list the remainder
of such weapons for destruction.

In that context, my country, Senegal, would like
to urge Baghdad, in this final phase, to fully honour its
obligations with regard to the release of Kuwaiti
prisoners of war and the return of property and
archives of Kuwait and to resolving the question of
third-State nationals.

Thirdly, we need to identify a credible alternative.
We need only to refer to what was stated by the head of
UNMOVIC to agree that disarmament clearly cannot
not be instantaneous, nor can inspections go on forever.

It would also be important, as our friend the
Ambassador of Cameroon so wisely reminded us, to
"together seek, in good faith, a credible alternative to
war and to endless inspections". Together, with
renewed resolve, we need to continue to explore the
slightest opportunities for peace and to activate
unexplored avenues for a solution based not on the law
of force, but rather on the force of international law,
pursuant to the Charter of the United Nations and the
relevant resolutions of the Security Council, referred to
by the declarations on Iraq which were the outcome of
the African Union Summit, the France-Africa Summit,
the Movement of the Non-Aligned Summit and the
Organization of the Islamic Conference Summit.

Fourth, we need to stress multilateralism within
the United Nations. A multilateral, concerted and
unified approach is the best way to resolve the question
of threats to the future of humanity. Senegal believes
that any enforcement action against Iraq absolutely
must be taken within the framework of the United
Nations, which, through the Security Council, is the
only body that can confer international legitimacy on
it.

This body must also assume the full measure of
its historic responsibilities. The Council would risk
losing its credibility if it did not fulfil its statutory
obligations on the Iraq issue. This is true for other
matters just as urgent, such as the Palestinian issue and
disarmament of the Middle East region. We must take
up this challenge together at a time when there are grim
prospects of an imminent war against Iraq, with the
terrible spectre of collateral damage in the Middle East
and throughout the world, with terrifying threats of
terrorist reprisals by the multinationals of crime.

Because of recent terrorist events, from which the
world is still suffering, everything should be done to
avert and stem the clash of civilizations brandished by
Huntington and others of his ilk, who are fanatics of all
kinds and who already see as part of their apocalyptic
madness the clash of cultures, traditions and religions.
We need to go beyond identity crises, xenophobia,
hatred, violence and chaos.

I cannot conclude without proclaiming my ardent
conviction that we must rise together against this
tyrannical chaos and forge this collective capacity to
hope, which will allow us to turn our sights towards
future heights.

In this quest for a peaceful solution to the dispute
between Iraq and the United Nations, Senegal reiterates
its support for Secretary-General Kofi Annan in his
personal efforts for a settlement based on strict
compliance with the principles inscribed in the
Preamble to the San Francisco Charter and on all
relevant Security Council resolutions.
Thus, we recall what the writer John Burger said:
"Without a vision for the future, most of our present
suffering will, day after day, condemn humankind to
live in darkness".

Let us allow the dedicated inspectors of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA to tear away the shadows of
a bygone era and, with the help, voluntary or forced, of
Baghdad, to strengthen their work and pursue their
saving mission on the basis of a reasonable and
transparent timetable that is precise and rigorous, and
to hasten, without an ultimatum that would
automatically lead to war, the complete disarmament of
Iraq, in the best interests of its people and the peoples
of the region and peace in the world.

