Mr. Mardini: I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this important and timely discussion. When the Nobel Peace Prize was first awarded in 1901 it was given to two joint winners - Frederic Passy, who advocated against war; and Henry Dunant, who campaigned for better protections in war. The Charter of the United Nations and international humanitarian law are much like those two prizewinners. The United Nations Charter includes rules on going to war in the first place - jus ad bellum - while international humanitarian law applies in war - jus in bello. Those two distinct bodies of law complement each other to prevent wars on the one hand, and to better protect people in the case of war on the other. Today, in these times of heightened tensions and uncertainty, I will focus on two key points. First and most critically, under international humanitarian law, civilians must be _ protected against attacks. Parties have a responsibility to take precautions in their attacks and to consider the effects of their attacks so as to spare the civilian population and civilian objects. Indeed, certain objects, such as medical units and transports, cultural property and objects indispensable to the survival of the civilian population have specific protections. Under international humanitarian law, an attack must be cancelled if it becomes apparent that it is prohibited. Parties must refrain from carrying out an attack when the expected harm to civilians and civilian objects outweighs the military advantage sought. It thereby becomes a disproportionate, unlawful attack under international humanitarian law. Where circumstances permit, advance warning must be given for attacks that may affect the civilian population. If there is a choice between military objectives offering a similar military advantage, the option posing the least risk to civilians and civilian objects must be selected. Secondly, one of the purposes of the United Nations, as set out in Article 1(3) of the United Nations Charter, is to solve international problems of a humanitarian character. To that end, the Security Council addresses humanitarian concerns in armed conflict. It has an important role to play in both maintaining international peace and security and in addressing humanitarian concerns. As one of the oldest and largest humanitarian organizations, the International Committee of the Red Cross knows all too well the suffering that takes place when armed conflict occurs. In today's world of heightened tensions and protracted conflicts, the Security Council and the international community, more broadly, must redouble their efforts to prevent wars from happening in the first place. Equally important, when wars do happen, they must do their utmost so that parties and those that support them respect and ensure respect for international humanitarian law because, in practice, that is what reduces human suffering and preserves human dignity.
