Mrs. Simpson Miller (Jamaica): It is an honour to
address the Security Council on the occasion of this
landmark open debate. I warmly congratulate New
Zealand for its presidency of the Council for the month
of July and commend you, Mr. President, for your
visionary move to focus the attention of the Council on
the peace and security challenges facing small island
developing States (SIDS).

Last September, at the Third International
Conference on Small Island Developing States, held in
Samoa, the international community addressed many
of the development challenges being experienced by
this group of countries. Today, New Zealand's initiative
to elevate these discussions to the Security Council
takes full account of the natural linkages between the
peace and security challenges faced by SIDS and the
maintenance of international peace and security.

Jamaica has long advocated for a holistic approach
to addressing matters of peace and security. In doing
so, we recognize fully the intrinsic link between peace,
security and development. The classic and relatively
narrow concept of peace and security cannot be neatly
applied to the multifaceted security threats that confront
SIDS. Our debate here today is therefore timely, as we
finalize the design of a sustainable development agenda
for our people and planet for the next 15 years.

In thanking you for your kind invitation to
participate, Sir, I would like to present a Caribbean
SIDS perspective on some of the peace and security
challenges that confront us. I will also share some
thoughts on the urgent need for tangible development
financing support for SIDS. This is critical for
building resilience in the face of climate change and
for overcoming the constraints imposed by small size,
resource scarcity, geography and inappropriate global
classification based mainly on per capita income.

Small island developing States such as Jamaica are
notable for our small size and porous borders and for
being prone to natural hazards and external shocks. We
are mostly import-dependent and constrained by high
debt burdens. We are also overly dependent on external
markets, technology transfer, international capital
flows and foreign expertise. These factors reduce
our ability to mount effective national responses to
domestic, regional and global challenges to peace and
security.

In Jamaica and the wider Caribbean Community
(CARICOM) region, transnational organized crime
represents the gravest threats to our peace and security.
Extensive open coastlines facilitate various forms
of illicit trafficking in drugs, arms, ammunition
and people, particularly women and children. In our
societies, the well-known guns-for-drug trade remains
a principal strategy of the international criminal
network. Money-laundering activities also enable
transnational criminal activity to thrive in our region.
It is further cause for alarm that in 2013, 70 per cent
of all homicides committed in the Caribbean subregion
featured the use of a firearm. It is well known that we
do not manufacture weapons or drive the demand for
drugs, yet they find their way to our shores.

It must be emphasized that these activities
account for the high levels of gun-related crime that
our countries are experiencing. They combine to
undermine law and order and impede economic growth
and social development. Our location makes us a prime
transit route for international narcotraffickers. If that
were not the case, the overall level of crime in the
Caribbean would be similar to what obtains in low-
crime countries. This fact is supported by the United
Nations Development Programme's Caribbean Human
Development Report.

The question arises as to what our response has
been in the face of these challenges. I can assure the
Council that we take these threats to our security very
seriously. We have given primary focus to safety and
security within our national development plan. We
have targeted our efforts at degrading the capabilities
of organized criminal gangs and have directed
resources at addressing the shameful crime of human
trafficking, including the appointment of a rapporteur
on trafficking in persons. We have also invested heavily
in technology, equipment and training for our security
forces within the constraints of our limited resources.
However, I must emphasize that our domestic policy
responses to those threats to our peace and security,
though significant and coordinated across the
Government, are insufficient. We therefore continue to
expand our international cooperation in improving our
national security infrastructure in order to deal with
transnational organized crime. We have made important
gains in enhancing our security environment, with
notable reductions in some categories of crime.

In spite of those efforts, the illegal flow of small
arms and ammunition into our local communities
continues to pose a significant challenge to law and
order. At the regional level, we have worked with
other CARICOM. Governments to establish a regional
security framework. At that framework's centre is
CARICOM's implementation agency for crime and
security impacts. At the United Nations, Jamaica has
been a consistent voice in the call for multilateral action
to address the issue of the illicit trade in guns under the
Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate
the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in
All Its Aspects. We welcome the Council's continued
consideration of the issue of small arms, including its
recent open debate (see S/PV.7447) and adoption of
resolution 2220 (2015) on the matter. In partnership
with our CARICOM. sister States, Jamaica played an
instrumental role in securing the landmark Arms Trade
Treaty (ATT). We welcome the convening of the first
Conference of States Parties to the ATT, to be held next
month in Mexico City, and look forward to the Treaty's
full and effective implementation.

We also look forward to participating in next year's
special session of the General Assembly on the global
drug problem. Small countries like ours must continue
to play a role in formulating strategies aimed at more
effectively countering the global trade in illicit drugs.
The success of many SIDS in stemming the drug
trade has been nothing short of remarkable given the
constraints on our resources. While we have achieved
some promising results in tackling those threats, more
must be done. However, a limited financial base, weak
technical capacity and inadequate concrete global
support continue to hamper our efforts. Stronger global
partnerships and more efficient forms of cooperation
are needed to help SIDS in their fight against the
scourge of transnational organized crime.

I would like to turn briefly to two areas in which
we have sought to contribute to the maintenance of
international peace and security. They are counter-
terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction. Without question, Jamaica and
other CARICOM. member States remain committed to
meeting our international obligations, particularly in
relation to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540
(2004). In 2009, CARICOM. instituted a region-wide
initiative aimed at fully implementing resolution 1540
(2004). Devised and constituted within the Caribbean
community, the initiative has enabled CARICOM
member States to effectively take on our responsibilities
under the resolution. We are grateful for the support of
our international partners, including the United States,
Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, Norway and
Finland. That support has helped to strengthen our
national capacities to address the threats posed by the
spread of weapons of mass destruction.

The reality is that where there is both sensitivity
to the special requirements of our region and support
enabling us to act effectively, we are better able to
contribute to global action in the maintenance of
international peace and security. We are particularly
proud of our contribution in the area of peacekeeping.
For more than two decades, Jamaica has been making
modest but impactful contributions to United Nations
peacekeeping activities through its provision of police
officers to missions in Namibia, Liberia, Sierra Leone,
Timor-Leste and Bosnia. Currently, just under 20
officers from our police force are serving in the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, in
the Sudan.

There are also emerging economic and social
issues that have direct and indirect effects on the peace
and security agenda. Our limited natural and human
resource bases, together with persistent and significant
external trade imbalances, have also constrained
economic growth in the region. That is compounded by
unsustainable public debt levels that in the Caribbean
average 70.5 per cent and are made worse by large
current-account and fiscal deficits. In addition, our
middle-income designation limits our ability to access
critical development financing. That jeopardizes our
ability to finance our sustainable development objectives
from domestic public resources. I would like to draw
the Council's attention to the proposal by the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean for a
debt-relief strategy for countries like Jamaica and other
middle-income SIDS. Comprehensive debt relief for
Caribbean States that would gradually write off 100 per
cent of our multilateral debt stock is timely. In our
View, the proposal is worthy of serious consideration
and support from the international community.

For small island developing States, climate change
is one of the greatest challenges to our development
aspirations, and it threatens our very survival. Most of
us have been feeling the present wave of heat in the
Caribbean and certainly elsewhere. For those reasons,
robust policy action on climate change is vital to our
national, regional and global welfare. The ecosystems
of some Caribbean SIDS are already experiencing
negative effects of climate change and are approaching
the limits of their adaptive capacities. The development
of sensible climate-change policy regimes is therefore
an urgent priority. It is for that reason, and others, that
Jamaica strongly supports the adoption of a legally
binding text at the conference of the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held
in Paris later this year. We are in favour of a protocol
that should be applicable to all, with measurable
mitigation efforts and equal treatment for mitigation
and adaptation measures.

For us, the link between climate change and
sustainable energy is clear. That is why we are actively
pursuing renewable energy investments in solar and
wind power, as well as promoting energy conservation.
Our strategy is designed to make us independent of
our over-reliance on unsustainable fossil-fuel energy
sources. That should reduce our trade imbalance,
improve our competitiveness and increase economic
growth. We must move forward in order to address both
our shared and individual security challenges. As we
do so, I ask that full account be taken of the fact that a
one-size-fits-all approach cannot provide workable and
sustainable solutions.

Based on the experiences of Jamaica and the
Caribbean region, we see the benefits of a regional
approach complemented by support from the global
community to assist in mitigating risks to our peace and
security situation. Given the great extent to which peace,
security and development concerns are interconnected,
it is essential that the entire United Nations system
work actively to overcome the special challenges facing
small developing States. We are prepared to work with
our partners to devise practical, multifaceted solutions
to those complex security challenges. That, we believe,
offers the best chance for success in achieving lasting
peace and security for our peoples. I am convinced
that, ultimately, a more secure, just and prosperous
world is the future that we all want for ourselves and
for succeeding generations.

