Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian Federation is grateful to the
Panel of Experts chaired by Ambassador Mahmoud
Kassem for the substantive addendum (S/2001/ 1072) to
its report on the illegal exploitation of natural
resources and other forms of wealth of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The information in the
addendum gives us a better understanding of what is
taking place in that country and sheds greater light on
the interests of the parties involved in the conflict. We
are disturbed by the information that large-scale
plundering of natural resources of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo continues, in violation of the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country.

Accordingly, and in the light of the request of the
authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
that the Panel should continue its work to formulate
effective measures to put an end to the illegal
exploitation of natural resources of the country, the
Russian Federation is willing to support renewing the
mandate of the Panel of Experts for a period of six
months. We call on all States named in the report to
cooperate with the Panel in its work, and scrupulously
to clarify the situation regarding the natural resources

S/l'VA437

 

and other forms of wealth of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Such illegal exploitation must come to
an end, no matter who is engaging in it, and the sooner
the better.

We agree with the main conclusion of the report,
that the situation regarding the natural resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo came about solely
because of the collapse of the country's State
structures. We endorse the view of the Panel that the
best way to solve the problem is to help the Congolese
authorities gain effective State control throughout the
territory, so that they can protect their natural
resources. We also view as reasonable and sensible the
recommendation that this process should be linked to
the convening of an international conference on peace
and development in the Great Lakes region.

We believe that the settlement of the conflict in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo is a prerequisite
for success in that regard. Here, we agree that the
efforts of the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be focused
on ensuring the withdrawal of foreign forces from the
territory of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
on the voluntary disarmament, demobilization,
reintegration and repatriation or resettlement of
members of armed groups. We think it is logical that,
following the outcome of the inter-Congolese dialogue,
the rebuilding of State structures in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will at some point require
analysis and review of concessions issued by previous
Governments for the exploitation of the country's
natural resources. We feel that, if necessary, there
could be discussion of involving expert assistance from
the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank in
trying to address that task. At the same time, we
consider that this process lies fully within the
competence of the national authorities of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In approaching the problem of the illegal
exploitation of natural resources and other forms of
wealth of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Russia is guided by the fact that in the final analysis, it
is the armed conflict that underlies that problem as
well as the problems of refugees and internally
displaced persons, child soldiers, violations of human
rights, the humanitarian crisis and many, many other
problems. Only recently has there been some
movement towards a settlement of the conflict. We
consider that progress towards a political settlement in

the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be a
priority for the Security Council. In our view, by
focusing on that, the Council would be shouldering its
Charter responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

