Mr. Argfiello (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like at the outset to indicate that my delegation
associates itself with the statement of the Permanent
Representative of Uruguay, who spoke on behalf of the
Group of Friends of Haiti. I also wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April and, in
particular, to thank the delegation of Mexico for
convening this open debate on the situation in Haiti. In
addition, I wish to highlight the importance of the
Visits by the Security Council mission and by the
Secretary-General to Haiti as a demonstration of the
international community's commitment with respect to
the situation in the country.
When, in 2004, the Security Council established
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH), the country was sinking into violence
to which the State had no institutional capacity to
respond. For this reason, the Council established an
integrated mission with a strong mandate, focused on
the issue of security. The main objective of
MINUSTAH was to establish a secure, stable
environment, where the political and constitutional
process in the country could develop. In this sense, we
can say that in the current phase of its development,
the Mission has certainly made significant progress.

Thus, the coming to power of a constitutionally
elected Haitian Government was a first major step in
the political life of the country. Similarly, the
resolution of the political crisis triggered by the fall of
the Prime Minister in April 2008, through the
appointment of a new Prime Minister in September of
the same year, and the call for parliamentary elections,
which will take place in this month of April 2009, are
milestones in the development of the Haitian political
process that we should see in a positive light.

That is the meaning of what the Secretary-
General is saying in his latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/129) when he stresses the progress on the
political dialogue, reflected in the will of Haitian
political leaders to work together to respond to the
country's situation, and in particular to the crisis
created by the devastating hurricanes and tropical
storms of 2008.

As a country participating in MINUSTAH, the
first peace mission with a majority of Latin American
contingents, in terms of both troops and the military
command, Argentina is pleased that the Mission has
become a decisive factor in re-establishing stability
and security in the country and in supporting the
Haitian people in its commitment to democracy. The
recent Security Council mission to Haiti noted the
progress made in the security sphere and stressed the
support that MINUSTAH gives the Haitian National
Police to build its capacity. It also indicated that the
improvements achieved can be seen in the decrease in
the crime rate and in the increasing confidence of the
Haitian people in the police.

The progress made in the area of security is
encouraging. However, we note with concern that
Haiti's opportunities for economic and social
development have been significantly compromised,
especially because of the grave damage inflicted by
natural disasters. The situation in Haiti continues to be
fragile owing to persistent poverty and unemployment
and the limited capacity of Haitian institutions to
provide basic services to the population. The close
relationship between security and development
highlights the fact that the action of the international
community cannot and must not be confined to the
presence of MINUSTAH, as any lack of visible
improvement in the living conditions of the Haitian
people could endanger the country's stability.

For this reason, the upcoming donor conference
in Washington is an opportunity to move forward on
Haiti's economic and social development and in its
institution-building, confronting the many challenges
that face us. To this end, the coordination of
international cooperation with Haiti must be improved
and institutional capacity in Haiti must be
strengthened, thus ensuring the dawning of a new age.
We must work for Haiti to take charge, in the medium-
term, of the implementation and coordination of the
assistance it receives.

The United Nations has an essential role to play,
since without a real bolstering of the Haitian State, a
political consultation process that ensures governance
and a basic level of human development, the factors
that made it necessary for the Organization to intervene
will never be resolved. The success of the United
Nations will be demonstrated when its presence is no
longer necessary.

We are facing a unique historic opportunity to
align the contributions of the international community
with the priorities established by the Government of
Haiti for its own economic and social development. In
this context, I wish to stress the commitment of the
Latin American countries to Haiti, especially through
technical cooperation projects entailing a substantial
human resources presence and aimed at strengthening
the Haitian State. The cooperation that Argentina
provides to Haiti in the fields of food security and
strengthening the structures of the Ministry of Planning
and Cooperation and the Ministry of Economy and
Finance are carried out in this context.

Before concluding, I would like to return to the
main conclusions of the most recent report of the
Secretary-General on Haiti, where he notes that,
notwithstanding difficulties, we have an opportunity to
advance towards the consolidation of stability in Haiti.
To this end, the continued commitment of international
community to support Haiti's security, State
institutions and economic and social development must
be ensured.

