Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today's meeting, which builds
upon yesterday's discussions on drug trafficking,
governance, organized crime and the rule of law in
West Africa (see S/PV.8433). I would also like to thank
all of the briefers who spoke today: Mr. Ibrahim Thiaw,
Mr. Hafez Ghanem and Mr. Remy Rioux, as well as
our dear colleague Ambassador Ion Jinga, Permanent
Representative of Romania.

The date of 30 June 2017 was a historic day for
the country of the current presidency of the Security
Council because it witnessed the closure of the United
Nations peacekeeping mission in Cote d'Ivoire. That
allowed the country to start a new chapter in its history.
Since then, Cote d'Ivoire has made considerable
progress towards sustainable peace, stability and
economic prosperity.

The closure of any peacekeeping mission does
not mean the end of the conflict. Instead, it means
the beginning of action towards achieving long-term
sustainable development, which is an important element
in preventing a relapse into conflict. We therefore stress
the importance of implementing the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, under the supervision
of Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed. The
Strategy is a comprehensive approach in support of
regional development and aims to achieve peace and
prosperity as well as the 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals. The Strategy also supports capacity-building. In
that regard, we urge Mr. Thiaw and Mr. Mohamed Ibn
Chambas, the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General for West Africa and the Sahel, to make every
effort to ensure that the goals of the Strategy are met. We
look forward to reviewing the outcome of their efforts
in the upcoming reports of the Secretary-General.

The State of Kuwait believes in the importance
of development as a way to prevent conflict, and we
work bilaterally with several African countries to
fund their development projects. We also enjoy close
relations with West African countries, especially in the
context of developing their infrastructure. Through the
Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development, Kuwait
has funded several African projects in the amount of
approximately $439 million since 2015. The projects
were conducted in various areas, including improving
health-care facilities, roads and airports as well as
developing water supply systems.

We welcome the steps taken by regional
organizations in Africa. We appreciate their efforts to
develop strategies that target sustainable development.
They include Agenda 2063 of the African Union, as
well as the priority investment plan of the Group of Five
for the Sahel. Regional cooperation is a fundamental
element in attracting the support of the international
community. I take this opportunity to welcome the
efforts of the Peacebuilding Commission, whose
annual session, held on 12 November, focused on
peacebuilding in the Sahel. There is a need to enhance
coordination among the various stakeholders that offer
development support in the region in order to guarantee
success in all the efforts being made.

In conclusion, I would like to commend the efforts
being made by all of the countries in the region, as well
as by United Nations agencies, especially since they
work in an unstable environment that has witnessed a
tangible increase in the level ofinstability and insecurity.
There is an urgent need to combat emerging terrorist
threats in West Africa while at the same time focusing
on intensifying efforts to establish peacebuilding. A
holistic approach is the best way to address the various
challenges posing a threat to the region.

