Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): I join
others in thanking the three inspiring and courageous
young women who briefed us today: Ms. Jayathma
Wickramanayake, the Secretary-General's Envoy
on Youth; and the youth representatives, Ms. Sophia
Pierre-Antoine and Ms. Kessy Ekomo-Soignet. I was
very inspired by what they shared with us. I believe
that, if the future depends on them, everything will
be alright. We congratulate Mr. Graeme Simpson,
the lead author of the independent progress study (see S/2018/86), and the United Nations entities involved in
it for their valuable work.

Today we recommit ourselves to resolution 2250
(2015), on youth, peace and security. In that connection,
allow me to focus on three issues for this debate: first, the
importance of youth participation; secondly, involving
youth in the work of the United Nations; and, thirdly,
translating the resolution into contextualized actions.

First, concerning the importance of youth
participation, the progress study makes clear how young
people often feel unrepresented or excluded by the very
institutions that are supposed to serve them. Young
people are indeed "the missing peace". We believe
young women and men to be enormously important
contributors to conflict prevention and resolution and
to sustaining peace. They have a legitimate desire to
participate in decision-making on their own future.
Youth have the potential to act as a transformative force
in peacefully bringing about change. This is not a threat
but provides an opportunity to strengthen a diverse
and inclusive society. History has demonstrated that
in places such as Prague, Indonesia or, more recently,
Tunisia and Egypt. It is no coincidence that human
rights defenders are often young people, underscoring
the need for their protection, particularly in times when
the space for civil society is increasingly under pressure.

That brings me to my second point, on involving
youth in the work of the United Nations. It is imperative
that we integrate the thoughts and views of young
people more structurally in the practice of the Council,
as part of the wider United Nations. Young people are
a major force when it comes to preventing violence
and sustaining peace. As a whole-of-United Nations
approach is needed, the Security Council should not
be excluded. Therefore, we welcome the contributions
of today's young briefers and encourage the Security
Council to be open to hearing youth speak on the regular
items on its agenda as well. We appreciate the attention
that youth have received from the Peacebuilding
Commission and would welcome a structural inclusion
in its future work.

We also welcome the active participation of youth
in this week's high-level event on sustaining peace.
As the progress study recommends, the role of youth
should be more strongly referenced in the mandates
and reporting of peacekeeping and political missions.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia is
a recent example of the inclusion of relevant language
on the meaningful inclusion of youth, which deserves
more systematic following. I am proud to say that
my statement today integrates the valuable input of
our youth representatives to the United Nations. We
strongly encourage those members that have not done
so yet to appoint youth representatives as well.

My final point concerns translating the resolution
into contextualized actions. For 1.8 billion young people
across the world, there is no one size fits all. Resolution
2250 (2015) therefore needs to be translated into the
different contexts and needs of young people, grounded
in a thorough analysis of root causes. These joined-up
analyses should be part of our comprehensive response
in implementing the agenda for sustaining peace and
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Our
implementation efforts should be made more explicit in
order to make resolution 2250 (2015) operational. The
European Union is currently devising its own agenda in
support of youth, peace and security, and we encourage
other regions to follow suit.

As the Kingdom of the Netherlands, we are
contributing as well, for example by assisting
programmes in support of youth participation in
northern Mali, supporting training on democracy and
human rights in different countries or, closer to home,
establishing community-level programmes in cities
such as The Hague to provide opportunities for youth
and prevent radicalization.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands believes that the
issue of youth, peace and security merits structural
debate and the attention of the Council. We therefore join
Peru and Sweden in supporting the recommendation to
request an annual report by the Secretary-General.

