Mr. Dauth (Australia): You will know, Sir, what
a personal pleasure it is always for me to address the
Council during your presidency.

I want to begin like others, however, by
associating Australia with the expressions of
condolences extended to our friends in the Russian
Federation following the appalling attack in Grozny
over the weekend. It is an appalling sign of the times
we live in.

I want to begin also, as others have done, and to
make a particular point of offering our congratulations
and paying our tribute to the work that our former
colleague and friend, Kamalesh Sharma, and his
colleagues have done in East Timor in the past two
years. It has been, as he himself said, good times and
bad times, but at all times he has maintained the
highest possible standards of professionalism, and we
in Australia have very much appreciated that.

We welcome the Security Council's readiness to
adopt a draft resolution extending the mandate of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) for another year through to May 2005. In
doing so, Australia congratulates the Secretary-
General, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Kamalesh and his team for their excellent work in
developing the follow-on UNMISET mission model.

No one would dispute the fact that Timor-Leste
has made remarkable progress in its first few years as
an independent nation. That success is, of course,
primarily due to the commitment and efforts of the
people of Timor-Leste. Nevertheless, UNMISET has
played an important supporting role. This contribution
is testament not only to UNMISET personnel, but also
to the continued attention of the Council, the efforts of
the Secretariat and the contributions of a number of
United Nations Member States.

In that context, the follow-on mission is a highly
appropriate response to Timor-Leste's ongoing needs.
The mission will help Timor-Leste consolidate the
many gains that have been made and will address those
gaps in capacity that are still evident. In particular, the
Mission will continue to provide solid support to
Timor-Leste's fledgling public administration, judicial
and security institutions - institutions critical to
Timor-Leste's future.

Australia is particularly pleased with the shape of
the security sector support, with both a small
peacekeeping force and a 125-member international
response unit to provide backup support to Timor-
Leste's security forces in emergency situations. This
arrangement will provide a strong and stable security
platform for Timor-Leste in the year ahead.

We are pleased to reiterate to the Council and to
Timor-Leste that Australia will continue to provide
strong support to UNMISET, including through the
contribution of personnel to the peacekeeping, military
liaison officer and police adviser contingents.

Australia will also continue to be a major
provider of bilateral development assistance to Timor-
Leste. Currently, Australia is fulfilling the final year of
its four-year, $150-million development pledge.
Further generous assistance for coming years will
shortly be announced. Consistent with our commitment
to assisting Timor-Leste to develop strong and
effective institutions, Australia, with assistance from
the United Kingdom, will be providing a four-and-a-
half year, $40-million programme of assistance to
develop the capacity of Timor-Leste's police force and
justice sector. Australia's significant defence
cooperation programme will also continue.

A number of delegations, and especially Minister
Ana Pessoa Pinto - who we, like others, very much
welcome to New York today - have referred to the
importance of maritime delimitation negotiations
between East Timor and both Australia and Indonesia.
I need hardly say that we, too, recognize the
importance of those talks. In this context, I want to
remind the Council that we have already negotiated
valid and generous interim arrangements, and I was
pleased this morning, I have to say, to hear Minister
Ana Pessoa Pinto's expression of confidence in
Australia as a negotiating partner in these very
important negotiations.

May I conclude by restating to the Council that
Australia is committed to supporting and working
closely with UNMISET for the term of its renewed
mandate. Australia wishes the follow-on mission every
success and will actively contribute to that success.

