Ms. Sison (United States of America): Several
notable issues captured our attention in the Security
Council this month. Africa was naturally a major
focus, including the Council's first trip to the Central
African Republic. In the Middle East, we continued to
concentrate on Yemen, Libya and Syria. This month
also marked one year since Russia used its military to
forcibly seize and occupy Crimea. I would like to touch
on these issues here this afternoon.

Much of our time this month was spent addressing
security challenges in Africa. The Council trip to the
Central African Republic, Addis Ababa and Burundi was
instructive and useful. In the Central African Republic,
the armed groups are still armed, and disarmament
needs to be a priority. Massive displacement has not
been addressed. Nearly 1 million people out of a total
population of 4.5 million have been displaced. Of the
436 mosques in the country, 417 have been destroyed,
and some international forces were recently closed or are
drawing down. The United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic is approaching its full strength, but we must
be wary of losing capability just as stability emerges.

In Burundi, the Council witnessed a worrying
situation. The country's leader is at a crossroads.
Opposition parties, civil society and human rights
activists have all warned of a potential for Violence if
the president seeks a third term. The Council delivered
a unified message on the centrality of the Arusha
Accords, and we reiterate the calls to respect the letter
and spirit of the Agreements and for more inclusive
political space.

South Sudan also remains central to our work.
Some 2.5 million people are in urgent need of food
assistance, and more than 2 million have been displaced.
The United Nations Mission in the Republic of South
Sudan (UNMISS) is providing shelter to more than
100,000 internally displaced people seeking refuge
from violence perpetrated by both the Government and
armed groups that oppose it. To address this situation,
we welcome the adoption of resolution 2206 (2015),
which establishes a framework for targeted sanctions in
the form of travel bans and asset freezes on individuals
and entities that undermine the country's political
stability or perpetrate human rights abuses. The United
States has supported the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the region in their
efforts to facilitate talks to reach a comprehensive and
inclusive peace agreement and to establish a transitional
Government. We hope that this resolution will enhance
IGAD's leverage and improve its chances of success.

As has been noted, the situations in the Middle East
and North Africa have caused us concern this month.
It is essential that the next phase of Libya's transition,
the formation of a national unity Government, take hold
before the entire country is lost to violent extremists.
Through United Nations-facilitated talks in Libya,
particularly since the start of the year, the parties have

made progress towards bridging the political divisions
that have prevented the country from providing for
its people and impeded efforts to counter terrorist
and criminal groups. Libyan parties must fully invest
in these talks, and we maintain our complete support
for Special Representative Leon and his efforts. The
United States will continue to engage with its Council
colleagues in looking how the existing sanctions
regime can best address concerns over the illicit flow
of weapons into and out of the country.

On Syria,just a few days ago, we heard from Under-
Secretary-General Valerie Amos (see S/PV.7418). Her
briefing drove home the grave decline in humanitarian,
economic and social conditions for Syrians inside of
Syria and in neighbouring countries, as well as the
Al-Assad regime's significant failure to the Council's
resolutions. Humanitarian actors, including the
United Nations and international non-governmental
organizations, must be able to deliver all necessary
humanitarian aid, not just food, to Syrians in need.
We remain particularly concerned about the regime's
consistent removal of medical and surgical supplies
from United Nations convoys prior to reaching their
intended destinations despite explicit authorization
to deliver medical and surgical supplies through
resolutions 2165 (2014) and 2191 (2014).

This was, of course, also an especially challenging
month with respect to Yemen. Houthi actions
undermined the efforts to achieve a political resolution
by continuing to take unilateral actions that are not
conducive to achieving a political solution. The United
States, alongside the broader international community,
hopes that the insurgents will stop their unilateral
actions and participate in the United Nations-led effort
to try to resolve the differences of all the parties there.
Just 10 days ago, we were all shocked and saddened by
the attacks on mosques in Sana'a that killed scores of
worshippers. In fact, it is heartbreaking that we cannot
get through a month without confronting such tragic
and despicable terrorist acts.

In addition to Yemen, we saw attacks this month
in Tunisia, where gunmen killed 19 people and
wounded more than 20 others, and the attack in March
in Mali, where five civilians, including personnel
from UNMISS, the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali and the
European Union, were killed in Bamako. The United
States condemns this violence in the strongest possible
terms.

March marked the one-year anniversary of Russia's
forcible seizure and occupation of Crimea and staging
of an illegal referendum. Over the past year, the human
rights situation in Crimea has deteriorated. Members
of Crimea's ethnic minorities, human rights activists
and those who oppose the annexation have suffered
systematic human rights abuses. Local residents
have been detained, interrogated and disappeared.
Non-governmental organizations and independent
media have been driven out. We continue to call for an
immediate end to the Russian occupation of Crimea,
which comes against a backdrop of continuing Russian
interference in eastern Ukraine. We continue to believe
that compliance with the September Minsk agreements
and the February implementation package provides a
road map to peace in Ukraine.

Finally, we welcomed Friday's Council open debate
on protecting ethnic and religious minorities in the
Middle East, presided over by French Foreign Minister
Fabius (see S/PV.7419). Promoting religious freedom
is a priority for the United States and it remains a
core value that influences United States diplomatic
engagement worldwide. In recent days and months, the
brutal persecution of religious minorities has shocked
us all. Together, we condemn the targeting of civilians
of any religious affiliation for any kind of Violence and
likewise condemn the destruction of religious sites
and property. There must be accountability for the
individuals responsible for these despicable acts.

In conclusion, I would like to thank the entire
French delegation for its excellent and patient
stewardship of the Council during the month of March.
To our colleagues from Jordan, we assure them of our
cooperation and support in the month to come.

