Mr. Mulet: Allow me to update the members of
the Council on the situation that has prevailed in and

around the Georgian-Abkhaz conflict zone since my
last briefing, on 11 August.

In a key development, on 12 and 13 August, the
Abkhaz side launched a military operation in the Upper
Kodori Valley. No actual close combat took place,
because the Georgian armed personnel in the Upper
Kodori Valley had been withdrawn beforehand.
Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili accused Russia
and the Abkhaz side of expelling the entire ethnic
Georgian population from the Valley. The team base of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
(UNOMIG) in the Upper Kodori Valley remains
closed. The Mission is considering launching a patrol
there to assess the situation.

During the previous week, the Abkhaz side HAD
crossed the ceasefire line on several occasions despite
warnings from UNOMIG not to do so, causing
agitation among the local Georgian population. The
crossings took place mainly in the areas of the
Ganmukhuri and Khurcha "pockets" along the
ceasefire line on the Zugdidi side. Occasionally, the
Abkhaz crossed over to Georgian villages in the north
of the Zugdidi sector, but they withdrew on the advice
of the peacekeeping force of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). One serious incident
occurred on 17 August, when two Abkhaz personnel
were killed and two others wounded as a result of the
explosion of a radio-controlled landmine in the
Ganmukhuri Patriot Youth Camp.

The Zugdidi town and district administrations and
the police are functioning. Through the continuous
presence and patrolling of UNOMIG, the local
population in Zugdidi town has been reassured that,
despite the tense situation, there is no direct threat to
them. The people who left the town at the beginning of
last week have started to return home, and at the
moment it appears that almost all of the population has
returned to Zugdidi. An issue of serious discontent
between the administration and the CIS peacekeeping
force remains the fact that the force is still occupying
several buildings in Zugdidi town.

The Mission has been able to monitor major
movements of CIS and Russian troops along the main
road, the M27, on the Zugdidi side. It has concluded
that some of those forces are concentrated along the
southern edge of the zone of conflict. UNOMIG is not
in a position to confirm the number of those troops.
Outside the conflict zone, the Russian forces have
reportedly conducted operations to destroy military
assets at the Senaki military base and at Poti harbour.
No targeting or damaging of public infrastructure has
been reported in those areas.

UNOMIG has continued to patrol in the Zugdidi
sector. It has resumed patrolling in the Gali sector, but
only along the main road for the time being.

Finally, I would like to mention an important
issue that could have implications for our area of
operations. As members are aware, UNOMIG counts
on CIS peacekeeping forces to provide security for our
military observers and our installations. However, on
14 August, the Georgian parliament unanimously voted
in favour of Georgia's withdrawal from the
Commonwealth of Independent States. By a unanimous
vote, the parliament also adopted an appeal to the
international community to replace the CIS
peacekeepers with "international peace contingents".
Yesterday, the Georgian Foreign Ministry advised that
it had sent a note to the CIS Executive Committee
notifying it of the aforementioned resolution and of
Georgia's renunciation of all obligations related to its
membership in the CIS as of 18 August 2008. A day
earlier, the Abkhaz de facto foreign ministry had stated
that it considered it necessary to maintain the presence
of a considerable contingent of Russian peacekeepers
on its territory as a security guarantor.

