Mr. Yoshikawa (Japan): I thank you very much,
Madam President, for convening this open debate. I
listened to your statement with great interest. I also
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.

The international community today sees regional
organizations playing significant roles in ensuring
international peace and security. That is indeed what
was expected when the Charter of the United Nations
was drafted, as evident from its Chapter VIII, on
regional arrangements.

In response to a suggestion made in the very useful
concept note (S/2015/599) that you, Madam President,
distributed earlier, I wish to focus today on the Asia-
Pacific region, to which Japan belongs. I would like first
to introduce the roles played by regional frameworks in
ensuring peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region
and then share with the Council our view on how to
further enhance their roles.

In East Asia, the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum (ARF)
has been serving as an ASEAN-centric ministerial
framework to address political and security issues for
more than 20 years. The mission of ARF is to foster
confidence-building in the region. To that end, ARF
not only provides a venue for candid discussions
among ministers, but it also embraces a wide range
of challenging issues such as disaster relief, maritime
security, counter-terrorism and transnational crime,
as well as non-proliferation and disarmament. I am
proud to note that Japan has actively contributed to
the activities of ARF by, for example, co-chairing and
organizing a number of ARF intersessional meetings
and official events.

The East Asia Summit (EAS) is another notable
example. Established in 2005, the EAS has been
providing a unique forum for the leaders of 18 countries
of the Asia-Pacific region to gather and discuss issues
of common interest and concern, including political
and security challenges, from a strategic point of View.

The Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) is also an example
of a regional framework at the summit level in the
Pacific. It aims to promote cooperation among its 16
member States in a wide range of areas, including
political and security challenges. Since 1997, the
Prime Minister of Japan has hosted the Pacific Islands
Leaders Meeting with the 16 PIF member States, aimed
at realizing the stability and prosperity of the Pacific.

In the Asia-Pacific region, a number of regional
frameworks are therefore being developed in a
multilayered manner, reflecting the political, economic
and cultural diversity of the region. We are convinced
that the further development of these frameworks is
essential to ensuring peace and security in the Asia-
Pacific region. It is from this standpoint that Japan
advocates the further strengthening of the role of the
East Asia Summit in the political and security field,
and developing it as a premier forum of the region.

Finally, let me refer to the supplementary role that
the United Nations and regional frameworks can play in
the Asia-Pacific region.

In my view, in order to identify the most appropriate
bodies to deal with particular challenges, it is important
to examine the nature of each challenge on a case-by-
case basis. Sometimes the direct involvement of the
United Nations might be more appropriate, which is
what happened in the case of Cambodia in the 1990s.
Sometimes regional frameworks are more effective in
handling issues on a region-wide scale, such as in terms
of combating piracy and armed robbery against ships.
Efforts to ensure nuclear non-proliferation in East Asia
are a notable example of the fact that a dual approach,
at both the United Nations and the regional level, is
important.

Japan will not cease in its endeavour to strengthen
multilateral frameworks in the Asia-Pacific region and
develop closer relations with the United Nations and the
relevant regional organizations, with a View to realizing
a more stable and peaceful Asia-Pacific.

