Mr. Granovsky (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to express our gratitude to
Under-Secretary-General Bernard Miyet for presenting
the report of the Secretary-General and also for the
additional information that he has provided the
Security Council.

The Russian delegation has studied this report
most carefully, and we are in agreement with its basic
contents and conclusions. The report contains detailed
proposals for the deployment of a full-scale United
Nations peacekeeping operation in the conflict zone,
with the cooperation of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) as a party supporting the process of
negotiation, and it is important that these proposals be
based on the 18 June Agreement on Cessation of
Hostilities, signed in Algiers, and also on the
conclusions of the United Nations mission to the
region, with which all involved parties cooperated
constructively.

We consider the speedy deployment of the United
Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), and
its later transformation into a full-scale peacekeeping
operation, an important precondition for the start of the
parties' implementation of the Agreement signed in
Algiers. The first practical step in this direction has
already been taken. On 31 July the Security Council
adopted resolution 1312 (2000), which authorized the
dispatch of a group of up to 100 United Nations
military observers. Russia, along with other members
of the Security Council, is counting on this effort to
reinforce the positive developments in the resolution of
the territorial disputes between Ethiopia and Eritrea
and to provide the United Nations a constructive means
to help settle this conflict.

The Russian Federation's basic view is that, with
constructive support from the host parties' authorities
and also through strict compliance by both Addis
Ababa and Asmara with the provisions of the Algiers
Agreement, this group of United Nations military
observers will be able to help resolve effectively the
conflict that divides these two States. The only way to
reach a breakthrough in this crisis, as has been
confirmed by the positive changes already noted, is
through the use of political mechanisms and by staying
within the framework of the standards of international
law. We are consistent and focused in our insistence on
this kind of approach, both in the Security Council and
in contacts with all interested parties.

Given the current situation, it is particularly
important that we make sure there are no
counterproductive actions, especially any involving the
use of armed forces, that might hinder our efforts to
normalize the situation in the conflict zone. Both sides,
in accordance with the security commitments they have
made, must show the maximum restraint and political
will and should take steps to establish a climate of
mutual trust, with the will to seek a comprehensive
solution to the conflict.

The OAU's mediation efforts deserve high praise,
as do the efforts of its former Chairman, President
Abdelaziz Bouteflika of Algeria. These efforts resulted
in the signing of the Agreement in Algiers. We
consider it important that the Security Council continue
to offer all its support and encouragement to the efforts
to advance the process of political dialogue and to
achieve the signing of a conclusive peace agreement
between the parties.

We share the views expressed in the Secretary-
General's report regarding the serious humanitarian
consequences of the conflict, which have led to large-
scale population movements and an increase in the
need for emergency food aid. The situation is rendered
yet more serious by the harsh climatic conditions, the
economic difficulties of the region and the landmine
dangers in the conflict zone and in neighbouring areas.
If we are to tackle these problems effectively, they
must be a priority for the international donor
community and for the United Nations specialized
agencies.

The Russian Federation, as a member of the
Security Council and a long-standing friend of the
States in the Horn of Africa, will continue its active
support for the process of establishing a lasting peace
between Ethiopia and Eritrea.

