Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank you, Sir, for giving me this opportunity
to address the Security Council on the occasion of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

As Council members know well, the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement between the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), as it was at the
time, which later went on to form the Republic of South
Sudan, addressed the question of Abyei through the
Abyei Protocol. All members know that the Protocol
stipulates clearly and frankly that Abyei still constitutes
an integral part of the territory of the Sudan and that its
residents are Sudanese citizens. There are two groups
in the Area, the Ngok Dinka and the Misseriya, whose
members are Sudaenese citizens. We have a keen
interest in their safety. Until an agreement on the final
status of Abyei is concluded, the two groups remain
Sudanese and we will treat both of them equally as
such. We do not differentiate between them and remain
responsible for their protection until a final status is
decided upon.

I welcome the Council's agreement to extend the
mandate of UNISFA for another six months. I also
welcome the increase in UNISFA troops by 1,126 to
enable the Force to monitor the Safe Demilitarized
Border Zone that has been established. We hope that
UNISFA will monitor it and prevent the infiltration
of any rebel elements from South Sudan and the
channelling or transfer of any arms from the South. Such
an incident took place one month ago and there remain
a great many doubts with regard to the infiltration of
such elements and weaponry from the South.

In the light of that, given our keen interest in
maintaining excellent and amicable relations with
South Sudan, our Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
head of the security services were dispatched to convey
to the Government of South Sudan our numerous
concerns regarding the continued infiltration of rebels
into Southern Kordofan from South Sudan.

We hope consultations will continue between our
two States on that matter so that we may find solutions
to all of those concerns.

With regard to the incident in Abyei that led to
the assassination of the Chief of the Ngok Dinka, as
well as a number of members of the Misseriya tribe,
we have condemned that incident and insisted that it be
investigated and the perpetrators tried.

Agreements made between States must in general
be respected. When that is not the case and one party
fails to respect an agreement, the other party is entitled
to reconsider and review that agreement, in accordance
with the commitment shown by the first party. We would
like to send a clear message in that regard. Given our
keenness to complete the normalization of our relations
with South Sudan in a manner that serves the interests
of our peoples, we would like to state that the State of
South Sudan has to respect the agreements it signed, in
particular with regard to security measures to prevent
the sheltering, furthering or assisting of rebels through
any channel. If those commitments are not respected,
the Sudan is entitled to review the pertinent agreements
accordingly. However, I would like to emphasize our

resolve, desire and determination to maintain excellent
bilateral relations with South Sudan.

With regard to the final status ofAbyei, all members
of the Council are well aware that the Abyei Protocol
was signed by both parties, leading to the enactment
of the law on the referendum on Abyei. No party can
nullify that law. It was the SPLM. that participated in
reaching that agreement at the time. The SPLM. was
represented in the Sudanese Parliament before the
secession of South Sudan. That law must be respected.
Any subsequent procedure or proposal adopted by the
high-level mechanism that may run counter to that law
or the agreements concluded between the two parties
would be illogical and unacceptable.

Lastly, the Sudan will continue to cooperate with
the Council to seek acceptable and satisfactory solutions
conducive to the achievement of peace and security in
the Sudan, between the Sudan and South Sudan and in
the entire region.

In conclusion, I welcome the resolution just
adopted, which, like previous resolutions, reiterates
that the territorial boundaries of States shall not be
altered by force, and that any territorial disputes shall
be settled exclusively by peaceful means. We commend
the resolution's emphasis on that point. I reiterate that
there are well-known mechanisms in international
law for resolving territorial disputes between States.
The Security Council must rise above the work of
tribunals, as it is not a tribunal. There are well-known
international legal processes that could help to settle
the final status of Abyei in a manner that ensures peace
and safety in the region. This is the main responsibility
of the Security Council.

