Mr. Fall (spoke in French): The situation in Central
Africa has remained difficult since the publication
of the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/521)
that is before the members of the Security Council,
with a number of serious threats to political, security
and socioeconomic stability, including in countries
affected by long-standing armed conflicts, such as the
Central African Republic and the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. All 11 member States of the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) are
either in the middle or at the beginning of an electoral
cycle and, as a result, are experiencing tensions related
to electoral processes. People everywhere continue to
demand better socioeconomic conditions.

Demands for the engagement of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), good
offices and preventive diplomacy have remained strong.
I have intensified my engagement with countries in the
subregion and our support to subregional organizations,

including by leading or deploying more missions to
redouble our efforts in conflict prevention and crisis
management. Allow me to set out some of the new
developments in the subregion.

The new Constitution adopted by the National
Assembly of Chad was promulgatedon 4 May, and a
new Government was sworn in on 10 May. President
Idriss Deby Itno presided over a ceremony on 24 May
to establish a new national framework for political
dialogue, which includes 15 members of the majority
and 15 members of the opposition. In coordination
with our partners, UNOCA stands ready to support
the national framework for political dialogue as it
takes up the challenge of promoting inclusive dialogue
and creating the conditions for credible and peaceful
parliamentary elections in November.

The newly established electoral body in Gabon has
begun preparations for the upcoming parliamentary
elections. During my meeting with the head of Gabon's
central elections body on 18 May, I reiterated the
readiness of the United Nations to support the electoral
process. In order to improve the representation of women
and youth in elected positions and decision-making
bodies, UNOCA and the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) supported the Gabonese network
of women senators in organizing a training workshop
in Libreville, from 5 to 7 June, which targeted women
and youth political leaders.

Burundi's President Pierre Nkurunziza
promulgated a new Constitution on 7 June, following
the Constitutional Court's validation of the results of
the referendum held on 17 May. Several stakeholders
and partners expressed concern that reform could
reverse the gains of the Arusha Agreement in terms
of peace, stability, democracy and inclusive political
participation. It is important that the Council continue
to lend its support to the mediation process led by the
East African Community. I reiterate Special Envoy
Michel Kafando's call to the Government and the
opposition to resume and conclude the talks as soon as
possible and start preparing the ground for inclusive
and credible elections in 2020.

The escalation of Violence and tension in the north-
west and south-west regions of Cameroon, which are
also still affected by Boko Haram's activities and the
impact of the crisis in the Central African Republic, is a
source ofmajor concern. More than 20,000 Cameroonian
refugees have already been registered across the border
in Nigeria and are in need of assistance. On 25 May,
seven English-speaking activists were sentenced to up
to 15 years in prison on terrorism and other charges.
The United Nations has consistently called for an
inclusive dialogue with all stakeholders as the best way
to find a solution to the crisis, respond to the grievances
of the English-speaking population and guarantee
the territorial integrity of the country and regional
stability. I congratulate the national commission for
the promotion of bilingualism and multiculturalism for
its efforts, and encourage it to continue its work and
duly note the public's recommendations. Diffusing
tensions will also contribute to the proper holding of
the presidential, legislative and municipal elections
scheduled for this year. In that regard, the United
Nations will continue to call on all actors to refrain
from further acts of violence.

A series oftrials took place in the Republic ofCongo
involving political leaders arrested following the 2016
presidential election, resulting in long prison sentences
for several of them, including 20 years for General
Jean-Marie Michel Mokoko, former Chief of Staff of
the army and a former presidential candidate. While
progress has been made in advancing the peace process
in the Pool region, the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process is progressing more slowly
than expected. The United Nations will continue to
support that process with other partners.

Tensions continued to erupt in Sao Tome and
Principe following a decision by the majority-controlled
National Assembly on 4 May to remove judges from the
Supreme Court of Justice because of differences over
the Supreme Court's decision to return the country's
brewery, Rosema, to an Angolan investor. The National
Assembly approved a resolution on 23 May on the
appointment of new Supreme Court judges, which was
subsequently adopted on 30 May. On the following day,
the opposition parties asked the Constitutional Court to
review the constitutionality of the law.

The crisis in the Central African Republic
continues to have a negative impact on the situation in
the subregion, particularly in neighbouring countries,
causing a large number of refugees. However, I am
encouraged by the findings of the second phase of
consultations with armed groups, conducted by the
panel of facilitators of the African Initiative for Peace
and Reconciliation. I hope that the results of those
consultations will lead to tangible improvements in the
security situation. I urge the countries of the region to
participate more actively in the African Initiative, both
politically and financially. I also strongly encourage
the Central African authorities and neighbouring
countries to accelerate the process of establishing joint
commissions, which could address issues such as border
control and transhumance. I will continue to focus my
efforts on mobilizing support for the African Initiative.

On 11 June, President Teodoro Obiang Nguema
Mbasogo of Equatorial Guinea invited all legally
registered and unregistered parties, civil society and the
diaspora to participate in a national political dialogue
scheduled for July. I congratulate the President on his
initiative and look forward with great interest to the
results of that dialogue, which could further open up
political space in the country.

(spoke in English)

The scourge of terrorism and violent extremism
continues to affect populations of the subregion and
to lead to the diversion of Government resources from
much-needed development programmes to costly
security operations. Boko Haram and the Lord's
Resistance Army have not stopped their deadly attacks
on civilians, committing egregious human rights abuses
and causing countless victims. UNOCA is engaging
subregional organizations, including the ECCAS
secretariat, the Lake Chad Basin Commission, the
Multinational Joint Task Force and other stakeholders,
to fight Boko Haram and address related issues and,
more broadly, violent extremism in the subregion,
including to facilitate the implementation of the
regional strategy against Boko Haram. I also continue
liaising closely with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for West Africa and the Sahel,
Mr. Mohamed Ibn Chambas, for coordinated support to
regional efforts to address the Lake Chad basin crisis.

On 8 and 9 May, the Lake Chad basin governors'
forum for regional cooperation on stabilization,
peacebuilding and sustainable development held
its inaugural meeting in Maiduguri, Nigeria. The
governors established the forum as a platform for
regional cooperation on stabilization, peacebuilding
and sustainable development in the area affected
by Boko Haram. The forum, which is supported by
UNOCA, the United Nations Office for West Africa
and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and the Sahel and UNDP,
will convene at least once a year.

Violent extremism, ongoing cross-border insecurity
and criminal activities are compounded by the flow of
small arms and light weapons throughout the subregion.
In response to that challenge, the first conference
of States parties to the Central African Convention
for the Control of Small Arms and Light Weapons,
Their Ammunition and All Parts and Components
That Can Be Used for Their Manufacture, Repair and
Assembly - the Kinshasa Convention - is taking
place right now in Yaounde, with the participation
of UNOCA. The Convention was developed through
the United Nations Standing Advisory Committee on
Security Questions in Central Africa (UNSAC), with
UNOCA support.

In its capacity as secretariat of UNSAC, UNOCA
supported the holding of the forty-sixth ministerial
meeting of the Committee, held in Brazzaville from
29 May to 1 June. The forum provides a unique
decision-making platform for discussing the overall
political, security and socioeconomic situation in the
subregion. The heads and representatives of United
Nations peace operations in the subregion - including
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Office
of the Special Envoy of the Great Lakes Region and
UNOWAS - also attended the meeting, in recognition
of the need for promoting cooperation and coherence
among United Nations entities on the ground. UNSAC
recommended that ECCAS expedite the implementation
of the regional strategy on counter-terrorism and the
non-proliferation of small arms and light weapons in
Central Africa, which was adopted at the forty-first
meeting of UNSAC, held in 2015.

I welcome the endorsement, on 24 May, of the
regional action plan for the implementation in Central
Africa of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and
peace and security, following a two-day workshop
organized by ECCAS and UNOCA in Brazzaville.
Resource mobilization will be critical to ensuring the
successful implementation of the plan. I am convinced
that the participation of women and youth will be
crucial to ensuring a successful ECCAS and Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) joint
summit, which is expected to take place in July, under
the theme "Peace, security, radicalization and violent
extremism within the ECCAS-ECOWAS space." I call
upon ECCAS and ECOWAS member States to ensure
that women and youth are involved in developing and
implementing strategies to prevent violent extremism
and terrorism, in line with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. UNOCA and UNOWAS will continue to
support ECCAS and ECOWAS in a coordinated manner.

Consistent with its mandate, UNOCA has remained
actively engaged in support of Central African Member
States and subregional organizations, in particular
ECCAS. At their joint meeting on 11 and 12 May,
ECCAS and UNOCA adopted a biennial programme
for the period 2018-2019 that includes additional joint
visits to the subregion and joint analysis to promote
enhanced coordination in conflict prevention and
management and peacebuilding. I welcome the decision
of ECCAS member States to accelerate the reform of
the institution. I call upon ECCAS member States to
remain committed to completing that important process.
The reform is a good opportunity for the subregional
organization to improve its functioning, including that
of its funding mechanism, to ensure the implementation
of key projects on peace, security, peacebuilding and
governance. The United Nations, including through
UNOCA, stands ready to provide assistance to ECCAS
and Member States in that critical endeavour.

Since its mandate was last renewed, in 2015,
UNOCA has proved its effectiveness as a tool for
advancing the Secretary-General's prevention agenda
in Central Africa. The activities of the Office have also
been crucial to strengthening the capacity of ECCAS
in enhancing United Nations coordination in the
subregion. We look forward to the Security Council's
support for UNOCA's mandate-renewal for another
three years, as recommended by the Secretary-General
in his report.

