The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of the Libyan Arab J amahiriya.

At the outset, I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing.

I wish to note that the peace process in the
Middle East is experiencing continual reversal. Peace
is impossible as a result of Israel's illegal and inhuman
practices on several levels. They include its blockades,
killings, construction of settlements, land
confiscations, home demolitions, erection of barriers
and detention of 11,000 Palestinians, including women
and children, who have been held not for thousands of
days but for thousands of months.

Since mid-2007, Israeli occupying authorities
have imposed a suffocating blockade on the Gaza Strip.
Palestinians live under very depressing circumstances,
which has been met with a very embarrassing silence
on the part of the international community. Israel
unleashed a war against the residents of Gaza after they
had become weary as a result of hunger and the
blockade. Despite everything that has transpired, the
Israeli authorities are continuing their blockade,
placing obstacles in the way of mediation efforts,
reneging on their obligations and changing conditions.
All of that is part of an effort to perpetuate the siege
despite the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) and
calls by the Secretary-General and many international,
regional and civil society organizations.

The occupying Power has committed grave
atrocities in the occupied Palestinian territories, in
particular in the Gaza Strip. Many of those violations
rise to the level of war crimes and genocide under
international law and international humanitarian law.
That has been confirmed by numerous distinguished
international personalities, including the 16 who
addressed a joint letter to the Secretary-General and the
members of the Security Council. Reports by
Mr. Richard Falk, the United Nations Special
Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the
occupied Territories, Amnesty International and Human
Rights Watch have all called for investigations into the
crimes committed in Gaza. In addition, the Red Cross
has condemned the targeting of medical teams and the
fact that they have been prevented from reaching the
wounded.

All that has been borne out by eyewitness reports
and the dramatic articles published in The New York
Times and Haaretz on 22 March 2009, which included
witness accounts, documents and information about
war crimes and other acts committed in Gaza by Israeli
soldiers acting on orders from high in the chain of
command calling for the use of phosphorous bombs,
the targeting of ambulances and defenceless civilians
and the ransacking of houses. The reports also included
a statement by a unit leader who deliberately killed a
Palestinian woman and her two sons with an automatic
rifle, as well as an account of the killing of an old
woman crossing a street who posed no threat to Israel's
occupying forces. The paper also included statements
of how, despite claims made by the Israeli army, pilots
deliberately and without warning targeted civilian
houses.

It is clear from the testimony of Israeli soldiers
that the orders they received essentially told them to
show no concern for the lives of Palestinian civilians.
An Israeli officer also stated that such orders could not
have been issued by a junior field commander; instead
they had to come from the highest level of the Israeli
army command. One Israeli soldier is quoted as saying,

"the staff command is responsible for issuing
these orders and is trying to manipulate the facts
and depict matters as isolated incidents. In fact,
they go much deeper than that".

In addition, Israeli soldiers have admitted to
killing hundreds of women and children who waved
white flags, knowing full well that they were civilians
and posed no threat to them. They too confirmed that
their actions were carried out on the basis of higher
orders. Haaretz also published that confirmed
information.

The international community must put an end to
the suffering of the besieged Palestinian people in
Gaza. It must not allow the occupying Power to
continue to hold the residents of Gaza hostage. The
lifting of the siege must not be linked to any other
issue, as it constitutes a violation of international law,
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
international humanitarian law, the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Fourth
Geneva Convention and numerous other instruments.

The perpetuation of the siege constitutes an act of
blackmail of the besieged that prevents them from
receiving food, medicine and shelter. The Israeli
authorities must also assume responsibility for the
rebuilding of Gaza, without using that as an instrument
of political blackmail to the detriment of those affected
and whose homes have been destroyed.

The situation in the West Bank is no less grave
than that which prevails in the Gaza Strip. A different
type of crime is being committed there, namely, that of
ethnic cleansing of Palestinians through a systematic
campaign to demolish their homes and prevent them
from rebuilding and to confiscate land through the
building of settlements.

That vicious campaign is focused in particular on
the city of Jerusalem, as has been confirmed by a
special report by the head of the European Union
mission in East Jerusalem that was published in The
Guardian. It describes the process by which Israel
demolishes Arab homes and prevents their inhabitants
from rebuilding or even gaining access to their
property. That serves not only to hamper the peace
process; it also obliterates any chance for the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State.

We reiterate that the unbalanced and biased view
of some of the Council's members has only served to
encourage Israel's settlement activities. Moreover, the
Israeli Peace Now movement, which monitors
settlement activity in the occupied Palestinian
territories, has stated that Israeli authorities plan to
build more than 733,000 housing units in the West
Bank. Of those, 15,000 have already been approved. If
the remaining units are also approved, the total number
of settlers would be double what it is now.

In addition, Israeli authorities have announced
that 1,700 homes were demolished in East Jerusalem
this year alone. That means the deliberate displacement
of 17,000 civilians. In addition, 35 outposts have been
established in other areas. Several houses have also
been demolished in the historic Selwan district of East
Jerusalem to build a city park, displacing 500
Palestinian civilians. That runs counter to the claims of
the Israeli authorities, which seek to portray what is
happening in Jerusalem as an isolated act committed by
extremist groupings while the truth is that the Israeli
Government is responsible for the targeting and
Judaization of the Old City of Jerusalem in violation of
international law, Security Council resolutions and its
obligations under the Road Map.

The Israeli Government's practices affirm that
Israel's only policy and only firm position for the past
six decades have been that it does not seek peace and
continues to expand settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories and attempts to terrorize and
humiliate the Palestinian people and bring them to their
knees. These practices show that those who rule Israel
are no more than a gang of criminals and that the
organizations and States of the international
community must make their position clear on the
crimes committed by Israel against the Palestinian
people. If they fail to do so, they should be considered
accomplices to these crimes and co-conspirators
against the occupied Palestinian people.

I now resume my duties as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Egypt.

