Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I should like to convey Cameroon's sincere
condolences to the International Committee of the Red
Cross over Monday's attacks on its headquarters in
Baghdad and on other Iraqi buildings. We extend our
condolences to all the families affected by these tragic
events, which are unforgivable and unequivocally to be
condemned.

I should like to welcome Mr. Benon Sevan and to
thank him for his excellent briefing on the oil-for-food
programme. We are particularly grateful for the
information he gave us on the exit strategy scheduled
for 21 November. My delegation has full confidence in
the resolve and capacity of all the parties involved -
the Coalition Provisional Authority, the Governing
Council and the Office of the Iraq Programme - to
work closely together to ensure a successful transition.

We welcome the progress made in the ongoing
selection of so-called priority contracts, the amendment
of those contracts and the settlement of litigation
related to the 10 per cent deduction applied to
petroleum and petroleum-product contracts. We also
welcome progress in the authentication of deliveries of
supplies and the issues involved in methods of paying
suppliers. More specifically, with respect to the
renegotiation of contracts under paragraph 16 of
resolution 1483 (2003), we encourage the Office of the
Iraq Programme and the other United Nations agencies
involved to pursue their efforts to improve the current
margin. However, given the relative utility of the
contracts and the time frames, which are shrinking
daily, we feel that it will not be possible to renegotiate
all the contracts before 21 November. We feel that,
whatever progress is made in renegotiation, the 21
November deadline should be respected, pursuant to
resolution 1483 (2003).

As regards pending payments, it is important that
they be made for all amended contracts where letters of
credit have been issued. Thus, we welcome the
decision of the Treasury to continue payments even
after 21 November 2003. We encourage BNP Paribas to
enhance its capacity to handle its responsibilities in this
process as speedily as possible.

As for what is to happen after 21 November, in
the interests of transparency we urge the Coalition
Provisional Authority to provide further clarification
on arrangements to follow the termination of the
current United Nations presence. We therefore believe
that talks that have begun must continue and be further
intensified and deepened. We are particularly
concerned about oil-for-food projects in the northern
governorates of Iraq.

Lastly, we are convinced that, following the
Madrid conference, the international community will
be able to pursue its efforts towards the recovery of
Iraq beyond 21 November. That is essential right now
in order to meet the humanitarian needs of the Iraqi
people and to support them as they seek to regain full
control of their fate.

