Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like at the outset to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Jan Kubis for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) (S/2013/350).
We listened with interest to the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
Mr. Tanin. Unfortunately, the current situation in the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is far from stable;
the trend is towards deterioration, especially with the
withdrawal of the international contingent.

There is an ongoing threat of terrorism, as reflected
in the numerous terrorist attacks that have resulted
in civilian casualties and the regrettable statistics
contained in the Secretary-General's report. The number
of civilian casualties increased by one fourth over the
previous reporting period; children represented one
fifth of those, with the indicator for casualties among
children 27 per cent higher than last year.

In addition, there were attacks by the Taliban on
State institutions and representatives of the coalition
force, including through the use of suicide bombers,
from January through June last year. Yesterday, we
witnessed attacks by the Taliban against the Bagram
air base, just 45 kilometres from the country's capital.
This was a clear sign that, after the 2012 withdrawal of
the foreign contingent from Badakhshan, the Afghan
security forces were unable to maintain control of
the province. As a result, a unit of the international
contingent returned there in April.

We are concerned about the ongoing rise in
terrorist activity this year, spreading from northern
Afghanistan to the countries of Central Asia, which
are our partners in the Commonwealth of Independent
States and the Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO). In the first quarter of this year, the number of
attacks on the Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF)
and governmental bodies in the north of the Islamic
Republic of Afghanistan rose by 25 per cent over the
same period last year. In May, there was a 40-per cent
rise in the number of attacks by armed fighters in the
northern provinces over the same month last year.
These terrorist activities seek, inter alia, at hindering
the transfer of equipment for the international forces via
the north. Groups affiliated with the Islamic movement
in Uzbekistan, the Union of Islamic Jihad, Gulbuddin
Hekmatyar's Islamic Party of Afghanistan and the
Taliban in those regions can have a negative impact
on neighbouring Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, which are
also our neighbours.

The situation in the eastern border regions with
Pakistan has sharply deteriorated. The ratio of ANSF
soldiers to detachment extremist fighters is 10 to 15 in
the province of Nuristan. That translates into only 196
soldiers against more than 200 detachments of Taliban.
According to the Governor of that border province, one
local district has been under Taliban control for two
years and is the base for the efforts and fighters in the
north-east of the country, posing the genuine risk that
control will be assumed by the Taliban and spread into
other provinces.

We are seeing the mobilization of armed groups
wherever the International Security Assistance Force
(ISAF) has transferred responsibilities to the Afghan
forces. We remain convinced that there can be no
justification for an accelerated transfer of security
responsibilities of ISAF in favour of the Afghan army
and police without due consideration of the reality of
the situation and the military capacity of the ANSF,
without which ISAF's withdrawal Will surely aggravate
the general situation in the country. The drawdown must
be mitigated by an increase in the military capacities
of the ANSF, but we have yet to see progress in that
sphere.

Like many other States of the region, we cannot
accept a long-standing foreign military presence in
Afghanistan, which we would like to see peaceful,
stable, independent and neutral. Such a foreign presence
could be used to project forceful influence in the region
as a whole and in third countries. Furthermore, it is
changing from a deterrent to terrorism into a factor for
regional instability. Following the transfer, the ISAF
presence in Afghanistan will no longer be relevant. Its
bases must be handed over to the ANSF, under Afghan
command. Full clarity is necessary with respect to the
parametres and tasks of future NATO operations in the
country, which can be mandated only by the Security
Council, and only once ISAF has reported to the
Council on the completion of its mandate.

One important factor for improving the situation
in the country is national reconciliation. In the light
of the establishment of the Taliban contact office in
Doha, we note that dialogue with the armed opposition
will have a positive impact only if it is led by Kabul.
Russia has always supported the efforts of the Afghan
Government to work for national reconciliation and
create conditions conducive to long-term stability,
including through dialogue between the High Peace
Council and representatives of the armed opposition.
To that end, the strict compliance of armed fighters
with the basic principles of reconciliation - laying
down their arms, recognizing the Constitution of the
Islamic Republic of Afghanistan, and cutting all ties
with Al-Qaida and other terrorist organizations - is
essential.

We support the Afghan Government's approach to
the principle of the establishment and functioning of the
Taliban office in Doha, and call for strict compliance
with the Security Council's sanctions regime, in
particular the prohibition of international visits for
those who figure on the sanctions list. We believe
it necessary to support the sanctions regime as the
most important tool of counter-terrorism with respect
to individuals, groups, entities and organizations
associated with the Taliban that pose a threat to peace,
stability and security in Afghanistan. We will continue
to work to ensure the effectiveness of the sanctions
regime and the strict compliance of States with their
relevant international obligations in that respect.

We remain seriously concerned over the illegal
manufacture, trade and transfer of drugs from
Afghanistan, which pose a threat to peace and stability.
Not only does the Afghan drug threat affect countries of
the region, but tens ofthousands ofpeople die every year
from Afghan heroin or opium in Europe and the United
States. Moreover, the illegal manufacture of and trade
in these drugs lead to other crimes, including terrorism,
corruption and money-laundering. In this context, we
attach priority importance to the implementation of the
decisions of the third ministerial conference of the Paris
Pact on preventing the spread of Afghan narcotics. An
important measure in that regard would be the agreed
inclusion of drug traffickers on the Security Council's
sanctions lists. In the interests of effectively removing
the drug threat from Afghanistan, we would favour the
establishment of dialogue on this matter in the format
of the CSTO and NATO.

It is our view that the Istanbul process on
Afghanistan is a good platform for dialogue. At the
same time, we have the impression that the process
is evolving slower than previously planned and that
a number of participants have become entrenched
in their positions. We should therefore like to see
increasingly dynamic progress in established formats,
such as the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. We
intend to promote the active participation of observer
countries, including Afghanistan, in its practical work,
particularly in discussions on countering such regional
threats as drugs, terrorism and extremism.

In conclusion, I wish the people of Afghanistan
every success and express our full support for the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan in
its efforts to fulfil its mandate at this most difficult
time.

