Mr. Loulichki (Morocco): I have the honour to
speak on behalf the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM).
In so doing, I would like to condemn in the strongest
terms the despicable terrorist act targeting the United
Nations compound in Abuja, and to convey our deepest
condolences to the people and Government of Nigeria,
the United Nations and the families of the victims.

NAM. expresses its appreciation for India's
initiative to devote this meeting to a thematic debate
that is timely and forward-looking and represents a
collective-thinking exercise on the future of
peacekeeping as the flagship activity of the United
Nations. Let me also take this opportunity to thank His
Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon for his
personal participation and comprehensive briefing on
the issue at hand.

Peacekeeping is dynamic in nature and has
developed incrementally, evolving from classic
peacekeeping operations with mandates limited to
ceasefire monitoring, mostly in inter-State conflicts,
into complex, multidimensional peacekeeping missions
combining military, police, civilian and humanitarian
components often operating in intra-State contexts.
This evolution has been managed, in large part with
continued adherence to the long-standing fundamental
principles of United Nations peacekeeping.

The history of peacekeeping derives mainly from
the fact that it remains the most cost-effective means to
avert conflict and represents a genuine expression of
the principle of collective security. Member States are
accordingly vested with the responsibility to continue
to abide by the guiding principles of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. These guiding principles -
the consent of the parties, the non-use of force except
in self-defence and in defence of the mandate, and
impartiality - constitute the ethical and moral
foundations of United Nations peacekeeping. NAM
also emphasizes that respect for the principles of
sovereign equality, political independence, territorial
integrity of all States and non-intervention must be
upheld in this regard.

The Movement underscores that United Nations
peacekeeping should not be used as a substitute for

11-4815]
addressing the root causes of conflict, which should be
addressed in a coherent, well planned and
comprehensive manner, with relevant political, social,
economic and developmental instruments. Peacekeeping
cannot substitute for a comprehensive political process.
The current debate on the future of peacekeeping
highlights the necessity to take a bolder stance on the
interaction between security and development, among
other challenges.

NAM. appreciates the growing acknowledgment
by all of the relevance of its consistent position that
peacekeeping should be provided from the outset with
the required political support, sufficient human,
financial and logistical resources, and clearly defined
and achievable mandates and exit strategies.

NAM. contributes 87 per cent of deployed
personnel to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
and counts among its 120 member States the majority
of countries host to United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Those facts, among others, entitle troop-
contributing countries (TCCs) to be fully involved in
the planning process and in all aspects and stages of
United Nations peacekeeping operations. Since
mandates are implemented in the field by troop-
contributing countries, those countries should be
involved as major partners from the policy formulation
and decision-making process to deployment. NAM
members' first-hand experience as TCCs and host
countries would contribute to an objective assessment
of where and when to deploy and where to strengthen,
cut or draw down, with the achievement of peace and
security as the main objective and indicator of the
success of peacekeeping missions.

Since we now have a broad consensus on the
need for better interaction with TCCs, we believe that
it is time to seek innovative ways to translate intentions
into actions. We look forward to engaging in a more
focused debate on options for a more structured
dialogue and interaction among TCCs, the Security
Council and the Secretariat.

In that regard, we should strive to further enlarge
the TCC base by encouraging new TCCs to engage and
old TCCs to return to the fold of United Nations
peacekeeping. The flagship activity of the United
Nations cannot continue to be supported by only a
portion of the United Nations membership. To ensure
the appropriate level of response in terms of the scope
and scale of peacekeeping, the entire membership
should deal with the difficulties arising from
deployment in hostile environments and difficult
political contexts. Furthermore, much broader sharing
and contribution by all Member States would ensure
unity of vision to reach our common goal of peace and
security. The issue of troop cost should enjoy sustained
attention.

Peacekeeping missions have become heavily
mandated and under-resourced. The mismatch between
mandates and resources has in turn raised the risk of
United Nations peacekeeping facing overstretched
capacity, coupled with the increasing demand for
expanded operations, which present a strategic
challenge for the United Nations. NAM. stresses with
concern that many deployed troops are being stretched
to cover geographic areas that exceed their capacities.

NAM. also stresses that the improvement of
peacekeeping entails a proactive management of the
logistics and support of peacekeeping missions. At the
core of that challenge is the need to address the
capability gaps that are well known to all. NAM
regrets that enablers are still not available to critical
peacekeeping missions, be they air assets, field
hospitals, transport companies, night-vision devices or
other critical equipment.

The peacekeeping budget has reached an all-time
record of $8 billion. That shows not only that there is a
diversification of tasks in field support, but also that
multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping
missions are more demanding in terms of financial
resources, equipment and capabilities. That
demonstrates the need to treat questions related to field
support in a holistic way.

The 2000 Brahimi report on United Nations
peacekeeping operations dwells on the sensitive issue
of the scope and the limitations of the use of force. In
that regard, it is worth mentioning here that the report
clearly states that "force alone cannot create peace; it
can only create a space in which peace can be built".
(S/2000/809, para. 3)

Since we constantly strive to improve
peacekeeping, we should at the same time be cautious
in peace enforcement. The use of force in peacekeeping
must under no circumstance jeopardize the strategic
relation between the host country and the peacekeeping
mission.

With regard to the notion of credible deterrence,
NAM. stresses that it is already part of peacekeeping
that peacekeepers have been doing for a while when
they operate under a Chapter VII mandate. In its
existing form, peacekeeping is robust or firm enough to
the extent allowed by the fundamental principles of
peacekeeping and intended by political will, within the
capability of the force and limited to the geographic
jurisdiction.

The challenges of peacekeeping are well known
and the fundamentals for improving this important task
of the United Nations have been constantly stated by
our Movement. They are, first, political will that
translates into clear, realistic and achievable mandates;
secondly, resources; and thirdly, capacity-building
through training.

