Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Special Envoy Djinnit for his briefing. He has
been proactive in carrying out his duties with regard to
promoting peace and stability in the Great Lakes region
for more than four years. China appreciates his hard
work and tireless efforts. We welcome Mr. Huang Xia,
the newly appointed Special Envoy, and are ready to
continue to engage closely with all the parties involved
and to support the Secretary-General and the Special
Envoy in their work.

The Great Lakes region is located at the heart of
Africa, and the ability to maintain peace in the region
has a bearing on the overall stability and development
of the entire continent. Thanks to the joint efforts of
the international community and the countries of the
region, the political and security situation in the Great
Lakes region has seen many positive developments
since the second half of last year. The major parties
in South Sudan signed a revitalized peace agreement.
Presidential and parliamentary elections were
successfully held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. The main party in the Central African Republic
signed a peace agreement and formed a Government.
The situation in Burundi has remained stable.

The countries of the region have continued to
promote the implementation of the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Region and to strive to cooperate in the
areas of disarmament, demobilization and repatriation
and Africa's economic integration. These positive
developments are not only conducive to promoting
peace, stability and development in the Great Lakes
region but also demonstrate that the countries of the
region can find African solutions to African problems
through regional cooperation. China welcomes those
efforts. At the same time, however, the Great Lakes
region is still dealing with multifaceted challenges. The
international community should continue to provide
assistance and work to actively maintain the current
positive momentum in the region. Right now we should
focus on the following three aspects.

First, we should continue to help safeguard regional
peace and stability. The international community,
including the countries of the region, should abide
faithfully by the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations, respect one another's
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity as
well as the ownership and leadership of the countries
concerned in handling their internal affairs, and refrain
from external interference. It is important to support
the African Union, the International Conference on
the Great Lakes Region, the East African Community,
the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
other regional and subregional organizations so that
they can continue to act as mediators and help the
parties concerned to resolve disputes peacefully. The
United Nations should leverage its full strength and
provide support for conflict prevention, mediation,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding.

Secondly, we should support the countries of the
region through capacity-building. In their efforts
to implement the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, especially in response to the threats posed
by armed groups, the countries of the region, as we
have seen, are confronted generally with problems
such as a lack of resources and insufficient capacity.
The international community should strengthen its
communication and cooperation with the countries of
the region and regional and subregional organizations,
provide the necessary funding and technical and
material assistance, according to their requirements,
and focus on helping them improve their capacities in
the areas of security, governance, the management of
natural resources and border control.

Thirdly, it is crucial to address the root causes
of conflicts. Poverty and underdevelopment have
seriously undermined sustained peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. The international community
should fulfil its commitments in a timely fashion
by increasing humanitarian assistance and official
development assistance and helping the displaced and
refugees in the region to return home. In the meantime,
it is important to increase assistance and investment
in health, education, interconnectivity and other
infrastructure areas for the countries in the Great Lakes
region, effectively improve youth employment in Africa
and raise the living standards of the local populations.

China has consistently supported countries in
the Great Lakes region in advancing their peace
processes and has actively participated in United
Nations peacekeeping operations in the region. At the
same time, China provides assistance to countries in
the Great Lakes region in areas such as infrastructure
and agriculture. We stand ready to work with the
rest of the international community in our continued
effort to contribute to achieving peace, stability and
development in the region.

