Mr. Vidal (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): Greater
transparency, efficiency and interaction with
non-Council members are goals shared by all. We are
aware of the commitment of the delegation of Japan to
the permanent improvement of the Council's working
methods, and we congratulate it on that initiative.

The review of the Security Council's working
methods is a subject of great importance to Uruguay.
We believe that Member States have the right to
participate in the negotiation and decision-making
processes of the Organization's organs, especially
when they have a direct interest in the results of the
deliberations and when those results affect their
citizens or their highest objectives. A concrete example
of this is the interaction between the Council and
troop- and police-contributing countries in the context
of decisions on peacekeeping operations.

It is fair to acknowledge here that, since the most
recent open debate on this subject (see S/PV.5968),
tangible and substantive progress has been achieved
with regard to this legitimate demand by police- and
troop-contributing countries. On the one hand, private
meetings with troop- and police-contributing countries
have been convened further in advance of mandate
renewals. At least in principle, that gives the Council
time to consider the inputs of those countries. We hope
that this practice will continue and that the
implementation of resolution 1353 (2001) will be
stepped up.

On the other hand, we highlight the reactivation,
in 2009, of the informal consultation mechanism
involving the members of the Security Council, troop
and police contributors and the Secretariat in the
context of the Council's Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations. We believe that the
exchanges at various meetings on significant
challenges to specific missions have been very useful
and productive. We hope that the Working Group will
relaunch such meetings with troop and police
contributors as soon as possible. We also hope that it
will be possible to debate cross-cutting issues that have
been identified as relevant to the entire peacekeeping
system. We also hope that such meetings will be made
part of the institutional framework, rather than being
left up to the presence or absence of a given country in
the Security Council.

On another front, we express our general concern
about the link that has been established between the
issue we are debating today and the reform of the
composition of the Council, as if they were
inextricably linked. As we have said on other
occasions, these are two inexplicably linked issues that
cannot serve as a mutual basis for negotiation. Some
time ago, the group of five small countries (S-5)
submitted to the General Assembly draft resolution
A/60/L.49, which contained worthwhile suggestions
and proposals that could be adopted today itself by the
vast majority of Members. The way in which that
valuable proposal was received was not especially
productive. The fact is that the working methods of the
Security Council have been held hostage to the
Council's enlargement, which is an extremely difficult
issue.

Uruguay supports draft resolution A/60/L.49
submitted by the S-5, as well as similar documents put
forward in connection with it. In the context of that
proposal, we are prepared to consider a package that
moves us towards the single undertaking referred to by
some States. However, we reiterate that we believe that
the Council's working methods and expansion are two
separate issues that can be resolved on different tracks.

Let us rekindle the spirit of draft resolution
A/60/L.49 and of the worthwhile efforts of the 8-5. Let
us now propose a set of measures that will make it
possible to improve the Council's working methods.
Let us make it possible to realize those valuable
proposals on which almost all of us agree.

