Mr. Ipo (cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to add my delegation's voice to the well-
deserved tributes paid to the late Major General Francis
Vib Sanziri. We extend our deepest condolences to his
family, to the Government and the people of Ghana and
to the United Nations.

Turning now to the issue that brings us together
today, I would like to welcome the holding ofthis annual
interactive, informative meeting with the Heads of the
military components of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Lieutenant General Leonard Muriuki Ngondi and
Major General Cheryl Pearce for their enlightening and
highly useful briefings.

The issue of cooperation between a peacekeeping
mission and the host State is of particular importance
to my delegation. Indeed, my country's recent history
has been characterized by exemplary cooperation with
the entire United Nations system, which served as a
catalyst for the success of the United Nations Operation
in cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI).

Peacekeeping operations, as we all know, are not
intended to be a substitute for the authorities of the
host State, but rather to support them as part of a crisis
exit strategy that is based on an inclusive and credible
political process. In that connection, the experience
of UNOCI provides us with sufficient insight into the
fact that dynamic cooperation, based on mutual trust
and the pursuit of consensual objectives between a
United Nations peacekeeping mission and host State
authorities, is essential. It creates the necessary
conditions for a successful transition that paves the way
for lasting peace and stability.

The military components of peacekeeping missions
are a key part of such cooperation. Their exemplary work
with the host country Government relies on the latter
taking strong national ownership of all United Nations
action, ensuring that local authorities are involved in
the peacekeeping mission's main tasks. UNOCI and
the Government of Cote d'Ivoire worked together
to improve the protection of civilians by, inter alia,
combating human rights violations and gender-based
violence, leading the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process and reforming the security sector,
as well as advancing the national reconciliation process.

I would like at this stage to ask Lieutenant General
Ngondi for his insights on the following points.

What is his assessment of cooperation between
the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the Sudanese authorities, in particular
with regard to the protection of civilians in those regions
affected by violence perpetrated by armed groups, or
to the curbing of communal violence? Will the current
political context, which is marked by tensions between
the Transitional Military Council and the demonstrators
from the affected sociopolitical strata, affect relations

between UNAMID and the Sudanese authorities? What
effects might the current sociopolitical situation in the
Sudan have on the UNAMID reconfiguration and troop
drawdown process?

Initiatives to promote national reconciliation are
an indispensable step on the road to peacebuilding,
especially in a context of deep resentment between
local communities. With regard more specifically to the
situation in Cyprus, what actions is UNFICYP taking
to promote reconciliation between local communities?

With regard to the zero-tolerance policy on
sexual violence, I wish to seek clarification on the
actions carried out in the framework of UNAMID and
UNFICYP to ensure exemplary conduct by their troops.

In conclusion, I would like to express my
delegation's congratulations and encouragement to
the UNAMID and UNFICYP Force Commanders, as
well as to all of their staff, for the outstanding work
they are doing in spite of numerous constraints and in
particularly difficult deployment environments. My
delegation also wishes to commend the thousands of
men and women of the military and police components
of the United Nations missions, and to pay tribute to the
soldiers who have made the ultimate sacrifice for peace
and security in the world.

