Mr. Kamara (Sierra Leone): Let me start by
thanking all present for having agreed to reschedule
this meeting, at our request. We apologize for any
inconvenience this may have caused.

I bring you greetings, Mr. President, with profound
appreciation, from His Excellency President Ernest Bai
Koroma on behalf of the Government and people of
Sierra Leone for the continued support and unfailing
interest of the Council, the wider membership of the
United Nations and our international partners towards
consolidating peace and security in Sierra Leone and
supporting our socioeconomic development aspirations.
I also apologize for the unavoidable absence of my
colleague, the Attorney General and Minister of
Justice. Please also accept our hearty congratulations
to you, Sir, for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of March 2013. We thank you for
giving our delegation the opportunity to contribute to
this briefing on the situation in Sierra Leone.

We were privileged to hear a while ago the presentation
by Executive Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jens Anders Toyberg-Frandzen, of the tenth report

of the Secretary-General (S/2013/118) on the activities
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), for the period 1 September
2012 to 28 February 2013, including key findings by
the technical assessment mission, which visited Sierra
Leone from 14 to 25 January 2013. The report clearly
outlines key achievements and remaining challenges.
We wish to thank the Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General and to also express our appreciation
for the excellent manner in which UNIPSIL continues to
partner and cooperate with the Government and people
of Sierra Leone in the delivery of its mandate. The
United Nations in Sierra Leone, under his leadership
as Resident Coordinator, continues to provide immense
technical support while allowing us to take the lead in
project selection, approval and monitoring.

Equally important is the very instructive briefing
we have just heard from the Chair of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission,
Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski of Canada, on his
recent visit to Sierra Leone in February. He underscores
the progress made in addressing key peacebuilding
priorities and the need for enduring support, particularly
in the areas of youth unemployment and empowerment;
building human capital; improving the justice system,
including the security sector; energy, management of
natural resources, agriculture and food security; the
constitutional review process; and the need for strong,
private-sector-led growth that could translate into more
tangible peace dividends.

We also wish to convey our sincere thanks and
appreciation to the members of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
through Ambassador Guillermo Rishchynski, as Chair,
for the relentless commitment and strong support they
continue to demonstrate in the pursuit of peace and
security in Sierra Leone. In particular, we note with
appreciation his interest, together with members of the
configuration, in the post-election political outlook
of Sierra Leone, including the support required of
the configuration, UNIPSIL and the agencies and
programmes towards a well-planned and equally well-
managed seamless transition to a more development-
focused phase ofpeacebuilding, as well as his views on
future support to Sierra Leone's political and economic
priorities.

Sierra Leone stands at the crossroads at this
stage of its peacebuilding journey. The decision as to
whether to draw down UNIPSIL or not should take into
account the challenges already outlined by the Chair
of the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, the Government of Sierra Leone, the
technical assessment team's report and the report under
consideration.

In other words, the process should be guided by
factors on the ground. In that regard, the immediate
and future consequences should be weighed, given
the present situation in the country and its immediate
neighbourhood. Furthermore, there is a need to
seriously consider the transition to a strong and well-
resourced Resident Coordinator system, in terms of the
much-needed technical expertise and funds, within a
time frame that avoids any gaps or hiccups along the
way.

We do not desire to be on the agenda of the Council
indefinitely, but the existing circumstances are such
that we see the need to prevail upon the Council to be
guided in its decisions on this sensitive and complex
matter by the prevailing circumstances in Sierra Leone
and the subregional dimensions. Of course, we share
the honour and glory of success, but also the blame
and responsibility for decisions that may prove wrong
and untimely. We are entirely in the Council's hands
and prepared to submit to the collective wisdom of the
Council in taking any crucial decision on the matter.

In taking forward our development aspirations
and addressing residual peacebuilding, security and
democratization issues, we look forward to the support
of UNIPSIL, even if it has to move into a phase of
transition. We therefore urge that any transition process
should be carefully thought out to the extent that due
consideration is given to the short-term and long-term
impact on the gains made thus far. In that regard,
we stand ready to partner with the United Nations,
the Peacebuilding Commission and development
partners in mapping out and implementing a smooth
and seamless transition process from UNIPSIL to the
normal United Nations esident Coordinator system as
and when necessary.

Today, we share the accolades in celebrating another
milestone in the consolidation of peace and security
in Sierra Leone through the conduct of successful,
violence-free, fair, transparent and credible elections,
which are considered to be a critical benchmark
signalling Sierra Leone's preparedness to move into
a more development-focused phase of peacebuilding.
That means that the democratic process is progressively
gaining firm footing as we position ourselves for a
smooth and seamless transition from the Agenda for
Change to the Agenda for Prosperity, which is tailored to
the spirit and purpose of the New Deal for Engagement
in Fragile States, agreed in Busan, Republic ofKorea, by
the Group of Seven Plus countries. In that connection,
I wish to express thanks and appreciation to all of our
friends and partners for their timely contributions to
the United Nations Development Programme basket
fund. I would like to particularly thank the leadership
of the Peacebuilding Support Office and staff for their
confidence and trust in making a huge investment in
our peacebuilding journey.

This year marks the eleventh year since the
conflict in Sierra Leone was officially declared over.
Since then, with the support of the Security Council,
the Peacebuilding Support Office, the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
international partners, remarkable progress has been
made in charting the path towards a peaceful, secure,
democratic Sierra Leone and its future prosperity. As
we commend ourselves for the gains made, some of
which are quite irreversible, it is crucial that, together,
we continue to tackle the remaining challenges in order
to further advance and consolidate comprehensively our
peacebuilding priorities aimed at building resilience.
Key among them is the increasing need to address
the economic, social and governance challenges to
match the growing expectations of Sierra Leoneans.
As already stated by the Chair of the configuration,
several of those challenges are long-term in nature and
will require sustained effort over a substantial period
of time, since much will depend on the global economic
scenario and the overall subregional security climate.

I am happy to report that tremendous progress is
being made in setting up the required structures to
address the three risk areas of youth unemployment
and empowerment; good governance and the rule of
law; and drug trafficking and organized crime, which
were identified in our Agenda for Change and endorsed
by the Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Sustained international support is,
however, required to fully address the challenges that
we continue to face at the national and subregional
levels.

On the socioeconomic and development front,
we remain committed to the strong partnership link
that exists between Sierra Leone, the United Nations
and the donor community. It is within that context
that Sierra Leone's experience is considered a best
practice in donor coordination and a success story in
peacebuilding. In that regard, we stress the need for the
international community to continue to invest in our
success by supporting and aligning with our Agenda
for Prosperity, which, as stated earlier, is anchored in
the Busan New Deal on aid effectiveness, as well as
to recognize the need for special attention to be paid
to countries emerging from conflict, Sierra Leone
being one of the pilot countries. The Agenda for
Prosperity, which is currently in the final stages of
completion and which includes broader national and
development partner consultations and buy-in, has as
its main focus taking Sierra Leone beyond the phase
of peacebuilding to being a more secure, peaceful,
developed and responsible member of the community
of nations. It aims to build a sustainable future for
all Siena Leoneans, including the young and the old,
the strong and the frail, the physically challenged, the
marginalized and disempowered, the majority and the
minority.

In his statement at the fourth opening ofParliament,
President Koroma clearly articulated his commitment
to putting Sierra Leone on the path to sustainability
and resilience. To that end, we will continue to engage
all stakeholders, including political parties and civil
society organizations, with a view to encouraging and
promoting national reconciliation, political dialogue
and an all-inclusive governance system, including
a constitutional review to address major political
and social issues, as well as gender equity. In the
constitutional review process, we will anchor in critical
analysis and broad-based national debate on the weak
or negative indicators that characterize such areas
as the rule of law, national unity, cohesion, inclusive
governance and social justice.

However, support from our international partners
to assist the Government in strengthening key national
democratic institutions - such as the Political Parties
Registration Commission, the Independent Media
Commission, the National Commission for Democracy,
the National Electoral Commission, the Human Rights
Commission of Sierra Leone and the Sierra Leone
Broadcasting Corporation - remains of paramount
significance. The high-level steering committee
comprised of elections basket fund partners, elections-
related agencies, the Sierra Leone Police, the justice
sector, civil society and the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Development, which effectively guided and
monitored funding and activities for the 2012 elections,
will continue its work in the post-elections period
ahead.

In line with the recommendations of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission aimed at addressing the
root causes of conflict in Sierra Leone, the Government
continues to collaborate with all national stakeholders
and the United Nations in promoting the enactment
of the gender-equality bill to enhance women's
participation in decision-making processes. Those
were also well articulated in the President's statement
during the State opening of Parliament, and reiterated
in his address to the women of Sierra Leone during the
celebration of International Women's Day, when he said
"Women are on the march - the whole country is on
the march to gender equity - there shall be no retreat".
The President has also declared 8 March every year as
National Women's Day.

In taking forward our development aspirations
and addressing residual peacebuilding issues, we
look forward to the support of UNIPSIL, even as
it moves into the uncharted course of its transition.
Let me therefore conclude by assuring members of
the Council, the Secretary-General, the PBC and the
wider United Nations membership of the Government's
readiness, willingness and interest in cooperating
with the Council's decision directed at ensuring a
smooth and seamless transition from UNIPSIL to a
Resident Coordinator system that will eventually mark
a successful outcome of UNIPSIL's mission and, in
general, United nations intervention in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding in Sierra Leone. We therefore urge
that the transition process should be carefully managed
to the extent that due consideration be given to the
short-term and long-term impact on the gains made so
far.

Finally, I commend the United Nations and our
international partners for the support provided towards
the completion of the work of the Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which has equally contributed immensely
to peacebuilding by sending a strong sign of an end to
impunity.

