Mr. Muita (Kenya): My delegation wishes to
commence, Mr. President, by congratulating you on
your appointment as Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and thanking you for
convening this important debate on peace and security
in Africa. My delegation also welcomes the presence
during these deliberations of the African Union (AU)
Commissioner for Peace and Security, Ambassador
Lamamra. Kenya also commends His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, Chairman of the AU-United
Nations panel, and his team for a wonderful report
(S/2008/813).

Peace and security has eluded many parts of the
continent of Africa for many decades. From the Horn
of Africa to the Great Lakes region to West Africa,
conflicts have been endemic. In past years, there has
been commendable progress both in achieving peace
and in fostering economic growth. However, new
threats emanating from the shift of inter-State to intra-
State conflicts have changed the nature and character
of the security framework.

The cost of these conflicts is having a negative
impact on the continent; it manifests itself through
massive destruction of property and the uprooting of
whole communities. In addition, general insecurity
inhibits economic development, and, along with the
consequent conflicts, brings with it an enormous
financial burden, including on the international
community. Related problems such as the destruction
of infrastructure, environmental degradation, disease
and the massive displacement of populations mean that
the aftermath of conflict is more damaging and long-
lasting than the conflict itself.

My delegation is encouraged by this debate
because it underscores the fact that Africa's peace and
security issues are now receiving increasing attention
at the international level. We are also heartened by the
broad acknowledgement that peace and security
concerns in Africa comprise an integral part of global
peace and security concerns. The causes and
consequences of conflicts and instability in Africa have
significant linkage to global developments and political
interactions in the international arena. The
international community therefore needs to offer
commensurate responses to crisis situations in Africa.
In the past, support rendered has tended to be
calculative, often delayed and, frankly, insufficient.
This trend undermines the very essence of the United
Nations, which is vested with the responsibility of
ensuring global peace and security.

Threats to peace and security in Africa are
diverse, and initiatives to contain them should equally
be diverse. They should consist of promoting long-term
conditions for development and security, building the
capacity of African institutions for early warning, as
well as enhancing their capacity to prevent, manage
and resolve conflicts.

Institutionalizing commitment to the core values
of the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) through leadership should also be a major
consideration. Any attempt to straitjacket conflict
resolution runs the risk of sacrificing effectiveness.
There is, therefore, a need for a programme of
democratizing the entire agenda of Africa's peace and
security architecture, starting with the basic structures
of government and looking outwards to the subregional
and regional institutions to mobilize collective action.

While the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for international peace and security,
regional and subregional organizations act on its behalf
and have proved useful precursors to larger United
Nations efforts. Kenya firmly supports the devolved
approach to conflict resolution and reiterates its
unflagging commitment to the support for regional
organizations such as the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
Economic Community of West African States. My
delegation encourages the strengthening of
partnerships between the AU and the United Nations in
the area of political and technical cooperation. To that
end, Kenya takes note of Security Council resolution
1809 (2008), which established the African Union-
United Nations panel to consider the modalities of how
to support peacekeeping operations established under a
United Nations mandate.

Kenya also welcomes the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission. We believe that its efforts
to marshal resources from the international community
serve to enhance integrated strategies for post-conflict
recovery. This to a great extent supplements regional
efforts and results in meaningful peace. We are
encouraged that the Commission has recognized the
role of African regional and subregional organizations
and the important role of women in peace and security
efforts. We look forward to the further strengthening of
these roles.

We know that peacebuilding is an important but
lengthy process. Nevertheless, we need to continue to
take concrete steps to address the root causes of
conflicts in Africa, especially the lack of economic and
social development and strong governance institutions,
and we need also to put in place mechanisms to ensure
that conflicts do not recur.

There has been tangible progress in focusing the
attention of the international community on socio-
political problems in Africa, especially in the Great
Lakes region and the Horn of Africa. Kenya and the
other neighbouring countries have been involved in
collaborative efforts to stabilize the region.

In that regard, Kenya especially welcomes
Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) which, inter
alia, provides a support package for the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), to be funded through
assessed United Nations contributions and the
establishment of a trust fund to allow for the funding of
the force. Cognizant of the security challenges in
Somalia, Kenya has offered to train Somali citizens,
who will thereafter join Somalia's security structure.

In conclusion, my country supports the resolution
of conflicts by peaceful means. Kenya's mediation
efforts in several conflicts in the Horn of Africa and its
continuous contribution of peacekeepers to missions in
Africa and beyond are testimony to its commitment to
the AU-United Nations partnership. My country thus
remains firmly committed to supporting the AU and the
United Nations in promoting peace efforts in Africa.
