Mr. Antenio (spoke in French): Given the
lateness of the hour, I shall not read out my prepared
text but will instead sum up my ideas. First, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting. This morning we carefully listened to the
statements of the Secretary-General, the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan and Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Ministers from Sierra Leone and Timor-
Leste, and of course, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Japan.

We commend this innovative initiative. This
morning we had an opportunity not only to listen to
countries on the agenda of the Peacebuilding
Commission, but we also heard about interesting
efforts, which could serve as lessons, from countries
that are not on the Commission's agenda. I believe that
we will take those experiences into account when we
undertake the review exercise.

In speaking of the African Union I will limit
myself to reiterating comments made earlier by the
representative of Ghana. As the Council is aware, the
African Union has developed its Policy Framework on
Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development aimed
at ensuring that countries do not relapse into conflict.
Above all, we have included the development aspect in
our approach. We have had the opportunity to address
the Council on the value of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations considering the
development aspect when addressing peacebuilding
issues. I believe that is a gap that we should not fear
addressing when reviewing the Peacebuilding
Commission.

The African Union has also incorporated the root
causes into its approach: we believe it is impossible to
build peace without addressing the root causes of
conflict. I think that too is a contribution that could
also be used in the United Nations approach to
peacebuilding.

The African Union Policy Framework is based on
certain principles such as national ownership, African
leadership, non-discrimination and, in particular,
inclusiveness. We know that partnerships are necessary
to achieve all the aims of peacebuilding. Thus we
propose the creation of an institutionalized partnership
between the multidimensional communities involved in
the African Union Policy Framework on Post-Conflict
Reconstruction and Development on the one hand and
the Peacebuilding Commission on the other.

Steps have already been taken. The African Union
and the Peacebuilding Commission have already met,
and the Chair of the PBC visited Addis Ababa with a
large delegation. We must see how to transform our
discussions into reality. There was also a meeting with
the African Union Peace and Security Council, which
is an important element of the African Union's peace
and security structure. Meetings between the African
Union Peace and Security Council and the United
Nations Security Council should be more than just pro
forma encounters. We must ensure that these meetings
lead to facts with a genuine impact on the partnership
we are building with the United Nations.

I think there are already lessons to be learned
from work on the ground. As the Council is aware, the
United Nations and the African Union are involved in
Darfur through the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur. I think there are lessons
being learned there that could also prove useful in the
review of the Peacebuilding Commission and in the
approach being developed by the United Nations.

The representative of Ghana was very eloquent in
addressing the regional aspect. We need to truly
involve the regions in peacebuilding. Ghana proposed a
far more integrated approach for cooperation among
the United Nations, the African Union and the regional
organizations, and we fully support that approach.

In practice, the African Union is currently
involved on the ground through its regional and other
offices and through its special envoys. We have
undertaken efforts in certain countries on the
Peacebuilding Commission agenda. There are
situations that are of concern, such as that in Guinea-
Bissau, which the Peace and Security Council and the
Security Council have been addressing. We believe that
the expected outcome will not occur until defence and
security sector reform has occurred in that country. We
therefore need to encourage regional efforts - those of
the Economic Community of West African States and
the African Union - and also to encourage bilateral
cooperation: I think there are countries, even on the
African continent, that are interested in helping
Guinea-Bissau. Thus it is important to encourage such
bilateral cooperation.

There are other salient aspects in countries where
the Peacebuilding Commission is involved. I am
thinking, for example, of youth employment.
Numerous delegations have repeatedly addressed this
issue in the Security Council and in the Peacebuilding
Commission. We cannot build peace unless we build a
future for young people. Young people are the future,
and unless they have support and a future before them,
there is little point in talking about peacebuilding.

Of late, we have come before the Security
Council a number of times to discuss various aspects of
peacebuilding. We have spoken of exit strategies and of
post-conflict peacebuilding, which is what we are
discussing today. Perhaps we should now think about
how we are going to turn the results of all of these
discussions into reality and about how they will have
an impact on the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission, which we are in the process of reviewing.

We also listened with great interest to the
Secretary-General's statement this morning, in
particular with regard to the establishment of an
advisory group to be led by Mr. Guehenno, with whose
experience we are all familiar. It would be desirable for
that advisory group to work in close coordination with
the Peacebuilding Commission and all partners.

Above all, we would like to emphasize the point
made about the need to listen to those who are
involved in peacebuilding on a daily basis, that is, the
people concerned. In that connection, we welcome the
initiative of the facilitators of the PBC review process
to go to Addis Ababa to speak to the Commission.

We also know that South Africa - and I stand to
be corrected - is considering organizing a seminar
with non-governmental organizations and populations
on the ground who are suffering every day and who
know what it is to have peace or not. I think these are
the types of forums that we need to encourage in order
to move forward effectively in this effort.
