Mr. Trujillo Garcia (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
I want to thank the Ambassador ofBolivia for convening
this briefing, as well as Mr. Jean Arnault for his briefing
on the Secretary-General's report (S/2018/874).

This being the first time that I am addressing the
Security Council, on behalf of President Ivan Duque
Marquez I would like to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General and to all the members of the Security
Council for their continued support to Colombia through
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
whose mandate has been extended unanimously.

Our recent elections gave President Duque a clear
democratic mandate to lead our national Government
for the next four years on the pillars of legality, equity
and entrepreneurship. The mandate supports the
unquestionable commitment of President Duque and his
Government to peace, stabilization and consolidation,
that is, to strengthening democratic institutions and
the rule of law, creating greater opportunities for
economic development and sustaining and expanding
social progress. That commitment goes further than the
Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building
a Stable and Lasting Peace, signed in 2016 by the
Government and the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP), and
above all corresponds to the values and principles of
the Constitution of 1991.

The agreement with the FARC-EP is an opportunity
that Colombia must take advantage of. As President
Duque indicated in the general debate of the General
Assembly a couple of weeks ago,

"Peace is an objective of all Colombians and all of
us, absolutely everyone, will work decisively for it.
However, peace needs to be built with the rule of
law, which combines the public goods of security
and justice. Our Government is going to work so
that the process of demobilization, disarmament
and reinsertion put forward in the past few years
will go forward successfully." (A/73/PV8, p. 23)

There are many challenges facing the Government
of Colombia with regard to the implementation of the
Final Agreement. Among other things, we are dealing
with a disconnect and a lack of funding, as is reflected
in the Secretary-General's report. That situation
requires corrective measures, which will be publicly
announced and carried out through institutional routes
with the aim of ensuring that the implementation of
the Final Agreement is truly conducive to its intended
goal of peace, stabilization and consolidation. All the
high-level Government bodies with responsibilities in
the areas of public order and citizen safety are fully
committed to that objective, not only with regard to
former FARC-EP combatants, but also in order to fully
ensure the human rights and democratic freedoms of
all Colombians.

We agree with the Secretary-General's report that
it is bad news that some of the leaders of the former
FARC-EP guerrillas who were in the areas used for
training and reintegration have abandoned their duty
to actively support the process. From this Chamber, we
urge them to return to their original course of action
and not to stray down a path of violence and illegality.

The assessment of the economic reintegration
process has acknowledged its uncertain progress, and
we share the concerns about it. We therefore intend
to adopt a new approach, with the aim of making up
for lost time and ensuring that the process has greater
impact, which will enable us to meet the expectations
that former combatants have of becoming full
citizens, meaningful members of their families and
economic actors contributing to the development of
their communities.
The social and economic integration of former
combatants is central to the implementation of the
Final Agreement, and our Government is aware of that.
However, as we work on it, it will be crucial to closely
coordinate all stakeholders, including State authorities,
the private sector, international assistance and United
Nations agencies. At the same time, combating the
cultivation of illicit crops is particularly urgent, given
its unprecedented expansion in recent years, as the
Secretary-General's report mentions. The fight against
illegal economies in all their forms and manifestations
is key to stabilizing Colombia and strengthening
peaceful coexistence. Our Government is committed to
making intelligent and responsible use of all the tools
and resources available to it within the framework of
the Constitution to tackle this problem, which threatens
not only the successful implementation of the Final
Agreement but also the integrity of our institutions and
our citizens' security.

We were pleased to note that the Secretary-
General's report recognizes the importance of some
of the initiatives that President Duque's Government
has undertaken, such as the national pact for life and
the protection of social leaders and human rights
defenders. In formulating the pact, we made progress
on the adoption of a comprehensive social policy that
includes early-warning alerts, quick-reaction protection
mechanisms, risk-prevention models and instruments
aimed at ensuring the effective punishment of
perpetrators of crimes against people from various
walks of life who are contributing to their communities'
well-being. We hope that this will ensure that acts such
as those oflast week will not be repeated.

The Government of Colombia stresses its
willingness to begin a dialogue with the National
Liberation Army as long as the conditions that have
been repeatedly outlined are met - that is, the release
of kidnap victims and a unilateral end to committing
verifiable criminal acts.

President Duque is aware of the deficiencies in the
peace agreement's implementation and his entire Cabinet
is already working to resolve them. His Government's

peace agenda is the Constitution's peace agenda, and
although it goes far beyond the peace agreement, it
acknowledges that its implementation is a valuable and
essential opportunity. We will therefore make sure that
we do not sacrifice that opportunity to the failures and
problems that the current Administration is facing at its
start. In that endeavour, we will continue to underscore
the issues of gender, ethnicity, children, victims and
justice. To that end, the support that the Council and its
members, together with the international community,
can continue to give us is crucial to ensuring that our
future generations inherit a fairer, safer and more

equitable and enterprising Colombia.

The meeting rose at 11.35 am.
