Mr. Khalid (Pakistan): First of all, Mr. President,
we would like to commend your initiative in convening
this meeting. We would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Kalomoh for presenting the
Secretary-General's report (S/2004/52).

Since the Security Council mission visited
Central Africa, a number of positive developments
have taken place. These include an improvement of the
political and security situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and, in Burundi, progress in the
implementation of the Arusha Agreement, with the
participation of the Conseil national pour la defense de
la democratic - Forces nationales pour la defense de
la democratie (CNDD-FDD) in the transitional
Government. There has also been an improvement in
the relations of the countries in the region, with the
explicit desire of many of their leaders to move
towards peace and reconciliation.

While we welcome these positive developments,
we must also be aware that much more needs to be
done to consolidate peace in the region. In this context,
we condemn the brutal killing of a Kenyan military
observer last week, and it is our hope that the
perpetrators ofthis crime will be brought to justice.

It is obvious that in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo progress is still required in the areas of
security sector reform and the rule of law, as well as in
the functioning of interim administrations, particularly
in Ituri. While we welcome the holding of elections in
May 2005, this must not be seen as an end in itself, but
a means to an end.

Similarly, in Burundi, the peace process will not
be complete without the inclusion in that process of all
the factions, in particular the Forces nationales de
liberation (FNL) (Rwasa) faction. There is also a need
to support the efforts of the African Union in Burundi,
address the issues of transitional justice, which are a
part of the Arusha Agreement, and help the badly
battered Burundian economy stand on its feet.

The international community's goal in both
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
must remain the consolidation of peace and stability.
One way to achieve this is by assisting both countries
in the following areas: first, in extending their State
authority; secondly, in carrying out meaningful security
sector reform through the creation of a truly general
national army and police; thirdly, in facilitating the
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of combatants, both local and foreign; fourthly, in
strengthening the rule of law and putting an end to
impunity; fifthly, in addressing humanitarian issues;
and sixthly, in promoting national economic
reconstruction and rehabilitation.

The recent tragic history of the region has clearly
demonstrated how easy it is for instability and conflict
in one country to spill over into another. Borders are
porous and do not make countries immune from the
free flow of arms and fighters and worsening
humanitarian situations. Such issues cannot be handled
by any one country alone. A regional approach is,
therefore, indispensable. However, such an approach
must aim at improving the political relations between
States and at helping them jointly resolve the
challenges they face.
As part of this regional approach, Pakistan
supports the convening of the international conference
on the Great Lakes region proposed for later this year.
The conference, however, must yield tangible results.
This can only be accomplished if the countries of the
region and their partners outside the region can work
together a priori to identify realistic objectives, themes
and structures. At the very least, this conference must
yield agreement on confidence-building measures to
help consolidate regional peace and stability.

At the same time, there are underlying issues of a
cross-cutting nature that will have to be addressed, and
not only within national or regional frameworks. Those
issues are the following.

First, one of the root causes of instability in the
region is poverty. There cannot be any peace without
poverty alleviation. The humanitarian situation, the
success of DDR and the consolidation of peace are not
possible without sufficient generation of sustainable
economic activity. The international community must
continue to assist not only the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Burundi, but also other countries in the
region, to promote long-term socio-economic
development.

Secondly, while greed may not have been the
cause of conflict, it has been responsible for
perpetuating it. There is an obvious and well-
established link between the illegal exploitation of
natural resources and the fuelling of conflicts in the
subregion. The Secretary-General's report clearly states
that "Illegal exploitation remains one of the main
sources of funding for groups involved in perpetuating
the conflict" (S/2004/52, paragraph 19). We must find
those who finance these wars by buying, trading and
engaging in the production and illegal exploitation of
the region's natural resources. The extension of State
authority and institutional reforms are imperative, as is
the need for full disclosure of revenues earned from
natural resources. We need a national, regional and
global approach to address those issues.

Thirdly, the success of the peace process thus far
has largely hinged on successful peacekeeping
efforts - in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC), and in
Burundi by the African Mission in Burundi (AMIB).
Both missions these need to be supported and, if
necessary, augmented by the United Nations. Pakistan,
as a major United Nations troop-contributor, will
continue to support such activities in the region.
Finally, on a policy level, the United Nations
itself needs to act coherently in Central Africa in
addressing the diverse requirements for consolidating
peace and stability in the region. It is imperative to
achieve greater coordination and synergy between the
endeavours of the three principal organs of the United
Nations - the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council - in addressing
the complex issues confronting the region. At the same
time, the active engagement of non-governmental
organizations, other United Nations agencies and, in
particular, the international financial institutions is
needed to bolster the whole effort. The idea suggested
by Pakistan of ad hoc composite committees could be
one means of building a comprehensive and coherent
approach by the United Nations and the international
community to complex crises.

