Mr. Moustafa (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to begin by thanking the three briefers on the
security and humanitarian situation in the Lake Chad
basin region. I thank Ms. Askira in particular for giving
us a local view on the situation. Those briefings have
given us some idea of the humanitarian tragedy that the
region is facing. It is a tragedy that the countries and
people of the region have been suffering for some time
now. Unfortunately, the crisis has gotten more serious
recently, as was indicated by the briefers, owing in
particular to the security situation in certain countries,
such as Mali and Libya, and the environmental threats
in the region.

The military operations of the Multinational Joint
Task Force (MNJTF) have made significant progress
in fighting Boko Haram and have been able to limit its
activity. We commend the leadership of the MNJTF.
Egypt calls upon the international partners and the
international community to increase their aid to the
MNJTF so that it can, once and for all, complete its task,
put an end to Boko Haram and liberate the outstanding
areas still under that group's control.

With regard to prevention, Egypt would invite
the international community to provide the necessary
support to the Governments of the region to help
them with their rehabilitation programmes for former
Boko Haram fighters and to help the Governments
to rehabilitate the villages that have been freed from
Boko Haram.

At the 10 January ministerial open debate under
your presidency (see S/PV.7857), my delegation
stressed the need to adopt an approach that would
address the root causes of those problems. The crisis in
the Lake Chad basin region is an example ofa situation
that would benefit from such an approach. We need
to concentrate on developing institutional and human
capacity in order to eradicate the terrorist groups and
counter their ability to recruit young people to commit
crimes on their behalf. That requires assistance to the
countries of the region so that they are able to invest in
health and economic and social development projects.
We need to build and sustain peace in order to put
an end to the crisis, as Ambassador Power said a few
moments ago. That means, inter alia, that we need to
have a new comprehensive Sahel strategy, because the
strategy up until now has been rather lacking.

The approach that I have referred to requires
the international community, including the United
Nations and its specialized agencies and regional and
subregional organizations, to pool their efforts and work
together with the States of the region. What is needed
is coordination and cooperation among the mechanisms
of all of the parties concerned, because that will ensure
peace and save the peoples of the region from political,
humanitarian and security crises.

Egypt is fully prepared to step up its cooperation
with the countries of the Lake Chad basin region
through projects and programmes under the Egyptian
Partnership Agency for Development, with a view to
alleviating the crisis faced by the region and its people.
That will be within the framework of a comprehensive
strategy aimed at sustaining peace in that region and
other regions of the African continent.

