I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict; Ms. Angelina Jolie, Special Envoy of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; Ms. Khin Ohmar, Founder and Chair of Progressive Voice, on behalf of NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Nadia Carine Therese Fornel-Poutou, Executive President, Association des Femmes Juristes de Centrafrique; as well as the statements delivered by Their Excellencies Mr. Philippe Goffin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Defence of Belgium; Mr. Heiko Maas, Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany; Mrs. Naledi Pandor, Minister for International Relations and Cooperation of South Africa; Ms. Elback Zeinabou Tari Bako, Minister for the Advancement of Women and Child Protection of the Niger; and by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, Indonesia, the Russian Federation and Viet Nam, in connection with the video-teleconference convened on Friday, 17 July 2020 on women and peace and security: conflict-related sexual violence. In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for this video-teleconference, the following delegations and entities submitted written statements, copies of which are also enclosed: Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, the European Union, Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, the Netherlands, Nigeria, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Peru, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates and Uruguay. In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020 from the President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, the enclosed briefings and statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council.
