Mr. Mudenge (Zimbabwe): At the outset, Sir, let
me congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month.

My delegation welcomes the convening of this
open debate on the addendum to the report of the Panel
of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Having
participated in the debate on the ground-breaking
earlier report on the illegal exploitation of the
resources of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on
3 May 2001, my delegation has requested the floor to
express its views on the follow-up report before us.

Mr. President, I know you are familiar with the
African saying "Cash talk breaks no friendship", which
is really a call for candid and frank discourse. My
submission will adhere to that wise, time-honoured
saying and call a spade by no other name - it is a
spade, not a "digging instrument".

It is both a misnomer and a travesty of justice to
try to pass off the document before us as an addendum
to the April report by the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In this addendum, the difference between a legal
and an illegal business transaction has been abandoned.
"Same difference", it seems to say. But, sadly for those
who put the addendum together, the difference is not
the same. The committee abandoned its terms of
reference in pursuit of a new agenda of its own - or is
it someone's private agenda?

Reacting to this report, the Information Minister
of the Congo, the Honourable Kikaya Bin Karubi,
rejected any suggestion that Angola, Namibia or
Zimbabwe was looting the resources of the Congo.
According to the Minister:

"These were countries that came to our
rescue in this war of aggression. Zimbabwe,
Angola and Namibia are here at the request of the
Government and the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and in the process we
have signed legitimate agreements to go into
business ventures, and these agreements exist
with countries throughout the world. On the other
hand, Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi invaded our
country and are looting the resources of the
Congo and at the same time killing our people.
More than 3 million have died as a result of this
war. So you cannot put Zimbabwe, Angola and
Namibia on par with Rwanda, Burundi and
Uganda."
But then the new report casts a slur and doubt on
the legality and authority of the Governments of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since 1997. This
offensive misadventure leads the Panel into dangerous
waters. To blur the difference between legality and
illegality, the document abandons the Security Council
terms "invited" and "uninvited" countries and settles
for the term "allies" of what it refers to as "the
Kinshasa Government" or "Government in
Kinshasa"- see paragraphs 70 and 71 of the
addendum. I shall deal with the connotations of the
latter phrase elsewhere in order to expose its
subversive nature.

Minister Karubi's observation is an echo of
President Joseph Kabila's and, indeed, the Congolese
people's position vis-a-vis the illegal exploitation of
their natural resources.

With the Council's permission, I will go down
memory lane with the express object of reminding the
Council of what transpired here on the occasion of the
debate on the report of the United Nations Panel of
Experts on the Illegal Exploitation of Natural
Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on 3 May 2001.

On that occasion, my delegation submitted that
President Joseph Kabila of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo had addressed the Parliament of Zimbabwe
on 27 March 2001. After expressing appreciation for
the African solidarity shown by Zimbabwe, Angola and
Namibia in responding to the request of the legitimate
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to defend its territorial integrity and sovereignty, and
after inviting and encouraging mutual beneficial
economic cooperation between Zimbabwe and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and referring to
"our mutual projects, like the Senga Mines", among
others, he had this to say:

S/l'VA437

 

"The joint ventures between our two
Governments are not to be confused with the
looting of the mineral resources of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, as is the case
in the occupied zones of my country."

He went on to say:

"Other projects have already started on a
strong footing, including the joint venture
between the Civil Aviation Authority of
Zimbabwe and the Regie des Voies Aeriennes, its
Congolese counterpart, the Air Zimbabwe and the
Lignes Aeriennes Congolaises project, the
National Railways of Zimbabwe and the Societe
Nationale des Chemins de Fer Du Congo, the
Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority and the
Societe Nationale d'Electricite, to name just a
few."

He went on to invite experts from both sides to come
up with "new creative projects that will benefit our two
countries", adding that

"we must accelerate the implementation of the
Memorandum of Understanding, which included
free circulation of goods and people between our
two countries."

President Joseph Kabila concluded by saying:

"The relationship between the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Angola, Namibia and
Zimbabwe in particular and the Southern African
Development Community region in general must
be a good example of integration and southern
African cooperation."

Who is better qualified to pronounce on the
legality of the economic cooperation between
Zimbabwe and the Democratic Republic of the Congo
than the President of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo himself? But, of course, to the Panel that wrote
the addendum, it seems he is only the President of the
"Government in Kinshasa" and not that of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Panel of Experts on the Illegal Exploitation
of Natural Resources and Other Forms of Wealth of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo was established at
the request of the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, then led by the late President
Laurent Desire Kabila. It must be recalled that the
Government of the late President Laurent Kabila was

accepted and recognized as the full, sovereign and
legitimate Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo by the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Non-Aligned Movement, the United
Nations and all other international organizations. Even
the Security Council in its resolutions recognized and
accepted this fact. My delegation therefore finds it
unacceptable for this report to refer to the legitimate
Government of the Congo as "the Kinshasa
Government" or "the Government in Kinshasa".

This language is reminiscent of the language used
by the rebels prior to the signing of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement in July 1999. This language is an
apologia for the invasion of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. We find it unacceptable that a United
Nations document should serve as a propaganda
mouthpiece for positions which are intolerable and
have since been largely abandoned by their
progenitors.

As a former Chairman of the Political Committee
charged with the implementation of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, I appeal to the United Nations to
expunge from all its documents such language, which
has been rejected by the Political Committee as
undermining the peace process. Whenever any of the
parties to the Lusaka Process uses such phrases, he or
she is immediately asked to withdraw and required to
refer to the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, as provided for in the Lusaka Agreement. A
representative of the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) is always present at our meetings and it is
therefore unacceptable that a United Nations Panel
should be so insensitive on such an important issue -
unless, of course, there is another agenda at play here.

There is only one Government in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, which, in exercise of its right
to self-defence as enshrined in Article 51 of the United
Nations Charter, invited the SADC countries to come
to its assistance in fending off aggression against its
territory. The intervention followed the decision of a
properly constituted extraordinary meeting of the Inter-
State Defence and Security Committee (ISDSC) of the
SADC Organ on Politics, Defence and Security. The
ISDSC meeting was held in Harare from 17 to 18
August 1998 under the chairmanship of the Minister of
Defence of Zambia, Mr. Chitalu M. Sampa.

Sll'V.4437

 

At that meeting, there was recognition that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, a SADC member
State, had been invaded and that the sister countries of
Uganda and Rwanda had deployed their forces as far
west as Matadi and Kitona on the Atlantic seaboard in
support of what they claimed was an internal rebellion.
The ISDSC meeting unanimously recommended that
SADC countries in a position to do so should
immediately go to the assistance of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Subsequently, the SADC
summit chaired by former President Nelson Mandela of
South Africa, held in Mauritius on 13 and 14
September 1998, stated in paragraph 21 of its
communique the following:

"The Summit welcomed initiatives by
SADC and its member States intended to assist
the restoration of peace, security and stability in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in
particular the Victoria Falls and Pretoria
initiatives. In this regard, the Summit reaffirmed
its call for an immediate cessation of hostilities
and commended the Governments of Angola,
Namibia and Zimbabwe for timeously providing
troops to assist the Government and people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to defeat the
illegal attempt by rebels and their allies to
capture the capital city, Kinshasa, and other
strategic areas."

The legitimacy of Zimbabwe's military
intervention in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
has been further recognized and accepted by the OAU
and by the Security Council in its resolutions 1234
(1999) and 1304 (2000), among others.

My Government takes great exception to
paragraph 76 of the report, which imports lock, stock
and barrel the caricatures and grotesque and false
misrepresentations of the situation in my country
peddled daily on the Internet and in the media by those
dedicated to demonizing, vilifying and ostracizing my
country, as was triumphantly and gloatingly announced
in the British House of Commons recently. We reject
this lampooning of our country with contempt. It is
unworthy of a United Nations document to use such
patronizing and anti-Zimbabwe language. If I might
ask: What has the internal situation in my country, as
falsely painted by our enemies and repeated by the
Panel, got to do with the illegal exploitation of
resources in the DRC? Nothing, absolutely nothing! It
is gratuitous and panders to the wishes and interests of
those who vociferously asked that there be a second

report to vilify Zimbabwe.

For example, the report alleges the existence of
one-party rule in Zimbabwe. This is a damned lie, an
unashamed falsehood. Zimbabwe may have a dominant
political party, but this does not translate into one-party
rule. There are over 30 registered political parties in
Zimbabwe today. It may interest the Council to know
that Zimbabwe is the second-longest stable multi-party
democracy in Africa, after Botswana. Zimbabwe,
which became independent in an epoch-making general
election in 1980, is still a multi-party democracy. Since
1980, Zimbabweans have exercised their democratic
right to elect their leaders and representatives every
five years, as demanded by the Constitution, in the
1985, 1990, 1995 and 2000 general elections.
Presidential elections were held in 1996 and new ones
are scheduled for March this coming year.

The reference to Zimbabwe as a one-party State
is therefore untrue and malicious propaganda from the
textbook of our detractors. Today, the two opposition
parties have 57 of the 120 elected seats and before
losing one in a by-election they had 58 seats. We are
now preparing for our next presidential elections in
March next year, to which we intend to invite
international observers from SADC, the Economic
Community of West African States, OAU/African
Union, Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America. From
Europe, we will invite some friendly countries,
especially those that have avoided interfering in our
internal affairs by, inter alia, desisting from funding the
opposition, as some European countries have done.
Last year, we had over 2000 journalists and tens of
thousands of observers watching our general elections.

But read the media and hear! Zimbabwe does not
have a land "appropriation" policy, as the addendum
puts it, but a land reform programme that has been
declared legal and constitutional by the Supreme Court
of Zimbabwe. It is evil and wrong that a mere 4,100
white commercial farmers, mainly of British
extraction, should own over 70 per cent of the best
arable land in a country of 14 million black people.
This is a relic of British colonialism. I find it intriguing
that the Panel should have decided to hear evidence
from the representatives of the 4,100 Commercial
Farmers' Union, an organization that has absolutely no
relevance to, and no expert knowledge about the illegal
exploitation of the resources of, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. But, of course, if the aim was

S/l'VA437

 

to tap into anti-Zimbabwe Government sentiments,
then the strategy is quite understandable and yielded
the intended results.

It is not surprising, therefore, that the land reform
programme in my country, which has absolutely
nothing to do with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, has been dragged into this report. But the facts
are that the fast-track land reform programme referred
to in this addendum started only in February 2000; yet
the invasion of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and our subsequent intervention took place in August
1998. The Security Council is aware of the fact that the
Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement was signed in July 1999.
What has an event that started in February 2000 got to
do with issues covering the period 1998 and July 1999?

Of course, let us not miss the agenda behind this
addendum. It is to besmirch Zimbabwe. Hence,
reference to land appropriation in this report is
intended to induce negative sentiments towards
Zimbabwe in international opinion, which is daily fed
on manure as far as the land question in Zimbabwe is
concerned. To avoid any lingering doubt the Supreme
Court in Zimbabwe has recently pronounced the land
reform programme to be not only legal and
constitutional, but to have been carried out in
accordance with the rule of law. In view of the
fandango of lies and falsehoods peddled by purveyors
of malice against my country, I doubt if the judgement
is widely known around the world.

The report further alleges that the failing
Zimbabwe mining industry acted as a motivational
factor in my country's decision to intervene in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Currently,
Zimbabwe exploits over 30 different types of minerals
that include platinum, gold, chrome, cobalt, copper, tin
and zinc. My country, God be praised, is blessed by
having a geological formation known to experts as the
Great Dyke. It is a trove of mineral wealth, which we
are only beginning to survey and exploit systematically
and scientifically. Zimbabwe is now the third largest
platinum producer in the world and is likely to move to
spot number two in three years' time. As a result of
recent geological surveys, it has been established that
Zimbabwe has a number of diamond-bearing
Kimberlite pipes. There is, if I may add, a near Wild
West frenzy among prospectors from around the world
regarding these pipes. Already Rio Tinto has tested the
viability of one of its claims and full exploitation
begins early in the new year. Others are at various
stages in this exciting development.

We remain and we shall continue for some time
to be a major mining country in our own right.
However, we do not control the prices of our minerals
and metals, which have remained depressed for some
time. And, of course, we have been under informal
sanctions by the international financial institutions and
some countries for the last two years because of our
land reform programme and our decision to assist our
brothers and sisters of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. But the puny, pathetic picture of Zimbabwe
painted by the addendum is the wishful thinking of our
detractors, which should have no place in such a report.

In spite of these endeavours to caricature
Zimbabwe's internal situation, I can assure the Council
that the situation as the Panel depicts it is largely a
figment of a fertile imagination. Those, like my
colleagues from the Southern African Development
Community (SADC), who are willing to be objective
see it differently. I wish, with the Council's permission,
to submit a copy of the communique of the SADC
Ministerial Task Force on developments in Zimbabwe
issued this week, on 11 December 2001, and request
that it be circulated as a document of the Security
Council.

I wish in particular to draw the Council's
attention to paragraph 11 of the communique, in which
the SADC Ministers "expressed their concern at
distorted and negative perceptions of Zimbabwe
projected by the international and regional media". If
they had read this addendum's reference to the internal
situation in Zimbabwe, I have no doubt that they would
have added it to the list of those purveying "distorted
and negative perceptions of Zimbabwe".

The report alleges that the allies of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo demanded
compensation from the Government for their
assistance. The simple answer is we did no such thing.
This is yet another attempt at tarnishing my country's
image and demeaning and debasing our noble
intervention. Within SADC there is a tradition of
coming to each other's assistance, and Zimbabwe itself
has been one of the beneficiaries of this spirit of
solidarity and pan-Africanism. Many countries in the
region made sacrifices for Zimbabwe's independence.
We did not promise or pay them anything; neither did
they demand compensation.

Sll'V.4437

 

It is therefore mischievous to suggest that we
would demand compensation from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, because we regard it a bounden
duty and moral obligation to return the favour done for
us by other African countries. In the past, we have
rendered assistance within this framework to our
brothers in Mozambique. We spent seven years in
Mozambique. We were paid nothing and we demanded
nothing. We are continuing to do so today in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and we will do so
in the future, should we be called upon and are able to
do so.

If I may refer to the issue of our joint ventures
with the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Council may wish to know that this was a Congolese
idea and that it was they who decided on the
shareholding structure of the ventures. Zimbabwe
merely responded positively to the offer. The
Democratic Republic of the Congo invited its allies in
joint ventures in the hope of raising resources to
support the whole effort and of strengthening economic
cooperation within the SADC family.

The phenomenon of joint ventures with other
countries is prevalent in SADC. Zimbabwe has joint
ventures with countries like Malawi, Namibia,
Botswana, South Africa, Tanzania and Mozambique.
Areas covered include the hospitality sector, banking
and finance, and transport. Even the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has joint ventures with other
SADC countries other than the three allies, indeed, as
Minister Karubi said, with countries throughout the
world.

The same cannot be said of the behind-the-scene
deals that certain Western Governments and companies
are concluding with the rebels, as disclosed in the
earlier report. The current report is therefore a
smokescreen meant to conceal the shadowy activities
of Western companies, while turning the spotlight on
Zimbabwe's perfectly legal joint ventures in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Panel has negatively portrayed the
relationships with Zimbabwe of certain individuals
doing business in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but has left out certain facts and other
significant connections of these individuals with other
countries. The case in point is that of John Bredenkamp
and Billy Rautenbach. The Council will be interested
to know that John Bredenkamp has been publicly listed

among the 100 wealthiest men in the United Kingdom.
However, his association with the United Kingdom is
conveniently not mentioned. In the case of Billy
Rautenbach, his family has had business interests in the
region, including in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for over 30 years. These business interests,
which predate this current conflict, are omitted,
creating the impression that his business interests in
the Congo began only with Zimbabwe's intervention in
that country. These are private businessmen pursuing
their own interests like other private businessmen from
around the world. They happen to be residents in my
country. They are citizens of other countries.

My delegation finds it obscene for this report to
allege that Zimbabwe is assisting and supplying arms
to the FDD rebels from Burundi. Yet the institutions
established by the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and the
United Nations - the Joint Military Commission and
MONUC, respectively - have not verified this alleged
support for the FDD. This is one of several despicable
attempts by our detractors to sour relations between
Zimbabwe and South Africa. Zimbabwe would never
undermine the facilitation efforts by South Africa in
the Burundi peace process. Zimbabwe and South Africa
are solid partners and brothers in SADC. I wish
therefore to lay to rest the ghost of those who think
they can succeed in tearing us asunder.

Let me now turn to the conclusions and
recommendations of the Panel. The Panel calls on the
Security Council to create a special commission that
would revise and review all concessions, commercial
agreements and contracts signed during President
Laurent Kabila's rule. I find this conclusion intriguing
indeed.

The concept of unequal treaties, which the panel
introduces, is very fascinating. My Government is
willing to cooperate with and assist the Council in fully
developing and exploring this concept so that it is not
used selectively but can be universally applicable. It
may very well be found that most agreements signed
with African chiefs by colonial representatives under
false pretences, if reviewed by such a committee
established by this Council, are invalid. The crisis of
land rights, mineral rights and other such forms of
alienation of indigenous people from their natural
resources in southern Africa and other developing
nations might benefit from the application of such a
progressive concept.

S/l'VA437

 

We may also wish to extend this new-found
morality in treaty-making to those agreements signed
by the victors of World War One and World War Two.
The possibilities opened by such a line of enquiry, if
pursued objectively, may prove to be most salubrious
indeed. What is wicked and dishonest would be to
apply it selectively.

The Panel must make up its mind about how it
intends to characterize Zimbabwe's presence in the
Congo. In one instance, Zimbabweans are perceived as
pirates plundering every mineral resource that catches
their eye. In the next instance, Zimbabwe is said to be
paying millions from its own resources to sustain its
intervention. It is therefore alleged that Zimbabwe has
been miserably impoverished by its intervention to a
point where it can no longer meet its balance of
payments. Either Zimbabwe is presently benefiting, or
it is not. The report should not be schizophrenic about
this.

Whether we are benefiting or not is discussed
elsewhere, in paragraph 58 of the report, where it says

"As Zimbabwe's joint ventures in mining
and timber begin to mature and become
profitable, it may be tempted to retain a sizeable
military presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo".

"Tempted" - in future. Two important points are made
here. The first, which is correct, is that the joint
ventures - except those in civil aviation - have not
yet matured or become profitable. We have reaped no
profits. We have sunk capital that may or may not
prove profitable. Mining is a risky business. There are
no guarantees of success in spite of the promising
prospects. This is not illegal exploitation of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; it is investment in
that country.

In all our joint ventures, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has at least 51 per cent of the shares and
a majority on the board of directors. These agreements
can be renegotiated at any time if any of the parties
requests such a renegotiation. If all companies and
countries adopted a similar policy in their business
practices in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it
would indeed be revolutionary and would set new
standards in development cooperation. We are proud of
our joint ventures with the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and challenge all other investors to follow our
example for the good of the Congolese nation.

It is this inherent fairness of the structure of these
joint venture agreements that will protect Zimbabwe's
investment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and not the presence of the Zimbabwe army. The
speculation that Zimbabwe will be tempted to maintain
a sizeable military presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to protect its investments is
maliciously thrown into the report in spite of my
country's numerous, authoritative and binding
commitments made on several occasions under the
Lusaka Agreement, during meetings of the Political
Committee, to the Security Council and in countless
bilateral discussions within Africa, SADC and with
some members of this Council.

Since the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement was
signed, Zimbabwe has been pleading with the Security
Council to urgently deploy a meaningful peacekeeping
contingent in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
order to guarantee that country's security after the
withdrawal of foreign forces. We have repeatedly
brought our concerns to the attention of the Council
directly, through the Political Committee, through our
contacts with the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and numerous other interlocutors.
Notwithstanding our many appeals and our oft stated
deep disappointment at the hesitation of the United
Nations in deploying sufficient peacekeepers, it is only
now that we are beginning to see the initial stages of
phase III deployment being initiated.

There is therefore no truth whatsoever in the
Panel's speculative assertion that our continued
presence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
intended to prolong the war for the economic benefit of
Zimbabwe. If the Council accepts this notion, then it
should also be prepared to accept the inherent
implication that the Council itself, through what
appears to outsiders to be an overcautious approach, is
also deliberately prolonging the war.

To avoid any doubt, I now wish to restate my
country's readiness to pull out of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo - in accordance with the
provisions of the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and
whenever requested by the Democratic Republic of the
Congo Government to do so. Either of the
aforementioned conditions is sufficient to cause an
immediate and total withdrawal of my country's troops
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Sll'V.4437

 

In conclusion, I wish to advise that my
Government intends in due course to submit through
your good offices a detailed rebuttal of the innuendos
and inaccuracies with which this hurriedly drawn
Zimbabwe-bashing pamphlet is replete.

