Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): As I
begin my remarks, allow me to welcome to the Council
His Excellency Mr. Ivica Dacie, Prime Minister of
Serbia, and His Excellency Mr. Hashim Thaci, Prime
Minister of Kosovo. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Farid Zarif, for presenting the quarterly report
of the Secretary-General (S/2013/72) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).

In his report, the Secretary-General underscores
the constructive approach taken and the pragmatism
shown by the authorities in Pristina and Belgrade in
the high-level political dialogue held under the aegis
of the European Union. The most recent session of that
dialogue was held the day before yesterday in Brussels,
with the participation of the two Prime Ministers. We
welcome the progress made at that meeting, and we
hope that it will be made concrete at the next meeting,
scheduled for 2 April.

Luxembourg firmly supports the efforts by the
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, Baroness Catherine Ashton,
as facilitator of that dialogue. I would like to join the
Secretary-General in commending Serbian and Kosovar
leaders for having committed themselves to the path of
dialogue, which has allowed for concrete results to be
achieved on the ground since the most recent debate of
the Council on this issue (see S/PV.6872). I would like
to note in particular the effective implementation of the
agreement on the integrated management of crossing
points as it relates to gates l, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 31 of the
agreement. Those efforts should be continued and the
achievements to date consolidated on the ground.

The meeting between the Presidents of Kosovo
and Serbia that took place on 6 February in Brussels
in the presence of Baroness Ashton, the first since
the declaration of independence by Kosovo, was an
important step towards the normalization of relations
between Belgrade and Pristina.

Much progress towards peace and stability has
been made since UNMIK's establishment, in 1999, by
virtue of resolution 1244 (1999). The context in which
the Mission and the other international missions are
operating, including the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), has radically changed.
The security conditions in Kosovo are evolving in
a positive direction. In that regard, the report of the
Secretary-General underscores that, on the whole, the
security situation is calm, with the exception of the
north of Kosovo. In particular, in northern Mitrovica,
several serious incidents have been reported, in
particular acts of violence against Kosovo Serbs and
incidents targeting the personnel, assets and projects of
the administrative office put in place by the Kosovar
authorities in northern Mitrovica.

We are concerned by the recent acts of vandalism
targeting Orthodox religious sites, and we firmly
condemn all acts of intolerance. While the total number
of incidents affecting minority groups has diminished,
there must be a redoubling of efforts to ensure peaceful
coexistence between the different population groups in
Kosovo. No effort should be spared to minimize tension,
particularly in northern Kosovo. In that connection, I
commend the work of UNMIK and EULEX in support
of the Kosovar authorities, including the participation
of EULEX in the recruitment of the new multi-ethnic
police unit that will be charged with protecting religious
sites.

The European Union is determined to continue
its support for Kosovo. The extension of the EULEX
mandate through June 2014 will allow the European
Union Mission to continue with its capacity-building
efforts in the area of the rule of law and help the
Kosovar authorities to undertake prosecutions against
the authors of war crimes, as well as to step up the fight
against corruption and organized crime. We welcome
the significant work undertaken by the Special
Investigative Task Force of EULEX to consolidate the
high-level support it has in all of the countries of the
region and to prepare for the operational phase of the
investigation into allegations of organ trafficking set out
in the report of Council of Europe Special Rapporteur
Dick Marty and into the information provided on that
subject to the Security Council.

For its part, Luxembourg remains committed
to the stability of Kosovo through its participation
in the Kosovo Force, to the development of the rule
of law through its contribution to EULEX and to the
socioeconomic development of the country through a
major cooperation programme focused on professional
training in the areas of water management and health.

In conclusion, allow me to reaffirm our deeply held
conviction that the future of Kosovo, as that of Serbia,
must take place in a resolutely European context. My
country is prepared to continue to support the efforts of
those two countries and their leaders in order to achieve
those common objectives.

