Ms. Wensley (Australia): Thank you, Mr.
President, for organizing this open debate, as well as
for the gesture of having non-Council members speak
before members. As the saying goes, one swallow does
not a summer make. But, as we have now had at least
two swallows, perhaps, if summer is not with us, then
spring in the form of further Security Council reform
may be just around the corner.

Speaking at the Millennium Summit last year, the
Australian Prime Minister, John Howard, observed that
for nations, as for individuals, no rights come without
responsibility, and no prosperity comes without price.
My own country has made its contribution to paying
the price of international peace and security. It has
participated willingly and, we would like to believe,
effectively in more than 30 peacekeeping and peace-
monitoring operations in the years since the foundation
of the United Nations. Our decision to participate in
today's stocktaking debate is a further practical
expression of our commitment.

We were heartened to see the same commitment
expressed by the leaders of the world's nations in the
Security Council and General Assembly millennium
resolutions, encouraging the United Nations to
strengthen and modernize its role in maintaining
international peace and security. We were also
particularly pleased to see the recognition of the ever-
growing complexity of the issues that affect
international peace and security, including, as spelled
out in Security Council resolution 1318 (2000), issues
of HIV/AIDS, which are to be taken up this year during
the special session of the General Assembly, in which
my Government is playing a particular role, as well as
the issues of the development of international criminal
law and of small-arms trafficking.

With regard to HIV/AIDS, I want to draw the
attention of members to a forthcoming ministerial
meeting on HIV/AIDS and development in the Asia-
Pacific region, which will be hosted by Australia in
Melbourne in October. This meeting is being organized
as a separate but complementary part of the 6th
International Congress on AIDS in Asia and the
Pacific. It will seek to strengthen action being taken to
address this issue in our region. Given the words of the
Secretary-General at the beginning of our debate in
particular, we see this as a concrete, practical follow-up
to the decisions taken at the Millennium Summit.

I want to take this opportunity to express
Australia's support for the principles, as well as the
decisions, contained in last September's summit
resolution, and to welcome warmly the recent activities
of the Council in moving them forward. Specifically,
we are very pleased by the establishment by the
Council of a working group on peacekeeping whose
mandate includes enhancing consultations with troop-
contributing countries. We listened carefully to the
remarks of our colleagues about this, and see it as a
good start to a process that is clearly going to be
developed and refined as we continue to have more and
more meetings.

Secondly, we were very pleased to see last
month's open debate on peace-building and the
Secretary-General's consultations with regional
organizations. Thirdly, we are pleased about the action
taken to support the commitment made in the Council
declaration on preventing the flow of small arms into
areas of conflict. This is a problem of particular
resonance in our South Pacific region.

Australia is currently the sixth-largest contributor
of United Nations peacekeeping personnel and, as I
indicated at the outset, has a longstanding commitment
to United Nations peacekeeping. This is reflected in
our current contribution to East Timor and our
participation in United Nations missions in Africa and
the Middle East. However, we believe that our
contribution to peacekeeping and to the peaceful
resolution of conflicts also extends to regional efforts.
These are not United Nations operations, but we
consider that they have made a contribution to the
efforts of the United Nations with respect to the
protection of international peace and security because,
by our regional efforts, we have made a United Nations
operation unnecessary. I am referring in particular to
the Peace Monitoring Group on Bougainville and the
International Peace Monitoring Team in the Solomon
Islands, both of which are assisting in a very real way
in building confidence and providing the conditions on
the ground necessary for bringing the various parties in
conflict together to resolve their differences. We keep
the United Nations very closely informed about these
operations, and we see a real value in continuing
dialogue and interaction as we work in the region to
deal with these conflicts.

We think that this demonstrates very concretely
our commitment to burden-sharing. Having
demonstrated our own willingness over many years to
contribute to United Nations and international
peacekeeping, often far from our shores, we believe
that, from time to time, we can reasonably look to
others to share the burden of peacekeeping in our own
immediate region.

The Brahimi report on United Nations peace
operations provides us all with the opportunity to bring
about major and much-needed changes in the way the
United Nations carries out its responsibility for
maintaining international peace and security. We
welcome the action taken to date, including the
increase in personnel granted to the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) late last year. We
express strong support for the current review of DPKO.
It is essential that its strategic and planning capacity
can be strengthened.

However, in our View, work on implementation is
really only in the first phase; much remains to be done
to give effect to many worthwhile aspects of the report.
Despite differences of opinion on the detail of some of
the report's recommendations, we urge all countries to
join together in working to address and resolve the
problems it identifies, in particular, issues such as rapid
force deployment capacity, regular financing
mechanisms, post-conflict management, peace-building
programmes and the training of personnel.

I want to make particular mention of East Timor,
because we would argue that the success of the
United Nations operations in East Timor has underlined
the critical importance, in designing and implementing
United Nations operations, of strong support from
Member States, and an appropriate, clear and decisive
mandate, as well as a clear exit strategy. In this respect,
we welcome the useful open Council debate in
November last year on exit strategies. We note the
major effect on the credibility of the United Nations of
how an operation is conducted and concluded, and we
hope that in time the operation in East Timor will be a
model in this respect.

In its resolution, the Council also stressed the
need to bring to justice perpetrators of crimes against
humanity, genocide, war crimes and other serious
violations of humanitarian law. I would like to say that
Australia, like Sweden-whose representative, our
colleague, spoke earlier-has always had a strong
commitment to the development of international
criminal law, in particular as expressed through our
support for the International Criminal Tribunals for the
former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, as well as for the
establishment of the International Criminal Court. The
establishment of an International Criminal Court with
the capacity to deal with the most serious crimes of
concern to the international community has been a
longstanding goal of Australia and one which we
continue to support strongly, particularly through the
current work being undertaken in the Preparatory
Commission for the International Criminal Court.

We see a real linkage between the Security
Council resolution and other decisions coming from the
Summit, and maintaining the momentum of the
International Criminal Court negotiations. It is a
significant element in following up the Millennium
Summit. The International Criminal Court will make a
significant contribution to the maintenance of
international peace and security.
This year's United Nations Conference on the
Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All
Its Aspects will also provide us with another
opportunity to follow up on the Millennium Summit
and to address the problem of the illicit small arms
trade through practical, concrete measures.

The extensive work already undertaken in this
area by African countries, as well as in some other
regions and subregions, provides us with important
building blocks for more concerted and coordinated
international action. In our own region, Pacific Island
Forum countries are also working actively to address
the small arms issue, including through the
development of model legislation to facilitate
implementation of a common regional approach to
weapons control. In the Association of South-East
Asian Nations Regional Forum, Australia has also
encouraged efforts to develop a coordinated approach
to the issue, in particular the adoption of a declaration
of responsibilities on small arms and light weapons.

I have mentioned all of those issues because we
see them as giving practical concrete expression to
those principles that were spelled out in the
Millennium Summit resolutions and decisions.

The Millennium Summit and the Millennium
Declaration, together with the extensive work
undertaken by the United Nations on redefining and
modernizing how the Organization operates, provide an
opportunity that should not be missed to review United
Nations operations so that they can better meet the
complex and difficult challenges that the global
community faces. This debate has provided us all with
an early opportunity to review what we are doing to
implement the commitments that we made jointly. I
chose to highlight a few areas that my Government
judges to be particularly important, where we are
focusing our attention and where one will not find
Australia wanting in either commitment or action in
contributing to the way forward.

Finally, like my Egyptian colleague, I would like
to raise one final point that was not in the Security
Council document, but that we would like to see inform
and infuse the work of the Council as it implements its
decisions: the question of gender awareness. As we are
sitting here in this Council, the annual meeting of the
Commission on the Status of Women is taking place.
Tomorrow is International Women's Day. I think that it
is appropriate in the present circumstances, as the
Council members collectively and the Member States
consider how they can give practical effect to all of the
decisions and the priorities that were identified at the
Millennium Summit, that they not forget the vital
element of gender awareness and work actively to
ensure that there is a gender perspective contained in
all follow-up actions.

