Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French):
France voted in favour of the draft resolution just
adopted by the Council. France is committed to the
non-proliferation regime and is actively participating in
efforts to strengthen it. We contributed to the adoption
by the European Union of a strategy in this area. We
are working with our partners in all appropriate
international and multilateral forums to improve joint
action against a threat that concerns everyone. France
is convinced that the United Nations - particularly the
Security Council - must play its full role in the
multilateral anti-proliferation effort; that is why we
supported the draft resolution from the outset and were
one of its sponsors. With regard to proliferation, the
Security Council draws its legitimacy to act from the
Charter of the United Nations. The proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and of their means of
delivery is a threat to international peace and security.

To be sure, the Council's actions must reflect
respect for the existing regime, and that is what it does
in the resolution we have just adopted, by filling a gap
in the regime in the light of a phenomenon that adds an
additional dimension to the danger of proliferation.
That phenomenon is the involvement of non-State
actors, particularly terrorists. The emergence of
trafficking networks exacerbates the spread of these
weapons. In an era of widespread terrorism, it
increases the risk of seeing them fall into the hands of
the most dangerous.

We now need to begin to implement this
resolution in a cooperative spirit. The committee that
will receive State reports will now be established. It
will include all Security Council members and will
adopt all its decisions unanimously. It is States' best
guarantee of the dispassionate implementation of this
resolution that we intend to carry out. It attests to the
sponsors' conviction that the Council can work
together on this proliferation issue.

France welcomes the fact that the Council
adopted the resolution unanimously. That is a strong
signal in favour of effective multilateralism. The
sponsors benefited from the dialogue that took place to
improve the text, thus strengthening support for it
within the Council and among all States. France
welcomes that success. We are convinced that the
Council can contribute to the international
community's action with regard to proliferation and
that a Council meeting at the highest level can, at the
appropriate time, lend impetus to the strengthening of
international initiatives in this area, which is essential
for the security of all States.

