Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, and members of the Council,
for convening this urgent meeting to consider the grave
situation in Palestine, on which my delegation feels
compelled to address the Council once again.

The situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories has deteriorated further since the Council
last met. The onslaught by Israel's military machine
against the Palestinian people and their leadership
continues relentlessly, leaving death and destruction in
its wake. Ambassador Al-Kidwa of Palestine yesterday
informed the Council of the latest developments, many
of which have been corroborated by media reports. In
short, the situation is extremely critical and demands
immediate action by this Council.

The Council adopted resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002) in an effort to calm the
explosive situation. But much to the regret of my
delegation - and, I am sure, of the members of the
Council as well - Israel has chosen to ignore them. In
defiance of the repeated calls of the Council, Israel
presses on with its ruthless invasion of Palestinian
territories. It ignores even the repeated calls of its
friends, including the United States, to desist from
further military action and to withdraw its troops
immediately from Palestinian towns and cities that it
had occupied.

Reports now indicate that there appears to be a
partial withdrawal from two Palestinian areas, Tulkarm
and Qalqiliya, but these may well be temporary,
tactical moves to ease the pressure from the Council
and the international community. These partial
withdrawals are not acceptable. The Council must
make it plain to Israel that it expects immediate and
full withdrawal. Withdrawal should not be contingent
on what is operationally expedient for the Israeli army.
It is a legal requirement imposed by the Council on a
Member State of the Organization and must be heeded.

It is therefore incumbent on the Council to exert
its authority fully and effectively and to demand that
Israel comply forthwith with resolutions 1397 (2002),
1402 (2002) and 1403 (2002). Should Israel continue to
ignore the request of the Council, the Council should
seriously consider taking appropriate punitive measures
against it, as provided for in the Charter.

The Islamic Foreign Ministers, in their meeting in
Kuala Lumpur, called for sanctions against Israel. Any
other State daring to defy the Council would have been
severely dealt with. That is the only recourse left to the
Council to bring Israel to its senses and to get it to
abandon its military option for one of negotiation, in
the interest of a lasting peace in the area. For the sake
of the people of Palestine, and for its own sake, the
Council must act promptly and decisively; it does not
have the luxury of time. Appeals that fall on deaf ears
will not enhance the authority of the Council. My
delegation entirely agrees that what is needed now is
not more statements or resolutions but concrete action
by the Council to back up its resolutions. Israel must be
told that the Council means business and that it expects
to see the immediate and full withdrawal of Israeli
troops from the areas it has occupied in recent weeks.
It must be told to begin the peace process in earnest.

My delegation looks forward to the efforts by the
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell. We hope
he will meet with all the principal actors, not the least
of whom is President Arafat. President Arafat is the
acknowledged and elected leader of the Palestinian
people. He should be treated with the dignity and
respect that his office deserves. He should not be
demonized and shunned, but should be taken seriously
as an important, indeed indispensable, interlocutor in
the peace process. We should all remember that it was
not President Arafat who precipitated this l8-month-
long crisis, but Mr. Sharon, with his deliberately
provocative visit to the Al-Aqsa compound. It is ironic
indeed that Mr. Arafat, who has made so many efforts
in the search for peace since Madrid and Oslo, is the
one being demonized and sidelined, when we all know
that this second intifada was precipitated by that
provocative visit by Mr. Sharon.

Israel's intransigence in the face of the direct
requests of the Council is a direct challenge to the
authority of the Council. It can be ignored only at the
expense of the Council's credibility, which is now at
stake. Israel's continued defiance would constitute a
rude rebuff and a humiliation of the Council, which the
international community cannot accept. The
impassioned speeches made in the Council on this issue
attest to this. They must move the Council to action.

