China supports South A frica's initiative to convene today's high-level debate. We welcome President Ramaphosa, who is presiding over today's meeting, and thank Secretary-General Guterres and Chairperson Faki Mahamat for their briefings. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic has exacerbated global crises, had a profound impact on the political, economic and social development of African countries and poses a host of new challenges to peace and security on the continent. The United Nations is duty-bound to take active measures to help Africa weather the storm. China proposes that efforts be made in the following four areas. First, we should demonstrate a united front in the fight against the pandemic in order to help strengthen Africa's health and safety defences. We must leverage the coordinating roles of the United Nations and the World Health Organization to mobilize global resources in support of the African Joint Continental Strategy for COVID-19 Outbreak of the African Union (AU) and broaden Africa's access to medical supplies, medicines, therapeutic technology and capital. By assisting Africa, we will shore up global efforts against the virus. Vaccines should be a global public good and made accessible and affordable for African countries. United Nations agencies such as the World Food Programme, UN-Women and UNICEF should all play their respective roles in helping Africa to break transport bottlenecks and ensure last-mile delivery of supplies, medicines and vaccines so that people and vulnerable groups in impoverished and remote areas can receive timely and effective medical treatment. We must take a long-term view and support Africa's efforts to strengthen public health prevention and control systems and improve its ability to respond to major infectious diseases, with a view to building a global health community for all. Secondly, we must continue working towards the goal of silencing the guns in order to restore peace and stability for the African people. Seventy per cent of Security Council agenda items involve Africa. Without stability in Africa, international peace will remain elusive. The United Nations and the African Union should therefore work closely to advance the African Union's Silencing the Guns in Africa by 2020 initiative and the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire, encourage warring parties to focus on overcoming the pandemic, turn their swords into ploughshares and stop the violence. We must continue to implement the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhancing Partnership in Peace and Security and strengthen cooperation to prevent and mediate conflicts and achieve lasting peace. The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council must build on their annual consultative meeting mechanism to enhance their level of cooperation. The Security Council must assume its responsibility to help Africa improve its independent capabilities in peacekeeping, stability and counter-terrorism, accelerate the establishment of the African Standby Force, a rapid response force and an early- warning mechanism, and to support sustainable and predictable financing for the AU's peace and security operations. Thirdly, we must deliver on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to help bring prosperity to the African people. As set out in the AU-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, the United Nations and the AU will prioritize poverty eradication, enhance cooperation in areas such as agriculture, education, health, and infrastructure, support the African Continental Free Trade Area, mitigate the economic fallout from COVID-19 and improve people's well-being. Developed countries should take more concrete steps in the areas of official development assistance, debt relief and technology transfer. International financial institutions should channel more resources into Africa, which is a vibrant and promising continent, as an investment in the future of humankind. Fourthly, we must promote fairness and justice to help Africans benefit from the progress of global governance. The global governance system should be improved and strengthened to mitigate inequalities in rights, opportunities and rules. The United Nations must do more to meet Africa's needs and accommodate its interests in rule-making, resource allocation and staffing. The representation and voice of African countries should be increased. Africans must be involved as equal participants and important contributors to global governance, since no one understands Africa better or is better placed to offer solutions to African issues than the African people themselves. When addressing African issues, the United Nations should respect the wishes of the African people, enlist the aid of the AU and other regional and subregional organizations and encourage and support Africa's own initiatives and solutions. China has always been a true friend and partner to Africa. Guided by sincerity, genuine results, a spirit of unity and good faith, China has always put the interests of African countries above its own. We are ready to play our part as Africans pursue the great dream of development and the revitalization of their continent. Under the auspices of President Xi Jinping, the Extraordinary China-Africa Summit on Solidarity Against COVID-19, attended by President Ramaphosa, was held earlier this year in support of Africa's COVID-19 response. The leaders of China and Africa pledged to strengthen solidarity and work together to defeat the virus. Together we set a fine example of international cooperation against COVID-19. China has sent eight teams of medical experts and professionals to 16 African countries to share information on controlling the spread of COVID-19. We have established partner schemes with 46 hospitals in 42 African countries and shipped emergency supplies to almost all countries on the continent. The construction of the headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention, a project that we are glad to support, will start this year. To maintain peace and security in Africa, China will honour its pledge to provide the AU with free military assistance, worth $100 million, and has extended military aid to the Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel through multilateral and bilateral channels. As we speak, more than 2,100 Chinese peacekeepers are serving in six United Nations peacekeeping operations in Africa. The United Nations Peace and Development Trust Fund, founded on China's pledge, has always focused on supporting Africa's capacity-building for ensuring peace and security, as part of the joint efforts to silence the guns in Africa. To promote prosperity and development in Africa, China has worked with Africa to formulate and implement 10 major cooperation plans and eight major actions to help Africa build more than 6,000 kilometres of railways and roads and construct nearly 20 ports and more than 80 large-scale power plants. China has signed agreements with 12 African countries on debt service suspension and has cancelled interest-free loans due at the end of 2020 owed by 15 countries. China and Africa have enhanced cooperation in emerging areas, such as the digital economy, smart cities, clean energy and 5G. The two sides are also pursuing high-quality cooperation on the Belt and Road Initiative. China will continue to provide strong support to the African people in their pursuit of peace. We are glad to extend a helping hand as African countries move towards modernization and will continue to speak in support of Africa on the international stage. We are prepared to be Africa's partner and work with it to build an even stronger China-Africa community with a shared future.
