Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First, let me thank Assistant
Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for another very
useful and comprehensive briefing. The picture painted
by Ms. Mueller is bleak. It is very regrettable that we are
meeting again to discuss the worsening humanitarian
situation in Syria.

The Ambassador of Equatorial Guinea referred
to the Westeros world ofA Game Of Thrones. I must
say that there is one huge difference between the
world of Westeros and our real world. In the world of
A Game of Thrones, there are no rules for the conduct
of war, whereas in our world there are such rules. I
am referring to international humanitarian law and
human rights law. This year we celebrate the seventieth
anniversary of the adoption of the Geneva Conventions
and the twentieth anniversary of the placement of the
protection of civilians on the agenda of the Security
Council. Additionally, the Council has adopted a
number of resolutions on the protection of civilians,
which constitute a part of international law. That means
that all actors, State and non-State actors alike, are
obliged to follow those rules, including in Syria.

We meet again to discuss an extremely worrying
humanitarian situation in Syria, especially in the
north-west part of the country. The military escalation
continues as we speak and hundreds of civilians are
being killed and injured. Military operations, which
have already brought enormous suffering to the civilian
population of Syria, have again started to advance.

Attacks on densely populated areas, homes,
medical facilities and settlements for internally
displaced persons are unacceptable and must stop. All
parties must, as a matter of the highest priority, protect
civilians. Any military operation should be fully in line
with the international humanitarian and human rights
law to prevent harm to thousands of civilians trapped
in the middle of fighting. The protection of civilians
and unhindered access to humanitarian assistance are
not a choice, as highlighted by Assistant Secretary-
General Mueller, but a legal obligation of all sides to
the conflict - State and non-State actors alike. Those
who do not comply should be held accountable.

In that context, let me echo the Ambassador of
Belgium, speaking on behalf of the humanitarian
troika, that the fight against terrorism cannot justify
indiscriminate attacks against civilians and the fight
against terrorists cannotjustify violations and abuses of
international humanitarian law and human rights law.

In addition, I want to stress our concern about the
dramatic state of health facilities in Syria, as raised
earlier by the United States delegation. Most of them
are not functional and those still operating are too
poorly equipped to provide care to patients with injuries
and further support to persons with disabilities. That
limited access to medical care turns many injuries into
life-long impairments that otherwise could have been
prevented with proper and timely care. We are also
deeply concerned about reported attacks and shelling
in north-west Syria, damaging 23 health facilities that
serve almost 240,000 people.

In our opinion, the international community, and
especially the Security Council, should vigorously
advocate for the health and protection of civilians,
especially the most vulnerable - women, children and
persons with disabilities. The situation is extremely
worrying in north-eastern and north-western Syria,
just to mention the Al-Hol and Rukban camps. In
that context, Poland calls on all sides to the conflict
to respect international humanitarian law and human
rights law. Appropriate mechanisms must be in place to
ensure that perpetrators are held to account, including
those accused of serious violations and abuses against
children. That is essential, especially in the Al-Hol
area, where children constitute a majority of the
population. Schools, hospitals and other vital civilian
infrastructure must be protected from attacks. Children
are particularly vulnerable to the impact of explosive
weapons, and warring parties should make a special
effort to protect them.

Let me turn to the issue of humanitarian access in
Syria, especially in Rukban camp, where the situation is
increasingly dire due to the limited movement of goods
and practically no access. As recalled in Assistant
Secretary-General Mueller's briefing, a second
humanitarian convoy to Rukban delivered life-saving
aid to 40,000 people living in the camp at the beginning
of February. Nonetheless, it was only a temporary
measure, sufficient for merely a month. As we approach
the end of May, no progress has been reached on a third
convoy. We were made hopeful by the positive steps
taken by the Syrian authorities in February with regard
to enabling the access of international humanitarian
assistance. We urge them to swiftly authorize the next
inter-agency convoy to Rukban, where approximately
24,000 people still need humanitarian assistance.

In conclusion, let me also underline the significance
of ensuring that the de-escalation zone in Idlib, as
agreed in the autumn between Russia and Turkey, is
again in place. All parties to the conflict should do
their utmost to ensure the full implementation of that
agreement on the ground.

Last but not least, let me also acknowledge the
presence of the Deputy Foreign Minister of Russia,
Mr. Sergey Vershinin.

