Mr. Annabi: As the President of the Council has
just noted, members of the Council will have seen the
Secretary-General's report dated 26 July, which
provides a fairly detailed account of developments in
East Timor over the past six months. I will therefore
limit myself to highlighting some of the most important
issues dealt with in the report.

The humanitarian emergency which faced the
United Nations following the popular consultation in
August last year has been largely overcome, but the
reconstruction of the destroyed infrastructure of East
Timor and the rebuilding of public services from
scratch are huge tasks. Significant progress has been
made, and the basic governance and administration
structures are now in place. There remains, however, a
lot of work to be done to reactivate the economy and
strengthen the delivery of basic services while
maintaining a stable security environment. The
situation of the refugees still in West Timor also
remains a matter of serious and increasing concern.

I will deal first with political developments. Over
the past six months we have seen the extension of the
sharing of political decision-making. The most
significant steps in this regard have been the creation
of a transitional Cabinet, half of whose members are
Timorese heads of government departments, and the
establishment of the National Council. The Cabinet
enables the Timorese to assume government
responsibilities for the first time. The National Council
will broaden participation in the legislative
consultation process by including new sectors of the
population that were not represented directly in its
predecessor, the National Consultative Council. It will
include members from the rural districts, whose
circumstances are quite different from those of the
capital, Dili.

The immediate challenge is to ensure that this
National Council is constituted in such a way that it is
part of a process of consensus building, as open
political activity and debate occur for the first time in
East Timor. We should listen carefully, for example, to
the youth and students who have been so active in the
pro-independence movement and who are becoming
increasingly vocal in their demands. As the Secretary-
General has emphasized, there is a pressing need to
strengthen tolerance for political bodies outside the
broad umbrella of the National Council of Timorese
Resistance (CNRT), religious groups and ethnic
minorities.

The CNRT, which is the largest and most
representative coalition of political forces in East
Timor, will hold its conference in August - next
month. This will be a very important public policy
forum and should significantly advance the debate on
the key issues of the new constitution and the timetable
for the holding of elections. A major political challenge
in this period is to maintain unity of purpose among the
Timorese while promoting the broadest possible
political participation. There have been a number of
political protest demonstrations this year, largely over
employment and economic issues, but fortunately they
have not caused any major security problems.

I turn now to the subject of relations with
Indonesia. As described in the Secretary-General's
report, relations with the Indonesian Government have
advanced considerably. There are, however, a number
of key outstanding issues. The central issue requiring
urgent attention and action concerns the refugees in
West Timor. The very unsatisfactory situation of the
refugees in the camps in West Timor is reflected in the
priorities that have been drawn up by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for guaranteeing the security of the refugees
and its own humanitarian workers. These include the
separation of former Indonesian soldiers, police and
civil servants from the bulk of the refugees. The failure
to guarantee the security situation in the refugee camps
is illustrated by the recent withdrawal of UNHCR staff
from the camps following attacks on UNHCR
personnel. This clearly is not a context in which the
refugees can freely decide whether they wish to return
or be resettled elsewhere.

The Government of Indonesia should be
encouraged to ensure that the influence of militias in
the refugee camps and their activities in the border area
are brought to an immediate end. The continued
existence of the pro-integration militias and their
evident capacity to operate along the border is
fundamental to the central issue of border security. In
this connection, I would like to mention that yesterday
in Geneva the High Commissioner for Refugees
highlighted these concerns about the situation of the
refugees and of UNHCR's own staff in West Timor by
issuing a background paper, which we would be happy
to make available to interested Council members.

While security has been stable throughout the rest
of the country, allowing an initial reduction in the
strength of the peacekeeping force, military component
of the United Nations Transitional Administration in
East Timor (UNTAET), the past six months have seen
periods of calm interrupted by violent incidents and
incursions across the border. Very regrettably, these
culminated earlier this week with the killing of a
member of the New Zealand contingent of UNTAET in
the Cova Lima district, which is located along the
southern border with West Timor.

At the suggestion of Indonesian officials, a joint
investigation involving UNTAET will begin on
Monday.

In this context, on behalf of the Secretary-General
I would like to extend our profound condolences to the
family of the New Zealand soldier who was killed in
this incident, and to express appreciation to all his
colleagues who have been working with UNTAET on
the ground.

I turn to the question of law and order. There has
been a somewhat worrisome increase in thefts and
violent crime, mainly in Dili, which has also seen some
youth gang activity. Following a large gang fight in
April, the decision was taken to make side arms
available to the United Nations civilian police when
necessary. The reduction of urban unemployment and
of the drift from the countryside to the cities - which
appear to be the main causes of this problem - remain
a priority.

The evolution of the thinking of the East
Timorese about the defence requirements of the future
independent State has led to the commissioning of a
study of future defence needs and their financial and
practical implications for East Timor. The study, as
Council members are aware, is being conducted by
King's College, London. The team is currently
completing its work in East Timor. While we await the
final report of this team, we understand that three
options will be proposed. All assume that the Falintil
will be at the core of a new defence or security force,
which will require significant international aid and
training. Meanwhile, provision has been made for the
basic needs of Falintil troops, many of whom have
been allowed to go home on leave.

The Secretary-General observed in his report that
East Timor's best assurance for a secure future lies in
healthy relations with the countries in the region,
particularly Indonesia. In this connection, I should
mention that, at the invitation of the Government of
Thailand, a delegation from East Timor, comprised of
Mr. Vieira de Mello, Mr. Xanana Gusmao and others,
attended the annual meeting of the Ministers for
Foreign Affairs of the Association of South-East Asian
Nations (ASEAN), which was held in Thailand on 24
and 25 July.

I turn briefly to the economic situation. Given the
levels of destruction and disruption which East Timor
suffered in the wake of the popular consultation last
year, the reactivation of the economy is clearly a long-
term task that will continue well after independence.
The reconstruction of essential buildings is proceeding,
but not as quickly as many would hope. We are
encouraged, however, that it has been possible to reach
agreement with the Timorese political leaders on a
modest budget of $59 million for next year. This will
require an additional subsidy from voluntary
contributions. I would like to take this opportunity to
thank donors for their support since the Tokyo
Conference last year and during the recent Conference
held in Lisbon last month.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, as we look
back over the past six months, we can all feel satisfied
about the progress that UNTAET has been able to
achieve, even if it has not yet reached full capacity. It
has contributed to the alleviation of the emergency
brought about by the violence and destruction of last
year; it has maintained a secure environment; it has
established the foundations of an effective
administration; and, above all, it has established a
relationship of mutual respect and trust with the East
Timorese. At the same time, the last six months have
underscored the fact that the task that the United
Nations and the international community have
undertaken in East Timor is a truly daunting one, and
that, as I stated at the beginning of this briefing, there
is still a lot of work ahead of us.

The international community's commitment in
East Timor will have to be sustained well beyond
independence, which the East Timorese hope to reach
by the end of next year. UNTAET will continue to do
everything possible, with the Council's support, to
assist the East Timorese to prepare for this challenge.

