Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): In
keeping with the established practice concerning the
end of the term of office of elected members of the
Security Council, I should like to share my impressions
and assessments on the work I have carried out at the
helm of the subsidiary bodies over which I have
presided in the course of my country's membership of
the Council. I will first turn to the Committee
established pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and
1907 (2009), concerning Somalia and Eritrea. I will
then refer to the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), on the non-proliferation and
weapons of mass destruction. Lastly, I will turn to my
chairmanship of the Council's Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict.

In our two years in the chairmanship of the
Sanctions Committee on Somalia and Eritrea, we faced
and overcame significant challenges that no doubt were
a reflection of the difficult situation that prevails in the
Horn of Africa. In December 2009, with the adoption
of resolution 1907 (2009), the Committee's mandate
was expanded to include the Eritrea sanctions regime
and to give the Committee a regional focus. As a result,
the Committee's guidelines were reviewed and the
Monitoring Group's mandate was expanded to include
reporting on violations of both sanctions regimes.
Those changes and the results of the Monitoring
Group's investigations clearly lent greater and more
specific weight to the Committee's work with regard to
the regional dynamic of the situation, including on very
sensitive issues that have an impact on the situation in
Somalia and on international efforts to achieve peace
and stability in the region.
With the support of the members of the
Committee, I led a mission to the Horn of Africa last
April, in which the delegations of the United States of
America and Turkey also participated. On that occasion,
we had conversations in Yemen, Eritrea and Kenya
with pertinent officials and stakeholders on this issue.
We also met representatives of the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia and of the Puntland region, as
well as with United Nations officials on the ground and
members of the diplomatic community. It is important
to underscore that the basic purpose of the visit was to
attain greater understanding and help disseminate
information in the region with regard to the sanctions
regime and the implementation of the measures
provided for in the relevant resolutions, including
resolutions 1844 (2008) and 1907 (2009).

As part of those efforts, I also held meetings in
New York with senior officials from Ethiopia and
Djibouti. I also maintained an ongoing and frank
dialogue with the Secretary-General's Special
Representative for Somalia. Moreover, in an effort to
promote transparency and a proper balance in the
Committee's decisions, I convened several meetings to
provide the members of the Committee with an
opportunity to receive information and exchange views
with officials of the Transitional Federal Government
of Somalia, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Somalia and the Coordinator for
Humanitarian Affairs, as well with officials from the
World Food Programme and UNICEF.

The Committee also took an important step by
placing the names of several persons and entities on the
consolidated sanctions list, in line with the provisions
of the relevant resolutions. I should point out that, to
date, more than 20 decisions have been taken with
regard to exceptions to the sanctions regime, with a
view to supporting humanitarian assistance efforts and
those of the Transitional Federal Government.

As Chairman of the Committee I aimed from the
very beginning to ensure that there were clear decision-
making processes and to provide timely and relevant
information on the work of the Committee and its
implications to the members of the Committee, the
States of the region and other pertinent actors. The
Mexican delegation's initiatives in the Committee were
always focused on further implementing the sanctions
regime and ensuring its impact, all the while promoting
its use as a tool for both control and incentives so that
the relevant stakeholders would join a regional process
conducive to peace and stability.

It seems to me crucial that, in the future, the
Committee's chairmanship should promote the practice
of duly keeping the Members of the Organization
informed, including the various parts of the Secretariat
and other relevant stakeholders, with regard to
substantive and technical aspects of both sanctions
regimes. The goal should be to produce a better
understanding of the Committee's work and ensure
better cooperation in implementing the measures
provided for in the relevant resolutions, as well as to
prevent the recurrence of technical violations.

I believe that the Security Council should use
clearer language in its resolutions, especially with
regard to cooperation between the organs of the
Organization and their responsibilities, including
Sanctions Committees' groups of experts. Similarly,
there should be special follow up in developing that
cooperation as well as with regard to its results. With
regard to the sanctions regime on Somalia and Eritrea
in particular, some aspects deserve greater clarity in
future mandates. Those include issues relating to the
Committee's formal function of attending consultations
of the Organization's Members and questions relating
to potential gaps in the current sanctions regime,
including the lack of provisions concerning the
carrying of weapons by the security personnel of
delegations visiting Somalia, to give just one example.

Lastly, I would like to thank the Secretariat for its
valuable support. I want to emphasize the importance
of that support in carrying out all the administrative
aspects associated with the work of the chairmanship.
That support also serves to provide him with an
environment conducive to productive work as head of
the Committee, easing the burden and contributing to
the fulfilment of his duties in line with his mandate and
agreement on the part of the Committee's members.

Turning to the 1540 Committee, although on
15 November I made some personal observations in the
Council from my perspective as Chairman of the
Committee, I think it is important, given the upcoming
renewal of the Committee's mandate next April, to
briefly and concisely highlight the main ideas and
proposals to emerge from the various bilateral and
multilateral consultations I have held during 2010. I
should therefore like to reiterate the five points I raised
in the Council in November, namely, areas that merit
greater attention on the part of the Committee; the
Committee's relationship with the relevant
international bodies; strengthening the Committee as a
platform for cooperation and bolstering its capacity to
facilitate the provision of assistance; the structure of
the Group of Experts; and, lastly, the length of the
Committee's mandate.

With regard to areas that merit greater attention
by the Committee, in a wide-ranging assessment, the
Committee found that, of the three categories of
weapons of mass destruction, biological weapons were
the subject of the fewest measures. Likewise, delivery
vehicles, sanctions lists and the financing of prohibited
proliferation activities were also identified as worthy
of special attention.

I reiterate my belief in the pressing need to
further enhance cooperation with international entities,
particularly with regard to information exchange, with
full respect for the specific mandates of those entities
and of the Committee. The Committee's work on
cooperation and assistance must, therefore, be further
strengthened. Implementation of the provisions of
resolution 1540 (2004) depends not only upon the
political will of States but on the resources they
possess to implement specific security measures. In
that context, the Committee must continue to actively
ensure that requests for assistance and offers to assist
coincide.

A structure to facilitate smoother functioning by
the Group of Experts must be established. It should not
be overly complex, and perhaps the appointment of a
coordinator by the Committee or by the Secretary-
General would be a first step in that direction.

Unfortunately, it is unlikely that the risks related
to the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors will cease to exist in the short or
medium term. The Committee's mandate could,
therefore, be extended for a further 10 years, with a
review five years from now, similar to the review cycle
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons, in order to be able to draw on a long-term
strategy to address challenges related to the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the
resultant risks related to non-State actors, through
cooperation with the international community.

I assumed the chairmanship of the Working
Group on Children and Armed Conflict on 1 January
2009. That was the first time that a non-permanent
member of the Council had the honour to hold such a
distinguished post. I am pleased to share with the
Council the progress that took place during that period.
As part of the substantive work carried out within the
Group we were able to convene two thematic debates
in the Council, which were chaired by the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Mexico, as well as the subsequent
adoption of two presidential statements on the subject
in April 2009 (S/PRST/2009/9) and June 2010
(S/PRST/2010/10). Those decisions reflect the
importance that my country and Council members
attach to the problem of children affected by armed
conflict, and our interest in promoting initiatives that
will end the recruitment of minors or their being
reinducted into armed groups; protect their physical
safety through actions to prevent killing or maiming;
eradicate the practice of sexual violence to which they
are victim. We have also sought to promote measures
aimed at ensuring access to such initiatives for States
suffering the consequences of armed conflict so that
they can establish programmes aimed at the
rehabilitation, demobilization and reintegration of child
soldiers into their communities and their families.

Those efforts paved the way for the adoption of
resolution 1882 (2009), whose negotiations were led by
my delegation. That resolution constituted a milestone
for the issue, as it extended the Secretary-General's
criteria for listing parties to armed conflict that recruit
and make use of children and are thus involved in the
murder, mutilation and sexual violation of those
children. That extension was accompanied by the
criteria for listing and de-listing that the Working
Group had studied and that the Secretary-General duly
included in his report on children and armed conflict
this year (S/2010/577). Furthermore, we also held an
Arria Formula meeting in April 2009 to further
strengthen cooperation with non-governmental
organizations.

Additionally, the Working Group adopted 11
conclusions and recommendations on the situation of
children in armed conflict in various parts of the world,
including Afghanistan, the Central African Republic,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Sudan,
Myanmar, Burundi, Uganda, Sri Lanka, Colombia, the
Philippines and Nepal. Given the unique nature and
complexity of each situation, each negotiation
generated substantive documents which, in addition to
providing an overview of efforts under way in those
countries, established diverse recommendations that
seek to protect children affected by armed conflict.

Analysis of the situations addressed in the
annexes of the Secretary-General's report on children
and armed conflict achieved a new level of
understanding with the first field mission of the
Working Group to Nepal, which I led from 22 to
26 November, where I was also joined by the
delegations of Austria, the United States, France, Japan,
the United Kingdom and the Russian Federation. We
were also able to draw on the valuable support of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Children and Armed Conflict and the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF). The purpose of that visit
was to take stock of the progress made in protecting
children affected by armed conflict following the
signing of an action plan by the Government of Nepal,
the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist and the
United Nations on 16 December 2009 after the
Working Group's adoption of various conclusions on
that situation.

The Group also met with representatives of the
Government and the military leadership in Nepal, the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist and the
youth wings of the political parties. We also met with
United Nations agencies on the ground and
components of the task force on monitoring and
reporting for Nepal. We were also in contact with
representatives of civil society, the Human Rights
Council and national and international media outlets,
and visited rehabilitation and reintegration centres for
children affected by armed conflict.

While the results of that visit will be described in
greater detail at the formal meeting of the Working
Group to take place tomorrow morning, I wish to
emphasize that that first mission constituted a
watershed with respect to the responsibilities entrusted
to the Working Group, by shedding light on one of the
situations addressed by the Secretary-General and by
providing the Working Group with an opportunity to
express in situ its commitment to children affected by
armed conflict. It is thus a crucial tool for improving
the recommendations issued by the Working Group. To
that end, I suggest that the Working Group maintain
that practice by ensuring the resolve and financial
resources needed to give it effect.

Finally, after various actions undertaken by the
Chair of the Working Group, we were able just two
8

months ago to ensure the provision of the
administrative support needed by the Working Group
in order to ensure that the Chair will have the
necessary resources to enable the Working Group to
better carry out its activities and responsibilities.

Finally, I wish to commend for the record the
excellent and outstanding support extended to my
delegation by all members, allowing me to fulfil my
work as Chair of the subsidiary bodies previously
mentioned.

