Mr. Tiirk (Slovenia): I wish to begin by paying
tribute to you, Sir, and to the delegation of Portugal for
your efforts which made today's discussion possible. I also
wish to recognize the presence of Mr. Olara Otunnu, the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and
express our appreciation for his statement, for his analysis
and, perhaps most importantly, for the recommendations he
offered to the Security Council.
There are many reasons why it has become necessary
for the Security Council to hold an open debate on the fate
of children in armed conflict. Among the problems relating
to the maintenance of international peace and security, none
has the same urgency and the same long-term importance
as the one being discussed today. The efforts of a number
of United Nations organs and agencies and, as of recently,
those of Mr. Olara Otunnu, the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, to alleviate the plight of children in
armed conflict and to solve a variety of problems affecting
children in such situations deserve the recognition and
support of the Security Council. They deserve our support
both for their inherent humanitarian value and for their
contribution to the international endeavours for peace and
security.

Two years ago, in her seminal report on the impact of
armed conflicts on children, Ms. Graca Machel, the Expert
appointed by the Secretary-General, defined the problem of
children in armed conflict as "the attack on children". The
dimensions of the problem were described in the most
dramatic terms. According to that report, in the past decade
an estimated two million children have been killed in armed
conflicts. Three times as many have been seriously injured
or permanently disabled, many of them maimed by
landmines. Countless others have been forced to witness or
even take part in horrifying acts of violence.

Many contemporary armed conflicts take place over
extremely protracted periods of time. The consequences of
such conflicts are devastating for children. In addition to
the immediate effects of violence, such conflicts deprive
entire generations of the benefits of security, adequate
health care and, above all, education. Entire generations
are being victimized and their prospects for normal life
destroyed.

In a recent report on Sierra Leone, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General explained that
one of the most pressing challenges facing that country
today is what he described as the crisis of the youth - the
plight of children affected directly or indirectly by
conflict. The manifestations of the impact of prolonged
conflict on children include the phenomena of street
children, child combatants, displaced children, orphans,
victims of atrocities and the collapse of health and
educational services. It was striking, as reported by the
Special Representative, that very many people expressed
their alarm at the erosion of local value systems within
society, especially among the youth.

This brings us to the core of the problem. As Graca
Machel emphasized in her report, while the statistics on
the suffering of children in armed conflict are shocking
enough, even more chilling is the conclusion drawn from
them:

"More and more of the world is being sucked
into a desolate moral vacuum. This is a space
devoid of the most basic human values; a space in
which children are slaughtered, raped, and maimed;
a space in which children are exploited as soldiers;
a space in which children are starved and exposed to
extreme brutality. Such unregulated terror and
violence speak of deliberate victimization. There are
few further depths to which humanity can sink."
(A/51/306, para.3)

The contrast between such reality and the normative
precepts which are supposed to protect children in armed
conflicts is particularly appalling, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General today explained
the stark contrast between reality and local values and
customs. The reality of the deliberate victimization of
children seems to deny the relevance of some of the basic
principles of humanitarian law pertaining to the protection
of civilian populations in armed conflicts. Moreover, the
situation has worsened precisely at the time of the
conclusion, entry into force and beginning of the almost
universal applicability of the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of the Child, which contains some of the
most detailed norms that are supposed to protect children.

 

It is clear that serious reflection needs to be given to
these problems and that urgent action must be taken. In this
context, we wish to express our appreciation to the
Secretary-General for the appointment of Mr. Olara Otunnu
as his Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflicts. As the results of the first missions of the Special
Representative have shown, it is possible to make a
difference in specific situations, including the most difficult.
The Security Council must extend its full support to the
Secretary-General and to his Special Representative. In the
same spirit, the Security Council must also extend its
support to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
and other organs, agencies and organizations which strive
to ameliorate the situation of children in armed conflict.

In addition, the Security Council must ask the question
of what needs to be done and can be done by the Council
itself. This is a question that the Council cannot avoid; for
it to do so would mean that the Council is unable to face
some of its basic responsibilities in the domain of the
maintenance of international peace and security under the
Charter of the United Nations. Let us not forget that the
Charter defines the responsibility of the Security Council as
an organ which acts on behalf the entire membership of the
United Nations. Moreover, its action must be in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter. The
Security Council is defined in the Charter as a collective
body with important collective responsibilities for our
common peace and security. Therefore, its action must
transcend the narrowly defined national interests of its
members and be aimed at securing, to the maximum extent
possible, the attainment of the common good.

At least four important conclusions or implications of
practical relevance arise from the essential character and
purpose of the Security Council.

First, the Council must not be neutral or indifferent
when the fundamental values of human survival are at
stake. The Council must therefore express a clear position
and ensure that its practical action is in conformity with the
requirements of international law and the basic, universally
shared moral imperatives. While it must be understood that
the Council cannot always provide solutions, let alone
enforce them, it must be equally clear that its action is
intended to achieve the maximum possible.

Secondly, the Council should not be allowed to
become an obstacle to the efforts pursued by the United
Nations Member States that wish to improve the network of
international cooperation so as to prevent and punish
atrocities against children and others victimized in armed
conflicts.

Here, an additional comment is in order. The ethical
vacuum which is characterized by the breakdown of the
basic norms of international law and of traditional norms
and social codes of behaviour calls for urgent action. The
necessary change is not possible without the minimum
retribution, which alone can break the cycle of impunity.
States must act individually and collectively to achieve
that goal. In addition to the efforts of states acting
individually through their national systems of justice and
through mutual cooperation, an effective international
justice system has become necessary.

Slovenia is deeply committed to that task and is
actively participating at the Conference on the
establishment of an international criminal court, which is
currently being held in Rome. We hope that the
Conference will succeed in establishing an effective and
meaningful international court with the relevant
competence to try persons responsible for crimes against
humanity and war crimes which victimize children. The
role of the Security Council in such an international
justice system must be that of enforcer, a factor for the
credibility of justice, not that of political decision maker,
which could cast doubt on the independence and
impartiality of justice.
Thirdly, innovative approaches to the question of
types of action by the Security Council need to be
explored. The Special Representative of the Secretary
General for Children and Armed Conflict can help in
devising such approaches. The proposal of the Special
Representative to make Sierra Leone a pilot project for a
more concerted and effective response to the needs of
children affected by war offers an important example in
that regard. The Special Representative identified a
number of clearly defined priority tasks. This will
certainly help the Security Council in its decision-making
when addressing the situation in Sierra Leone. It would
be useful for the Security Council to develop a continuous
and meaningful dialogue with the Special Representative
and periodically evaluate the progress made.

Among the priority tasks for Sierra Leone, the
Special Representative emphasized the need to address the
problems of recruitment and demobilization of children
under the age of 18 and the treatment of child
combatants. While the issues of demobilization represent
a standard aspect of many situations dealt with by the
Security Council, the idea of giving a priority to the issue

 

of child soldiers requires special attention. My delegation
firmly supports the approach taken by the Special
Representative. We also believe that by giving priority to
practical action in addressing the issue of child soldiers, the
Special Representative and the Security Council could make
an important contribution to international efforts in that
domain. We support the preparation of an optional protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child to address the
problem of child soldiers. If the Security Council proves
effective in addressing specific situations, it will also help
the larger cause of curtailing the practice of exploiting
children as soldiers.

The fourth and final implication relates to the needs
most directly associated with the powers of the Security
Council. In the recent past there have been situations in
which children have become victims of abuse and
prostitution following the arrival of peacekeeping forces. In
half of the situations studied by Graca Machel, the arrival
of peacekeeping troops was associated with a rapid growth
of child prostitution. We welcome the efforts of the
Secretary-General and his Special Representative to prevent
the recurrence of such phenomena. The Security Council
must give its full support to these efforts and ensure that
peacekeeping forces observe the rules of international law.
International personnel must be protected by international
law. At the same time, it must be clear that war crimes and
crimes against humanity will be prosecuted irrespective of
the status of the perpetrators.
I would like to conclude my statement by saying that
the discussion today is timely and necessary. The delegation
of Slovenia participated actively in the preparation of the
presidential statement, and we hope that it will be adopted
soon.

