Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): Allow
me to join my colleagues in thanking the Secretary-
General for addressing the Council earlier and Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe for his update.

The United States continues to work to support
progress towards an Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement before the end of 2008. Vice President
Cheney and Secretary Rice each visited the region
earlier this month to encourage progress in negotiations
and on the ground. Secretary Rice will return to the
region later this week to continue her discussions with
the parties.

When we last met, we were rightly concerned
about the escalation of Violence in southern Israel and
Gaza caused by an increase in terrorist rocket attacks
by Hamas that led to an Israeli military response in
self-defence. Subsequently, on 6 March, a terrorist
gunman opened fire at a Jewish religious school in
Jerusalem, killing eight young Israeli students and
wounding 11 others, which the United States and many
other Governments rightly condemned as a vicious
targeting of innocent civilians.

As we recall those events, let me make clear that
the United States deeply deplores the death of all
innocent civilians. In the wake of that tragedy, which
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas
unequivocally condemned, the United States supported
the Government of Israel's courageous decision to
reaffirm its commitment to negotiations. Israeli and
Palestinian leaders continue to meet to work towards
the shared goal of a permanent status agreement.
Constructive regional and international support that
enjoys the support of the parties for their efforts
remains crucial.

With that in mind, I would like to make two
additional points. The first is the need to achieve
progress on the ground in order to create an
atmosphere supportive of the negotiating process and
to reassure Israelis and Palestinians alike of the
seriousness of the process. General Fraser, who leads
the United States efforts to monitor progress on road
map implementation, has just returned from the region,
where he convened a trilateral meeting with the parties
to assess progress and discuss next steps to fulfil the
parties' commitments under the road map. The General
had a frank and positive exchange with the parties and
is working with them to promote progress in that area.
Secretary Rice will use her next round of meetings
with Israeli and Palestinian leaders later this week to
further encourage progress.

The second is the critical importance of support
from the international community to ensure that
Palestinian humanitarian needs are being met and that
nations are following through on their pledges from the
Paris donor conference. Those efforts will help
President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad build the
institutional capacity and develop the economy that
will serve as the foundation for a Palestinian State. For
our part, the United States continues to provide basic
humanitarian assistance to Palestinians living in Gaza
through ongoing United States Agency for
International Development programmes and annual
contributions to the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA).

The United States is the largest bilateral donor to
UNRWA. In fiscal year 2007, we contributed over
$154 million to UNRWA and we have to date pledged
$148 million in 2008. Our contributions to UNRWA
support its provision of basic and vocational education,
primary health care, and relief and social services to
over 4.4 million registered Palestinian refugees in
Gaza, the West Bank, Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, as
well as its provision of emergency food, health, job
creation and other relief services to Palestinian
refugees in the West Bank and Gaza.

We are also moving forward with assistance
programmes utilizing the $545-million pledge for
assistance to the Palestinian Authority that Secretary
Rice announced in Paris last December. Most recently,
on 19 March, we signed a cash transfer agreement with
Prime Minister Fayyad, providing $150 million in
budgetary support to the Palestinian Authority. Much
more is needed, and we encourage Paris conference
participants to urgently provide the assistance they
have pledged. We look forward to reviewing progress
in that area at the upcoming meeting of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee. We welcome Tony Blair's
continuing leadership role in that area, including his
involvement in planning the 21-23 May Bethlehem
private sector investment conference. We also support
Germany's proposed meeting later this spring to focus
donor support on building the capacity of the
Palestinian justice sector.

Turning to Lebanon, I would like to thank the
Secretariat for the efforts under way to rapidly
facilitate the work of the Special Tribunal. We look
forward to the update on the Tribunal scheduled for
Thursday. I urge all Council members to generously
support the Tribunal as a clear signal that the
international community backs the effort of the
Lebanese people to end the era of impunity for political
assassinations in their country.

I would like to underscore our deep concern
about illegal arms transfers across the Syrian-Lebanese
border, and in particular claims by Hizbullah that it has
replenished its military capacity since the 2006 war.
We fully support the Secretary-General's call for a
process to disarm all militias in Lebanon in accordance
with resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006) and the
Taif Accords. In accordance with those resolutions,
Hizbullah must disarm, and it must do so now.

Finally, I would like to reiterate our concern that
it has not yet been possible for the Lebanese to hold a
presidential election. Although the Lebanese agree on a
candidate, Syria and its allies within Lebanon are using

other preconditions to perpetuate the political
stalemate. It should be clear, however, until a new
president takes office, the United States has full
confidence in and fully supports the legitimate
Lebanese Government in managing the affairs of the
State and the Lebanese armed forces in continuing to
provide security.

Allow me to conclude my statement by offering a
brief comment on the format of this monthly meeting.
Since 2002, it has been the practice of this Council to
have regular briefings on the developments in the
Middle East. Yet the polarization and divisions of the
United Nations membership over the conflict all too
often manifest themselves as heated political
statements in both the General Assembly and the
Security Council that do little to help advance the
cause of peace or help the Palestinian people in any
tangible way. It has long been the conviction of the
United States that a solution will be achieved only by
direct negotiations between the parties, facilitated and
supported by constructive international engagement.
That is why the bulk of our efforts are focused on
making a difference on the ground. If these types of
meetings do not contribute to that effort - or, worse, if
they fuel the tensions that impede constructive
engagement - then we need to ask ourselves whether
the public format of debates in New York truly helps to
create the environment necessary to facilitate the
pursuit of the two-State solution. I therefore urge my
colleagues to use these meetings to promote the cause
of peace and the pursuit of the two-State solution.

