Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation thanks you, Madam President,
for arranging this important meeting on the question of
children in armed conflict. We wish also to thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, Ambassador
Otunnu and Ms. Bellamy for their important
statements.

In recent years, the Security Council has made
active efforts to press for a solution to the question of
children and armed conflict.

Thanks to these efforts, the international
community has been paying greater attention to this
issue. In his report, the Secretary-General has made
some concrete and focused proposals, which merit the
attention of the entire United Nations system and all its
members. We believe that the most urgent task is for
the various parties to abide by the relevant legal norms
universally accepted by the international community
and to implement the relevant Security Council
resolutions in earnest, so as to translate consensus on
this issue into action. The Security Council has the
primary responsibility for maintaining international
peace and security. In order to be truly concerned about
the protection of children and civilians in armed
conflict, priority should be given to taking effective
measures to prevent and end armed conflict. Only
when conflicts are resolved and crises are addressed in
a timely manner can the protection of children be
finally fully addressed.

The Security Council has considered the
protection of civilians, women and children in armed
conflict recently and on many occasions and has passed
resolutions and presidential statements. Regrettably, in
areas such as Palestine and Afghanistan, where
conflicts are quite grave, the protection and the rights
of these vulnerable social groups are not ensured, as
they should be. According to the statistics of the
relevant agencies, about 100,000 Afghan children and
adolescents may not survive the coming winter. We are
deeply concerned about this. We call upon the
international community to increase assistance to the
Afghan refugees and to find a political solution to the
issue of Afghanistan at an early date.

The protection of children in armed conflict
requires the joint efforts of the international
community. The Chinese delegation has always
attached great importance to the protection of children.
De jure and de facto protection of the rights of the
child is a basic principle followed by China in the
protection of children. Last year, the Chinese
Government signed the Optional Protocol to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We hope
that the various parties will abide by the relevant
provisions of this Optional Protocol, such as that on
recruitment age, at an early date. We hope that the
various United Nations agencies will do their jobs well
under their respective mandates and that, at the same
time, they will strengthen cooperation and coordination
so as to bring into full play their combined strengths.

We appreciate the various efforts made by the
United Nations Children's Fund, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Ambassador Otunnu, for their efforts over a long
period. The Chinese Government will continue to
support their work, and we are ready to strengthen our
cooperation.

