At the outset, we would like to thank Germany and the Dominican Republic for organizing today's high-level open debate on conflict-related sexual violence. We would also extend our thanks to the briefers for their interesting briefings delivered at the beginning of the meeting. Egypt welcomes the efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, especially her cooperation with African States. We also welcome the measures undertaken by the Secretariat with regard to the increase in number of women protection advisers in United Nations peacekeeping missions, as we believe that conflict resolution cannot be separated from efforts to empower women and girls and the elimination and prevention of sexual violence in armed conflict. As we celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the women and peace and security agenda this year, it is worth mentioning that Egypt has always supported the landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and its agenda in relation to the inclusion of women at all levels of peace and security arrangements. In this regard and at the national level, Egypt is developing its first national plan to monitor and implement resolution 1325 (2000). The Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution, Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding organizes series of workshops for Egyptian forces and forces from Arab and African countries participating in United Nations peacekeeping operations to train them to deal with crimes related to sexual violence in armed conflicts. Egypt reiterates its commitment to the Secretary-General's initiatives for zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and abuse. We will continue working with the Security Council and the Secretariat to eliminate all forms of violence against women in the peacekeeping-operations context. We commend the efforts of the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual Violence in Conflict, especially the efforts related to capacity-building of States in conflict or post-conflict situations. Egypt calls for the mobilization of human and financial resources to assist in the implementation of the mandate of the Special Representative of the Secretary- General on Sexual Violence in Conflict. We believe that the situation of women under foreign occupation, especially that of Palestinian women, should not be left out of our discussions on women and peace and security. Respect for the societal and cultural contexts in each country when implementing the women and peace and security agenda is paramount, especially when combating sexual violence. We call upon the Secretary-General to focus his reports only on sexual violence in armed conflicts zones. His reports should not include controversial concepts and concepts that are not internationally agreed. Egypt would like to highlight the important role of building the capacities of religious and local leaders to raise awareness about ending stigma for victims of sexual violence. While thanking the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict for her work, we call on her to resume the dialogue launched with the Al-Azhar Al-Sharif institution and the League of Arab States with regard to the correction of religious discourse and the renunciation of violence against women and girls, especially in armed conflicts.
