Mr. Valle (Brazil): I would like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Sukehiro Hasegawa, for introducing the Secretary-
General's latest report (S/2004/888) on the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor (UNMISET)
and on Timor-Leste. I also take this opportunity to
congratulate him and his team on their contribution to
the steady progress that we proudly acknowledge
today, particularly regarding institution-building and
human resources development in Timor-Leste.

The delegation of Brazil is pleased with the good
news about recent developments, in particular the
overall achievements made by the people and the
Government of Timor-Leste. In the last six months,
there was further significant evolution in the areas of
justice and security, public administration, human
rights, civic education and legal and political affairs,
among others. At the same time, we wish to
acknowledge the invaluable assistance of the
international community, and in particular of the
United Nations system, which have been trustworthy
partners of the people of Timor-Leste.

As a sister country of Timor-Leste and a member
of the Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries
(CPLP), Brazil is particularly thankful to neighbouring
countries for the support they provide to Timor-Leste
in its efforts to build a viable, peaceful and stable
country. It is fair to say that Timor-Leste is already
paying back the investment that individual countries
and the international community as a whole have made
towards its self-determination and independence. The
authorities of Timor-Leste and the people are fully
committed to a friendly and democratic environment as
well as to close and constructive relations with their
neighbours. The next step should be Timor-Leste's
contribution to regional economic development, as
soon as national revenues from oil exploitation start
contributing to its own economic development.

In the coming six months, the consolidation phase
of UNMISET will come to an end. Tomorrow, the
Council will hopefully adopt a draft resolution
extending UNMISET's mandate for a final six-month
period. In this very short time, there still remains
essential work to be done by UNMISET with the full
and unequivocal cooperation of the Timorese
themselves. As pointed out by the Secretary-General,
some weak and fragile sectors remain, requiring further
and more focused attention, mainly in the areas of
public administration and law enforcement.

My delegation is confident of the progress that
UNMISET and the Government of Timor-Leste will
make. Brazil believes that, within six months, the
minimum threshold of self-sufficiency is likely to be
reached. Nonetheless, by the time of UNMISET's
departure, the international community and the United
Nations in particular will be faced with a challenge
that, while perhaps not of large proportions, is certainly
extremely relevant. The day after UNMISET's
departure will show how creative the Council was in
conceiving a new post-conflict peace-building model to
assure the transition from a very successful
peacekeeping presence to a thoroughly sustainable
project of international partnership and cooperation.

My delegation takes this opportunity to strongly
encourage the Secretary-General, his team and all the
members of the United Nations development family to
examine Timor-Leste in an innovative and sensitive
manner and to envisage ways and means to meet our
current expectations regarding the United Nations role
in the post-UNMISET phase. Further strengthening of
public administration, national institutions and
economic and social development are essential for the
consolidation of peace and stability. This is true not
only for Timor-Leste, but also for the international
community's own record of successful participation in
peacekeeping and peace-building efforts in the world.

My delegation gladly acknowledges that the
United Nations, upon the Secretary-General's request,
is already giving due attention to renewing its presence
in Timor-Leste on the basis of a different structure and
philosophy. In three months' time, when the next
Secretary-General's report on UNMISET will be
available, my delegation hopes that the Council, the
authorities of Timor-Leste and the Secretariat will be
ready to engage in a deeper exchange of views on this
issue. Meanwhile, all of us, including the authorities of
Timor-Leste, may start consultations in order to assist
the Secretary-General on the recommendations that he
may wish to present on that occasion.

For our part, Brazil will continue to develop
bilateral relations with Timor-Leste as well as through
CPLP. Promoting and spreading the use of the
Portuguese language is one of our priorities, in which
we hope we can count on the support of other
countries, particularly in the region. Multilingualism,
as we know, is a reality in Timor-Leste, and we must
support that as well.

In conclusion, I wish to join those who urged the
international community to maintain its full and deep
engagement in the country. Timor-Leste deserves to
enjoy the rewards of its successful evolution. We
believe the best way to do that is by recognizing its
legitimate call for inclusion in the international
community as a full partner in business, trade, politics
and economic and social development.

