Mr. Kapambwe (Zambia): I am speaking in my
capacity as chairperson of the African Group for the
month of November. We thank the Austrian presidency
for convening this important debate.

Due to the lateness of the hour, my statement is
abridged. The full version has been circulated.

Africa welcomes the work of the Security
Council to protect civilians in armed conflict, in
particular the measures outlined in resolution 1674
(2006) adopted on 28 April 2006.

As most conflicts occur on our continent, Africa
calls upon the Security Council to be proactive in early
warning and response to conflict. In this regard, the
Security Council should strengthen its early warning
mechanisms to detect, assess and discuss potential
conflict situations before they happen. In addition,
there is a need for the adoption of clear mandates for
peacekeeping missions that would make the protection
of civilian populations, of which women and children
constitute the majority in every conflict situation, their
top priority.

The prevention of conflicts is the best way of
protecting civilians from the suffering inherent in
armed conflicts. It is for this reason that the African
Group supports the implementation of the measures
recommended and contained in resolution 1265 (1999)
and the report of the Secretary-General in document
S/2009/277.

It should, however, be understood that durable
conflict prevention can be successful only if the root
causes of conflict are addressed. As long as we
continue to have oceans of poverty and
underdevelopment surrounding the few islands of
wealth around the world; as long as we hold sections of
humanity under the bondage of colonialism and foreign
occupation; as long as we continue to treat women,
who comprise half of humanity, as second class
citizens; as long as we continue with trade practices
that disadvantage developing countries; as long as we
continue to deny human rights and due process to
sections of world citizens; and indeed, as long as we do
not address governance challenges around the world,
the scourge of conflict will be a constant, ever-present
menace.
From the comfort of distance and in the shelter of
the edifices of wealth, a false sense of security has
arisen in developed countries. Conflict is seen as
remote and a phenomenon of the third world. We must
awaken to the fact that, in a globalized world, there are
no borders. The consequences of desperation, poverty
and underdevelopment in the third world -
uncontrolled migration, transnational crime, drug
trafficking and even some acts of terrorism - manifest
themselves all over the world. These issues affect all of
us. They must be resolved by all of us, acting together
as the United Nations.

The Austrian delegation's concept paper
(S/2009/567) refers to the need to strengthen the rule of
law, enhance compliance and ensure accountability. It
also addresses the need to improve the implementation of
protection mandates by peacekeeping missions and to

enhance the provision of information and reporting to
the Council on issues pertaining to the protection of
civilians. We agree with those objectives. All of them
are important and necessary. The Security Council
must engage and come up with relevant
recommendations.

It is just that on the ground, when an illiterate
armed warlord or child soldier takes up arms against
society, the rule of law and accountability are
oftentimes not sufficient deterrents. Only by providing
at least a minimum of social, economic and political
opportunities to the citizens of the Third World shall
we create conditions for lasting peace and stability and,
thereby, durable protection for the civilians of these
societies.

