Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): At the outset, I would
like to extend our heartfelt sympathies and deepest
condolences to the people and Governments of Nigeria
and Iraq for the dastardly terrorist attacks that have
taken place in those countries today. Our thoughts and
prayers are with the victims of those terrorist attacks.

We thank Italy for organizing today's debate and
the briefers for their interventions. We appreciate the
attention that the Security Council has devoted to the
issue of trafficking in persons over recent years.

Turkey welcomes the adoption today of resolution
2388 (2017). We consider the implementation of
resolution 2331 (2016) to be very important in advancing
the normative agenda set out by the Security Council.
We are pleased to see that today's resolution once again
recognizes that trafficking in persons entails grave
violations of human rights and strongly condemns all
instances of trafficking in persons.

As an offence against the dignity and integrity of
human beings, trafficking in persons also constitutes
a serious transnational organized crime. The recent
unspeakable pictures of the slave trade are a case
in point. In situations of conflict and complex
emergencies, human trafficking can drive conflict,
finance terrorist organizations and amplify the risks for
the most vulnerable, namely, women and children. The
Secretary-General's report (S/2017/939), as well as the
recent studies by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime, demonstrate that situations of conflict
pose various sorts of challenges to efforts to counter
trafficking in persons.

I should also note that trafficking is a global
problem that requires global responses. Therefore, in
preventing and countering trafficking in persons, we
should always address the four pillars of prevention,
prosecution, protection and partnerships. In addition,
the international community has to continue
developing inclusive, human rights-based and victim-
centred approaches, including legislative and criminal
measures. Such measures should be informed, first and
foremost, by the United Nations Convention Against
Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons,
Especially Women and Children.

Owing to its geographical location, Turkey has
been adversely affected by the rising trends in human
trafficking and related malpractices. During this time
of crisis in our region, criminal and terrorist networks
resort to various forms of exploiting human beings,
commit gender-based sexual violence and force the
recruitment of adults and children in order to fund and
sustain their criminal operations.

The Secretary-General's report explains how
Da'esh, the Lord's Resistance Army, Boko Haram
and Al-Shabaab resort to human trafficking for the
purposes of forced labour, slavery, abuse against
minors and sexual exploitation. Such tactics are, sadly,
not limited to those terrorist groups. It is important
to emphasize that terrorist organizations such as the
Kurdish Workers Party and the Democratic Union
Party of Syria also widely employ such methods aimed
in order to exploit human beings, in particular, through
the forced recruitment of children and young women.
Turkey is actively fighting against the terrorist
organizations in its region. We also support our partners
in their efforts. In doing that, we are of the view that
investigating, disrupting and dismantling criminal
networks operating in the context of armed conflicts
can serve as a contributing factor for sustaining
peace. We also recognize the need to address the
vulnerabilities of victims trapped in conflicts and to
ensure accountability for perpetrators of trafficking.

Turkey remains strongly committed to eradicating
human trafficking by implementing a progressive
approach. With that understanding, we have introduced
comprehensive administrative and legal measures
aimed at combating that phenomenon. At the domestic
level, our efforts have been focused on strengthening
our legislation and improving the implementation of our
obligations. In that regard, a Coordination Commission
against human trafficking has been established. The
Commission will put into practice an updated national
action plan on the fight against human trafficking in the
coming period. Moreover, the regulation on combating
human trafficking and the protection of victims has
been issued and put in force last year. Through those
steps, we are making further strides towards better
identification of victims and ensuring adequate
protection for them.

At the international level, Turkey is a party to the
Palermo Convention and its relevant supplementary
protocols. As to efforts the regional level, Turkey put
into force the Council of Europe Convention on Action
against Trafficking in Human Beings in February 2016.

Human trafficking can be prevented if we
recalibrate and coordinate our ongoing efforts, in line
with the commitments agreed in the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the World Humanitarian
Summit, the New York Declaration for Refugees
and Migrants and most recently through the Political
declaration on the implementation of the United
Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in
Persons. Strengthening the role of the United Nations
system, including through today's resolution, will assist
the entire Council in achieving our common objectives.

