Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I would like, first of all, to congratulate
Denmark for having assumed the presidency of the
Security Council and having organized this open
debate, providing countries non-members of the
Council with the opportunity to express our views on
the fragile situation in Haiti. On behalf of Guatemala, I
wish you, Madam President, every success as you
preside over the work of the Council.

We are also grateful to Ambassador Ronaldo
Mota Sardenberg, Permanent Representative of Brazil
and head of the Security Council mission to Haiti, for
his comprehensive introduction of the mission's report.
We would also like to thank Ambassador Allan Rock,
Permanent Representative of Canada, for having led
the Ad Hoc Advisory Group on Haiti of the Economic
and Social Council during the joint mission to the
island from 13 to 16 April.

I would like first of all to stress that the work
carried out by the Security Council and the Economic
and Social Council in connection with post-conflict
situations - one in the area of security policy and the
other in the area of humanitarian support for
development - offers an opportunity for very
productive action. The joint mission to Haiti and the
ongoing support that the two Councils have been
providing each other with respect to that country in the
fulfilment of their respective mandates attests to that
renewed climate of cooperation. Guatemala welcomes
that development.

It is even more important to stress that the role of
the United Nations is not merely to assist domestic
actors to put an end to conflict and, in the case of Haiti,
to stabilize the situation. We should be equally
effective in providing humanitarian assistance and
helping to bring about the establishment of institutions
that will make possible long-term development and
prevent the resurgence of conflict.

Since the beginning of the crisis in Haiti, my
Government has expressed its solidarity with the
people of that brotherly country. Moreover, my
Government has made known its sincere hope that all
political actors in Haiti will find a way to build a true
democracy and to create a favourable environment for
sustainable development in the country to the benefit
of all Haitians. Although the primary responsibility to
achieve that rests with Haitians, we also know that that
essential goal will be achieved only if the international
community promotes an effort towards cooperation
that is coordinated, generous and long-term in nature.
We believe that the Interim Cooperation Framework,
which was developed jointly last year by the
Transitional Government and the international
community, is an important step in the right direction.

In keeping with our policy of promoting the
peaceful and negotiated resolution of conflicts, the
Government of Guatemala has reaffirmed its
commitment and readiness to participate in the United
Nations Mission Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH). A 70-person Guatemalan military
police contingent is now in Haiti as our present
contribution to MINUSTAH. We would like to express
our firm support for the work carried out by
MINUSTAH, whose principal military and civilian
components are of Latin American origin. Guatemala
in particular supports the work of Ambassador Juan
Gabriel Valdes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of MINUSTAH.

With regard to the reports presented today, we
share the concern about the current delicate security
situation in Haiti and the conditions regarding the
former army, in particular the challenge posed by
armed gangs linked to criminal groups. We are also
worried about the weakness in the administration of
justice and the ongoing problem of insecurity, as they
constitute major hurdles confronting the entire Haitian
people today.

For that reason, Guatemala believes that the
international community, regional organizations,
international financial institutions, agencies,
programmes and non-governmental organizations
should continue to support the Haitian people in order
that it may fully enjoy basic human rights, and that
they should support the Transitional Government in
investigating the abuses that have taken place so as to
put an end to impunity through reform and the
strengthening of the National Police and the judicial
system, institutions without which the administration
of justice is impossible. In that connection, we call
upon the Transitional Government to adopt the
concrete measures necessary to prevent such acts
through effective investigation of complaints and the
prosecution of those responsible.

With a view to the preparation and holding of
local and presidential elections that are fully
participatory, representative, legitimate and in keeping
with the existing timetable, we support the basic idea
that furthering political dialogue between all groups
and actors in Haitian society without exception merits
priority attention. We are gravely concerned about the
structural, technical and logistical problems described
in the relevant report with regard to properly preparing
for elections. More worrying yet is the $22 million
deficit in the election budget. In that regard, we believe
it essential to have sufficient resources available and
the necessary technical assistance from the
international community - particularly that of donor
countries - for the successful holding of elections and
an orderly transition to a democratic system.

Guatemala would also like to stress the
importance of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) programmes. We share the visiting
mission's concern not only about the delays in the
implementation of the programmes proposed by
MINUSTAH but also about the problems in financing
those programmes, especially with regard to
reintegration.

My delegation must also underscore such
fundamental problems as extreme poverty and high
rates of illiteracy and malnutrition, which continue to
deprive Haitians of basic economic, social and cultural
rights and to aggravate the consequences of the non-
observance of basic civil and political rights. We
recognize that the temporary nature of the Transitional
Government means that there will not be enough time
to substantially resolve those problems. However, the
Government could get some initiatives under way. We
therefore urge the Transitional Government, with the
cooperation of all social sectors and the support of the
international community, to develop and implement a
long-term development strategy that makes it possible
to address the basic economic and social needs of
every Haitian citizen.

With regard to the tasks and challenges facing
Haiti and its people, we appeal to the international
community, and donor Governments in particular, to
provide Haiti with the backing and assistance needed
to overcome the difficulties inherited from the past and
to move the country towards a future in which the rule
of law is fully in place, with democracy and respect for
human rights. It is essential that we face the Haitian
challenge as a common challenge, and that we meet
our duty to demonstrate our solidarity with a country
that has been so ill-treated throughout history. We shall
continue with our commitment to rebuild and stabilize
Haiti in order to make it possible for the Haitian people
to be the masters of their own destiny.

