Mr. Vinay Kumar (India): Let me begin by
welcoming you, Madam President, to the Security
Council and by thanking the Colombian delegation for
organizing today's open debate. Our thanks also go
to the Secretary-General, Ambassadors Gasana and
Momen, and the Vice-President of the World Bank for
their valuable statements. I also want to put on record our
appreciation for the useful concept paper (S/2012/511, annex) provided by your delegation, Madam, to anchor
our deliberations today.

The nature of conflicts today is very different from
what it was in the past. Their intra- State nature, the need
to manage natural resources, transnational organized
crime, illicit trafficking in drugs and weapons, and
regional dimensions demand an approach that is
capable of building upon the gains of stabilization.
Building the institutions of core governance, promoting
youth employment, ensuring transitional justice and
national reconciliation, providing electoral support
and constitution-building are tasks that need the
coherent and sustained assistance of the international
community. This in turn requires political will, the
allocation of adequate resources and readiness for
long-term engagement.

It is in this context that peacebuilding, once
described as the missing middle between peacekeeping
and durable peace, assumes importance. The setting
up of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) six years
ago reflected the collective desire of the international
community to assist post-conflict countries on a
long-term basis in their transition. Despite its advisory
role, the Commission and its Organizing Committee
have done work worthy of our commendation in
mainstreaming peacebuilding.

Given the wide range of tasks the PBC is expected
to administer, it is not surprising that it faces several
challenges. In our view, the willingness of the
international community to provide adequate resources
is the first and necessary condition for successful
peacebuilding efforts in post-conflict countries.

Secondly, greater coherence among various United
Nations organs under the aegis of the Commission
is required to enhance its ability to carry its agenda
forward. In this connection, I would like to mention
that the organizational context of peacebuilding
continues to lack uniformity. Some peacebuilding
efforts are being managed by the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, others by the Department of
Political Affairs, and yet others by the United Nations
Resident Coordinator system. Clearly, peacebuilding
policymaking needs to be suitably addressed in this
Organization today.

It is also important to keep in mind that peace
in post-conflict societies cannot be restored unless
citizens are free from fear and want and institutions
of governance perform effectively. The capacity for
effective governance, in turn, depends on the existence
of institutions that enable these authorities to respond
effectively to people's aspirations. This general
political aphorism is substantiated by the experience
of the international community in its peacekeeping and
peacebuilding efforts over the past two decades.

We therefore think that the core institutions of
governance are the key to sustainable peace. They
must be rooted locally rather than being imposed from
above. Their local relevance and inclusiveness will
make all the difference in the governance process. It is
therefore important for the PBC to align its objectives
with national priorities and ensure that all plans and
programmes are implemented under national leadership
and through national institutions so that gains are
sustainable, if slow. The Commission must also draw
from the experiences that are the most relevant to the
prevailing socio-economic conditions in the countries
on its agenda. An effective measure of the success of
peacebuilding efforts will be the Commission's success
in promoting inclusive political processes, national
reconciliation and security sector reforms.
Peacebuilding anchored firmly in the overall peace
process will deliver the best results. This requires
the international community to make available a
predictable and appropriate level of resources over
extended periods. Our advocacy must be accompanied
by matching commitments in resources.

The United Nations capacity to assist national
institutions is contingent upon the Secretariat and the
funds and programmes having the skills and expertise
that are relevant to these societies. We believe that
the Secretary-General's review of civilian capacity
is a step towards making that process inclusive and
representative. We firmly believe that the nimbleness
of recruitment and deployment is not a sufficient
condition for performance delivery.

Those willing to invest their lives in the field must
be valued. Our in-house experts who have gained
valuable insights by spending time in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, the Sudan and other
challenging locations should be the pivots of all our
endeavours. Our efforts, at the same time, must be
demand-driven and nimble in order to respond the
changing times, rather than supply-driven. Our ways
of selecting police and military officers on secondment
need to be simplified. Communication methods with
Member States have stagnated and are outdated in this
regard. The representative nature of our institutions will
ensure the collective spirit of our enterprise, including
in the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support.

In conclusion, I would like to stress that, as a
responsible global citizen with extensive nation-building
experience that is very relevant for countries on the PBC
agenda, India will not be found wanting in responding to
the challenges of the peacebuilding process, including
under the aegis of the Peacebuilding Commission.

