Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the Swedish delegation for having convened
today's meeting, and Ms. Gamba, Henrietta Fore and
Yenny Londofio for their briefings today.

My country welcomes the adoption of resolution
2427 (2018), which we co-sponsored.

The numbers speak for themselves: in just a year,
the number of cases of violations against children has
gone up by more than 50 per cent. We are talking about
21,000 cases of violations of the rights of children,
10,000 of them involving children killed by aerial or
artillery strikes, usually against schools, hospitals or
civilian infrastructure. This is a proven fact and, if
that were not enough, humanitarian assistance, as the
Special Representative so clearly stated in her briefing,
is also being denied in Myanmar, South Sudan, Syria
and Yemen, where the delivery of humanitarian
assistance for children is being hampered.

We wish to highlight here the role of the
Special Representative, who can count on our full
support - support that we urge the international
community once again to continue to provide. We
see great value in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/465), particularly the list annexed thereto. But
in order for it to be effective, it must remain independent
and impartial, without any interference by Member
States or unnecessary accommodation with respect to
any Member State, which would hinder the capacity to
respond to and prevent violations against children.

We often speak of accountability, which is the
ultimate objective in order to that those who commit
such atrocities are brought to justice. I should like
simply to recall that while those who fire missiles
bear responsibility, so do those who provide them with
weapons or the logistical support necessary for them to
carry out such terrible acts.

Allow me to conclude with a quote from
Nelson Mandela:

"There can be no keener revelation of a society's
soul than the way in which it treats its children".

This can be either high praise or strong condemnation.

