Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, I would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for sharing her valuable insights with us in her briefing this morning. We also thank the Permanent Representative of Brazil, His Excellency Mr. Ronaldo Costa Filho, for his briefing and his efforts in his capacity as Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). We find it important to further strengthen the link between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding Commission, all the more so given the necessity of an even more prominent role for the PBC. We extend a special welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Niger, His Excellency Mr. Kalla Ankourao. We commend the peaceful holding of both rounds of the presidential elections, despite the political tensions that preceded the polling. The voter turnout of more than 70 per cent is very encouraging. It is now of paramount importance that all stakeholders act responsibly and ensure a peaceful transition of power to a new president. As a first step, that requires the determination of the final results of the elections according to constitutional and democratic principles and respect for the results by all parties. We very much welcome efforts by the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) aimed at fostering dialogue, mediating between political adversaries and supporting efforts to find a way to overcome the political tensions, both in the run-up to the elections and now. After the conclusion of the electoral cycle, it is key for all political actors to put their country and their people's interests first and to work in a collaborative manner to enact critical reforms envisioned in the Conakry Agreement and laid out in the Stability Pact. We particularly commend the inclusion of gender perspectives and the support for women's engagement in the democratic process. In that context, we also welcome the support for efforts to end impunity for gender-based crimes and human rights violations. We remain concerned about the threats to stability posed by transnational organized crime and drug trafficking. We therefore express our support for the important work of United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNIOGBIS in that regard. It remains important to empower national law enforcement authorities to effectively prosecute organized crime. We are glad to hear that the transition process is well-structured and planned. Any vacuum following the end of UNIOGBIS must be avoided. Therefore, Guinea-Bissau's close cooperation with other United Nations entities on the ground, and of regional organizations, especially ECOWAS, as well as their active involvement in the country, is crucial to avoid destabilization. In that regard, we highlight the continued importance of the cooperation of the group of five international partners. We also commend the role of the PBC country-specific configuration as well as the support provided by the Peacebuilding Fund. The mandate renewal of UNIOGBIS this month needs to take into account the realities on the ground and should once more send a signal of our continued support for Guinea-Bissau and our commitment to efforts aimed at development and peacebuilding. Before concluding, let me say that we also agree with the Secretary-General's recommendation to work very closely with the Government of Guinea-Bissau in order to ensure national ownership.
