Mr. Serry: At the outset, let me congratulate you,
Sir, on Lebanon's presidency of the Security Council.

Since the Council last met on this item, Israeli-
Palestinian proximity talks, mediated by the United
States, have officially commenced. The Secretary-
General has been actively supporting the resumption of
proximity talks, and the Quartet welcomed that
development on 11 May.

We commend President Abbas's continued
commitment to the two-State solution and his readiness
to participate in talks. We welcome the support
provided by the Arab League ministers' meeting in
Cairo on I May and from the Executive Committee of
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) on 8 May.
We also commend Prime Minister Netanyahu's
adherence to the policy he laid out last year committing
his Government to a negotiated two-State solution. The
leaders have displayed political courage in entering
those negotiations. That courage will now be tested
anew at the negotiating table, initially in proximity
format, with a view to transitioning to direct talks as
soon as possible.
Both parties have made specific commitments
and received certain assurances, which have enabled
proximity talks to begin. Some of these remain
confidential. These commitments must be respected, as
must obligations under the Road Map and international
law. We welcome United States President Obama's
reaffirmation that both parties would be held
accountable for actions that undermine trust during the
talks.

United States Envoy George Mitchell is currently
in the region for a second round of proximity talks,
following the first round in early May. We commend
the United States on its readiness to play an active role
in the process. Quartet members remain in close touch
regarding the ongoing talks. While the issues are
complex and sensitive, the goal of the effort under way
is clear, as stated by the Quartet on 19 March in
Moscow: the resolution of all core issues, an end to the
1967 occupation, and two States living side by side in
peace and security.

With the start of the proximity talks, it is vital
that positive actions be taken on the ground to build
confidence in both Gaza and the West Bank, including
in East Jerusalem. I turn first to Gaza, where the
Secretary-General has repeatedly called for a different
and more positive strategy. The United Nations is
seeking to be a catalyst for such an approach on the
ground, within the framework of Security Council
resolution 1860 (2009).

We continue to condemn acts of indiscriminate or
excessive violence and to urge calm. Militants fired 12
indiscriminate rockets towards Israel, causing no
injuries. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) conducted 19
incursions and eight air strikes during the reporting
period, injuring nine Palestinians and killing three.
Seven Palestinians were killed and 13 injured in tunnel
incidents under the border with Egypt.

We continue to urge Palestinian unity on the basis
of PLO principles. Despite recent efforts by
independent Palestinian figures promoting
reconciliation, Hamas continues to refuse the unity
proposal that was mediated by Egypt and accepted by
other Palestinian factions.

We call for access to, and the release of, Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit, who has been held in captivity
for 47 months without third-party access. The
resolution of this issue, and with it the release of a
significant number of Palestinian prisoners, would be
10-36643
in the overwhelming interest of both Israel and the
people of Gaza.

Above all, we stress the scale of the unmet needs
of Gaza's civilian population after nearly three years of
closure and the heavy damage of Operation Cast Lead,
and we urge an end to the Israeli closure of the Strip.
While the Israeli Government continues its existing
policy, I welcome initial steps that have been taken to
ease the impact of Israel's closure.

The package agreed between the Government of
Israel and the Secretary-General in March is being
implemented. The Tel el-Sultan water treatment project
will be completed by the end of this month.
Construction material began entering Gaza yesterday to
begin the completion of 151 housing units at Khan
Younis within 16 weeks. I received confirmation this
morning that the essential wastewater treatment facility
and pipeline at Khan Younis is now also fully
approved.

Two thousand four hundred and sixty-nine
truckloads entered Gaza between 11 April and 8 May.
That represents a modest increase over the previous
period, and there was a wider variety of items allowed
in. The entry of wood, aluminium and, in particular,
glass into Gaza on the private market has enabled a
range of minor repairs. However, import levels are still
only about one quarter of pre-June 2007 levels.

This can only be a beginning. Much more is
needed. The United Nations, in close cooperation with
the Palestinian Authority, is seeking larger and more
strategic interventions to address needs in Gaza. These
efforts enjoy strong support from Quartet and regional
partners. We are in active dialogue with the Israeli
authorities in pursuit of that objective. Defence
Minister Barak confirmed to me last week that Israel
will further engage the United Nations on the way
ahead. I believe we must move forward with urgency
on several fronts.

First, major water and sanitation interventions
cannot wait. The aquifer underlying Gaza is collapsing
and is expected to be completely unusable within two
years. The salinity of water available is reducing
agricultural productivity, while raw sewage continues
to flow at alarming levels into the sea - as bad for
Gaza's neighbours as it is unacceptable for Gaza itself.
The United Nations has already presented a full
programme of the work required in this sector. In
partnership with the independent water authority in
10-36643
Gaza, supported by the Palestinian Authority, we will
seek discussion with Israel on its implementation.

Secondly, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) needs to build 100 schools in Gaza, starting
with at least 15 straight away. The student population
in UNRWA schools will have increased by 15,000
above the classroom capacity since the imposition of
the closure in June 2007. Without new schools,
UNRWA cannot meet a rapidly expanding demand for
quality education for the next generation of Gazans.

Thirdly, there are key construction needs in the
health sector, along with needs for additional
equipment. The Gaza power plant also requires a major
servicing and the routine supply of spare parts to
ensure continuous operation and a corresponding
reduction in electricity cuts across the Strip. The first
step in this regard will be to ensure that all material
required for this servicing enters Gaza in the days
ahead.

Fourthly, a significant increase in both the
quantity and range of commercial traffic through
legitimate crossings is required to restore market
conditions. At present, the flourishing illegitimate
tunnel trade permits smugglers and militants to control
commerce. By contrast, international agencies and
local contractors who wish to procure goods entering
through legitimate crossings too often stand idle due to
the Israeli closure. Yet, as we have seen with the recent
imports of glass, restoring functioning market
conditions is the way to meet needs, lower prices,
combat smuggling and empower legitimate business
activity.

I wish to note that Egypt opened Rafah crossing
on 13 May for six days to enable the movement of
persons on humanitarian grounds. I also note that
Egypt continues its important efforts to combat
weapons smuggling, including by installing metal
sheeting along its border with Gaza. This only
redoubles the importance of goods being able to enter
Gaza through the legitimate crossing points.

Within the Gaza Strip, we condemn the
extrajudicial execution by Hamas of two Palestinian
prisoners on 15 April and a further three executions
carried out today without presidential authority. We
call on Hamas not to carry out any further executions.
Hamas demolished approximately 20 homes two days
ago in Rafah, which it alleges were built illegally.
3

We are closely following developments on the
ground in East Jerusalem. No demolition orders against
Palestinian homes were implemented during the
reporting period, despite official statements threatening
further demolitions. No new settlements have been
approved or tendered in East Jerusalem. Israel has also
publicly stated that there will be no construction in the
Ramat Shlomo settlement for two years. However, the
Government continues to state its intention to build
settlements in Jerusalem, and there is ongoing settlement
activity. Construction in existing Palestinian
neighbourhoods in East Jerusalem - such as the start of
work on 14 settler housing units within the Ras el-Amud
neighbourhood - is particularly provocative. Marches
by right-wing Israelis into East Jerusalem have also
caused tensions, as have settler provocations and clashes
in Sheikh Jarrah and Silwan. Palestinian institutions in
East Jerusalem remain closed. I urge Israel to implement
its Road Map obligations and respect international law in
East Jerusalem. I stress the utmost importance of all
parties showing restraint and responsibility in words and
actions regarding Jerusalem.

In the remainder of the West Bank, no new
tenders were issued or approvals given for construction
of settler units during the reporting period, reflecting
Israel's settlement restraint policy. Construction is
ongoing due to approvals given prior to the restraint, or
due to violations of the restraint policy by settlers. The
Israeli Government is taking certain steps to address
violations. The restraint is a step beyond previous
Israeli positions and has not come without domestic
challenges. We strongly urge that it be extended
beyond September and expanded to cover all
settlement activity, including in East Jerusalem, and
that action be taken in accordance with the Road Map
to dismantle outposts erected since March 2001.

Both parties have responsibilities to act to
maintain a secure environment, and security
cooperation between Israel and the Palestinian
Authority continues to be an important enabler of
improvements in the West Bank. However, there are
also worrying trends, in particular a rise in settler
violence. Two mosques were vandalized, one in an
arson attack by unidentified assailants on 4 May in a
village between Nablus and Ramallah. The Israeli
authorities condemned these incidents and ordered
investigations, but no one has yet been held
accountable. Following stone-throwing at Israeli
vehicles on 13 May, a 15-year-old Palestinian boy was
shot and killed by unknown assailants believed to be
Israelis - an incident that must be fully investigated. I
strongly urge Israel to do more to combat violence by
settler extremists.

By contrast, Israeli forces conducted a
significantly increased number of incursions from the
previous period, arresting 286 Palestinians and injuring
96 others. A militant was killed in an IDF operation on
26 April. Weekly demonstrations against the barrier
continued, with Israeli security forces using live
rounds, rubber-coated bullets and tear gas to disperse
demonstrators. Following recent amendments to a 1969
Israeli military order that originally authorized the
deportation of infiltrators from countries hostile to
Israel, there are continuing concerns regarding the
number of Palestinians who may be affected by the
broad and unspecific terms of the order. The United
Nations is closely monitoring its impact and continuing
to seek clarifications.

The Palestinian Authority should also continue
and intensify its ongoing security efforts, in accordance
with the Road Map. On 25 April, Palestinian security
forces seized hundreds of kilograms of explosives,
ammunition and weapons from a number of Hamas
arms caches in Nablus, and arrested some 35
individuals. President Abbas has also recommitted to
combating any incidents of incitement.

Looking ahead, and building on earlier steps,
reduced Israeli incursions and the further removal of
obstacles to movement - which currently stand at
505 - would be very positive. It is equally important
that certain security and development steps by the
Palestinian Authority are now permitted in Area C. The
United Nations also awaits an Israeli response to a
$5-million plan to address some of the most basic
humanitarian needs in education, shelter and water and
sanitation in Area C.

Let me also draw the Council's attention to
certain funding concerns. Despite the Ad Hoc Liaison
Committee's call on donors, only $380 million have so
far been provided to the Palestinian Authority out of
the $1.24 billion required for 2010. I urge increased
support for the Palestinian Authority budget. Private
sector growth is critical to sustainable economic
growth, and in this regard I note that the second
Palestine Investment Conference will take place on 2
and 3 June to facilitate and mobilize investment in
Palestinian businesses, including in the tourism sector.
10-36643

UNRWA also faces a financial crisis that
threatens the sustainability of essential operations
throughout the region, from employing teachers and
providing medical care to improving precarious camp
conditions for Palestine refugees. Even after scaling
back requirements to critical levels, UNRWA's deficit
today amounts to $90 million. I urge all those in a
position to assist, in particular countries in the region,
to provide additional support to UNRWA this year.

While the situation pertaining to Lebanon has
remained largely stable on the ground, allegations of
arms transfers to Hizbullah created tension between
Israel and Lebanon during the reporting period. Israeli
officials have reiterated their concern over alleged
transfers of sophisticated weaponry through the Syrian
border. Lebanese officials, including President Sleiman
and Prime Minister Hariri, Hizbullah leaders, and
Syrian officials sharply denied these allegations. A
number of Arab and European leaders actively engaged
with all relevant parties to dispel the tension.

Within Lebanon, leaders met to continue their
discussions on the development of a national defence
strategy in the forum of the national dialogue on
15 April. They will resume their deliberations on
3 June.

Lebanon has also seen the successful conduct of
the first two rounds of municipal elections on 2 and
9 May, which took place in an atmosphere of overall
calm and stability and without security incidents. The
next two rounds will take place on 23 May and
30 May.

Concerning the reconstruction of the Nahr
el-Bared refugee camp, international support remains
of great importance. There is a shortfall of
$209 million to cover the costs of rebuilding the camp.

The situation in the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon area of operations remained largely quiet.
On 16 April, a local Member of Parliament led a
demonstration in the village of Al-Abbassiye, and
around 20 demonstrators, including journalists, crossed
south of the Blue Line, where one person planted two
Lebanese flags at the technical fence. The
demonstration and the Blue Line violation took place
in the area where, three days earlier, the IDF had
carried out work north of the technical fence, but south
of the Blue Line. No Blue Line violation had occurred
during that work. A week later, on 23 April,
demonstrators, led by the same Member of Parliament,
crossed the Blue Line in the Shab'a area, in Violation
of resolution 1701 (2006). In both instances, the
situation was tense but contained. Israeli air violations
have continued on an almost daily basis. On a number
of days, there were over 30 violations, the majority of
which were carried out by fighter jets.

The search for Arab-Israeli peace must be
comprehensive. We continue to value close
engagement with Arab partners, which have a crucial
role to play in supporting efforts on the Israeli-
Palestinian track. Moreover, the Israeli-Syrian and the
Israeli-Lebanese tracks, and indeed the framework
provided by the Arab Peace Initiative, must be fully
integrated into an overall effort for comprehensive
peace, as recognized by the Quartet in Moscow. Efforts
must continue to restart regional negotiations, and I
take note of recent efforts by Israeli and Syrian leaders
to convey messages of peace through international
leaders. The situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
remained stable, although settlement activity
continued.

In conclusion, after many setbacks and delays, we
are entering a new phase in the efforts for Israeli-
Palestinian peace. Those efforts have our strong
support, and I am convinced of the united
determination of the international community. But let
us all realize that we do not have the luxury of time.
There is distrust and scepticism among people on both
sides; their leaders face multiple political challenges;
and there are powerful elements who will seek to derail
progress.

Negotiations need to address the core issues and
cannot be allowed to stagnate. Equally, the process
must be sustained by positive actions on the ground,
including in Gaza and Jerusalem, and in the further
empowerment of Palestinian State-building. The
United Nations will continue to play its full role in
such efforts, consistent with the resolutions of the
Council.

