Mr. Aniokoye (Nigeria): My delegation would
like to begin by expressing its gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate on
the protection of civilians in armed conflict. The
Council discussed this subject only five months ago.
My delegation is therefore receptive of this debate and
the opportunity it affords to refocus attention on the
enduring plight of civilians in situations of armed
conflict.

I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for his latest report (S/2007/643), which succinctly
examined the subject in its evolving ramifications.
Likewise, I thank Under-Secretary-General John
Holmes for his informative briefing.

My delegation is concerned that, despite the
decline in the number and intensity of conflicts
globally, and on the African continent in particular, the
ambit of threats to civilians keeps expanding. Today,
civilians are not just casualties caught in the crossfire
of Vicious battles, they are specifically targeted, with
an unprecedented number of them being women and
children. The increasing number of non-combatants,
including journalists and humanitarian aid workers, are
now the victims of abduction, dubious military
strategies, suicide attacks and sexual violence. That
situation worsens the general milieu of fear arising
from the social, economic and cultural dislocations
created by conflicts. It is inhuman, to state the obvious,
that among the heavy tolls that conflicts impose on
civilians is the denial of access to medical care for the
infirm, the aged and people with disabilities.

More than ever, the challenges of protecting
civilians in armed conflicts have expanded and become
more daunting. My delegation therefore believes that
the time has come for the international community to
re-examine when it is its responsibility to protect,
without prejudice to the sovereignty of Member States.
Genocide, ethnic cleansing and crimes committed
against unarmed civilians in situations of conflict are
grim reminders that the time is right for the
international community to determine when to exercise
its responsibility to protect.

It is in that regard that Nigeria welcomes the
increased capacity of the African Union to forestall and
resolve armed conflicts and to protect civilians in war
situations through its Peace and Security Council. We
equally welcome the valuable extension of logistical
support from the United States of America and the
European Union for the African Union's peacekeeping
operations in the Darfur region of the Sudan.

We appreciate the renewed United Nations-
African Union partnership aimed at identifying specific
cases in which the United Nations could assist the
African Union response to capacity-building
requirements, including the capacity for monitoring the
conduct of parties to conflicts.

Condemnations by United Nations Member States
of rape and sexual assaults on women, as well as the
anguish often expressed by human rights advocates at
the enlistment of child soldiers for combat, are
authentic and beneficial means of protecting civilians
in situations of conflict.

My delegation believes that the expansion of the
scope and definition of war crimes and crimes against
humanity to include rape, enforced prostitution,
trafficking, enslavement and torture has resulted in an
increase in the number of persons brought before
international tribunals for acts committed against
civilians in the course of armed conflicts.

In order to strengthen the laudable initiatives to
which I have referred and which have already been
embarked upon by the international community to
bring relief to hapless non-combatant victims of war,
my delegation to urge States that have not done so to
adopt, ratify and/or codify in their national laws the
various conventions and protocols on the law of armed
conflicts and to ensure the implementation of their
provisions. That calls for a more results-oriented
strengthening of legal frameworks and mechanisms for
monitoring and reporting attacks against civilians by
both States and non-State actors.

My delegation wishes to reiterate its belief that
conflict prevention is the surest way to protect
civilians. Practice has shown that it costs less to
prevent than to control conflicts. Within the West
African subregion, for instance, Nigeria has been
steadily coordinating initiatives with other Member
States of the Economic Community of West African
States to bring about a peaceful resolution to conflicts
within and among its member States and other States
contiguous to Nigeria. It is in that respect that we call
for the strengthening of the region's evolving security
architecture. The region's zero-tolerance policy for
military interventions in politics and the efforts to
solidify its emergent democratic structures also need
support as safeguards against conflicts.

Although the primary responsibility for
protecting civilians lies with national Governments, the
police, army, civil society and the private sector have
roles to play. Additionally, the international community
must continue to intensify its peacebuilding efforts and
to assist regional organizations to overcome such
protection concerns as insufficient resources, weak
capacity of national institutions, dysfunctional social
services and insecurity, which can affect the process.

Finally, my delegation fully associates itself with
the statement made by the representative of Angola on
behalf of the Group of African States.

