Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
would like to congratulate Guinea on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
March. Your stewardship, Mr. President, comes at a
most difficult time for the Council and indeed for the
whole world. We hope that your leadership and wisdom
can bridge the divisions that prevail in the Council. My
delegation associates itself with the statement made by
Malaysia on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

We come before the Security Council under the
gathering clouds of war. Millions of people around the
world have openly rejected this war and believe, as we
do, that it is not necessary. A war against Iraq will be
deadly and destabilizing and will have far-reaching
political, socio-economic and humanitarian
consequences for all the countries of the world. For us
in Africa, the impact of this pending war will indeed be
crippling. It is for that reason that we appreciate the
opportunity to share our views with the Council at this
critical time.

The decision that the Security Council is about to
take will undoubtedly transcend the immediate issue of
Iraq. It appears to us that we are no longer debating the
situation in Iraq and that country's full compliance
with Security Council resolution 1441 (2002), but that
we are currently defining a new international order that
will determine how the international community
addresses conflict situations in the future. This is an
extremely serious issue that needs our careful
consideration and that will have far-reaching
implications as we progress into this new millennium.

We have to remind ourselves that the founders of
the United Nations were motivated by an abhorrence of
war and by a commitment to resolving international
conflicts peacefully and through collective action. The
Charter of the United Nations states that the
Organization was founded "to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, which twice in
our lifetime has brought untold sorrow to mankind". It
is that objective that we should keep central to our
deliberations as we carefully progress in finding
solutions to the current crisis so that we can ensure that
weapons of mass destruction are completely removed
from Iraq and so that we can thereby avoid war.

Our overall concern is premised on the belief that
the members of the Security Council, who act on behalf
of all Members of the United Nations, should discharge
their duty in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the United Nations. The devastation of
war - which threatens the lives of innocent civilians
whose voices are rarely listened to, and which is also
staring into the eyes of the young men and women who
are called upon to serve on the front lines - should
always be a matter of last resort. War should not be a
means of attaining objectives that contradict the
Charter of the United Nations.

The Security Council must uphold the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Member States, in
conformity with the Charter, and must remain sensitive
to cultural, ethnic and religious differences. For us, the
fundamental issue is the peaceful disarmament of Iraq.
Resolution 1441 (2002) is about disarming Iraq
through inspections. It is not a declaration of war.
Neither is the use of military force the best way to
bring about democracy or to improve human rights in
any country.

The Security Council has recently heard from
Mr. Hans Blix, Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC), and from Mr. Mohamed
ElBaradei, Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), that Iraq has been
actively cooperating and that substantial progress has
been made during the past month. The Al Samoud 2
missiles are being destroyed as we speak, and Iraq is in
the process of accounting for past biological and
chemical weapons programmes.

As the Council is aware, President Thabo Mbeki
has reported to the Secretary-General on the visit to
Iraq by a South African team of experts in the nuclear,
biological, chemical and missile disarmament fields.
South Africa sent its experts after several members of
the Security Council had sought to draw a comparison
between our own voluntary disarmament process and
Iraq's compliance in terms of Security Council
resolutions.

President Mbeki reported that, despite the
difference in South Africa's experience with
disarmament, our team stressed to the Iraqis the
importance not only of taking the necessary steps to
disarm, but also of building confidence in the
credibility of their process through full compliance in
terms of resolution 1441 (2002). South Africa indicated
its willingness to interact further with the Secretary-
General, UNMOVIC and the IAEA and to
communicate to them such detail about the visit as may
be considered necessary.

We wish to reaffirm our full confidence in the
work of Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei and to support the
professional work that they do. We believe that the
Council can strengthen the work of the inspectors by
endorsing a programme and a timeline for inspections,
which Mr. Blix has already offered to present to the
Council. We believe that any timetable developed
without taking into account the programme of the
inspectors can only lead to an unnecessary ultimatum
for war. Furthermore, we believe that a deadline by the
Council would be counterproductive and contradict
both resolutions 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002). As a
result, we fail to see any need for a further resolution
until all the provisions of resolutions 1284 (1999) and
1441 (2002) have been exhausted.

In conclusion, we wish to remind the Council that
the peoples of the world are opposed to this war.
Recently, the heads of State or Government of the
African Union, the Summit of the Non-Aligned
Movement and other international organizations
reiterated their support for the full implementation of
all relevant Security Council resolutions, and, at the
same time, reiterated their opposition to a war against
Iraq. Together with millions of people around the
world, they want to see that Iraq is peacefully disarmed
of any weapons of mass destruction.
