I would like to thank Mr. Martin Griffiths and Mr. Mark Lowcock for their informative and sobering briefings. We have often reiterated that there is no military solution to the crisis in Yemen. As Martin Griffiths has rightly emphasized, there is now the opportunity for a political solution. As the Yemeni women's Technical Advisory Group urged Mr. Griffiths when he met with its members recently, there has never been a more timely moment for parties to silence the guns. Accordingly, we call on the Yemeni parties to fully engage in negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations Special Envoy. We stress that Mr. Griffiths's role is crucial in coordinating all efforts. The parties must pursue the discussions with Mr. Griffiths on the basis of his three-part proposal, which we welcome, in particular by accepting his invitation to participate in a crisis meeting of all parties. France welcomes the announcement made last Friday by Saudi Arabia on behalf of the coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen to unilaterally cease their strikes. Unfortunately, the Yemeni parties have not yet answered the call of the Secretary-General for an immediate and global ceasefire to facilitate the fight against the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). They have not yet followed the coalition's announcement with any sort of commitment. On the contrary, the parties have intensified hostilities. France condemns in the strongest terms the increased levels of fighting. We call on the Yemeni parties to commit to an effective and lasting cessation of hostilities. We also reiterate the obligation of all parties to respect international humanitarian law, in particular the protection of civilians, including humanitarian and health workers, as well as civilian infrastructure. We also call on all parties to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian access to all people in need, which is crucial to facilitating the response to the COVID-19 crisis. The warnings of epidemiologists mentioned by Martin Lowcock are clear. The spread of COVID-19 in Yemen would be catastrophic, as the Yemeni population is extremely vulnerable, and there is an obvious lack of medical capacity in the country. The socioeconomic impact of the crisis is already being felt. Everyone must act with an increased sense of urgency. Early action can still prevent the spread of the virus. United Nations agencies and their partners are scaling up efforts to prevent the spread of the pandemic and strengthen the capacity to respond to the crisis and continue existing humanitarian programmes, which are the lifeline for everyone in Yemen. These efforts need to be supported and enhanced. All obstacles to humanitarian access and deliveries must be lifted. To conclude where I started, I would like to reiterate that an immediate and sustainable ceasefire is needed more than ever before to facilitate the efforts aimed at responding to the COVID-19 crisis. The call of the Secretary-General must be heeded. The Security Council can count on France to remain fully mobilized, engaged and committed to finding a political solution to the crisis in Yemen and to responding to the COVID-19 emergency. The French authorities are also working more broadly to de-escalate the tensions being felt at the regional level.
