Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We congratulate you, Sir,
on steering the work of the Security Council this month
with dedication and finesse.

We align ourselves with the statements delivered
by the Permanent Representatives of Egypt and
Tajikistan on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and
the Organization of the Islamic Conference,
respectively.

During the most recent debate on the Middle East
in this Chamber (see S/PV.6484), most of us lamented
the breakdown of Palestine-Israel direct negotiations
and its implications for peace in the region. Three
months later, the pall of gloom is heavier. The
prospects for a resumption of the Middle East peace
process are not encouraging. The slight window of
opportunity for sustainable peace, created by the recent
reduction in violence, appears to be slipping through
our fingers. To make matters worse, the Middle East
Quartet also appears to be increasingly hamstrung in its
efforts to facilitate the resumption of direct
negotiations and to specify the parameters of the final
settlement. That was made evident by the recent
postponement of the Quartet's Berlin meeting.

Amidst such despair, the Security Council, too,
has abdicated its role in the settlement of the question
of Palestine to individual countries or informal
groupings. It is worrisome to note that the Council's
only activities in regard to the Palestinian issue are its
quarterly open debates, where even spirited and
well-drafted statements fail to cure the somnambulance
of their audience, which knows only too well that the
stalemate is as immutable as the proverbial North Star.

The only ray of hope in this pessimistic scenario
is the impressive march of the Palestinian Authority on
the road to statehood. Numerous independent sources
have confirmed that building State institutions by
August is well within the reach of the Palestinian
Authority. According to recent reports prepared by the
United Nations, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund for the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee of
the Middle East Quartet, the Palestinian Authority is
above the threshold of a functioning State in several
key sectors. Its fiscal performance and high rates of
economic growth in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
have been duly acknowledged in those reports. The
Quartet itself has welcomed that assessment and stated
that Palestinian institutions compared favourably with
those of established States. The Palestinian Authority's
policies of self-reliance, empowerment and creating
economic opportunities have disabused even the
occupiers of their ability to justify the illegal
occupation as a necessary evil.

The attainment of the goal of a Palestinian State
by September is well within our grasp. Letting it
founder on the rocks of cynicism, inaction or political
expediency would have serious consequences for peace
and stability. The failure to meet the 1999 deadline set
in the Oslo Accords triggered the second intifada. The
missing of the 2005 deadline for Palestinian statehood,
as set in the Quartet Road Map of 2003, precipitated
violence and bloodshed and culminated in the siege on
Gaza and its violent aftermath. September 2011 cannot
become just another date in that tragic chronology.

The people of Palestine have already travelled
more than halfway in honouring their side of the
bargain. Israel must reciprocate with an open mind and
in good faith. It must stop all settlement activity in the
occupied Arab territories and fulfil its obligation to
respect the human rights of the Palestinian people.
Israel's blockade of Gaza is neither conscionable nor
tenable. Israel must also facilitate the completion of
reconstruction projects, including those undertaken by
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East.

Pakistan is supportive of lasting peace for all
inhabitants of the Middle East, irrespective of their
religion, ethnicity or nationality. As Palestinian
statehood emerges from the debris of broken promises,
it should not be stymied by violence. We join other
delegations in calling for a prevailing ceasefire in
Gaza.

The framework for peace in the Middle East is set
forth in detail in resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973),
1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850 (2008); the Madrid
terms of reference; the Arab Peace Initiative; and the
Quartet Road Map. Mustering and sustaining the
political will to implement the framework is
imperative.

We hope that the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet will engage themselves meaningfully with
the parties concerned to realize the collective objective
of the international community for an independent,
sovereign and viable State of Palestine, living side by
side and in peace with all of its neighbours. Pakistan
shares and supports that objective.

