Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): My delegation has already had the
opportunity to congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council. We want to let you
know that we are here to cooperate fully with you to
ensure the full success of your mission. That success
will also mean success for the Council, for the United
Nations and for peace. In the past few days, despite
emotions that have run high, you have been able, under
difficult conditions, to preserve an atmosphere of calm
in the Council. That atmosphere has encouraged us to
engage in thorough discussions of the matter that we
are gathered to consider today. My delegation is
extremely grateful to you for acceding to the well-
founded request of the Arab Group to convene this
meeting.

The circumstances that made this meeting
necessary are well known: the situation created by the
impossibility of sending the fact-finding team to Jenin.
However, this meeting is also an opportunity for us to
take an overview of the whole situation. In that regard,
certain advances have been made in the past few days
that have been recalled frequently throughout this
debate. First, there was the lifting of the siege of the
headquarters of the Palestinian Authority in Ramallah
and the restored freedom of movement of President
Arafat. We urge respect for the sacred and inviolable
character of the Church of the Nativity.

Another advance was yesterday's meeting of the
"quartet" in Washington, DC, which allowed the
emergence of some positive elements, among which
figured the proposed international conference on peace
in the Middle East. That peace, we reiterate, has a
prerequisite: the settlement of the question of Palestine,
which is the heart of the conflict, has claimed so many
victims and has led to so much destruction in the
region. We appreciate the steps taken by the Secretary-
General to prepare for the conference, which could take
place this summer.
Another positive element that emerged from the
meeting of the "quartet" was the international
community's urgent need to take a more
comprehensive approach to solving the issues of
security, humanitarian needs and the reconstruction of
Palestine and of the Palestinian Authority's
infrastructure, built up after so many years of effort and
reduced to rubble in just a few days.

However, none of this progress can outweigh our
bitter disappointment today. That disappointment and
growing anger have been provoked by the non-
compliance with resolution 1405 (2002), in particular
operative paragraph 2, by which the Council welcomes
the initiative of the Secretary-General to develop
accurate information regarding recent events in the
Jenin refugee camp through a fact-finding team and
requests the Secretary-General to keep it informed.
Had the provisions of that paragraph been respected,
things could have been very simple.

The Secretary-General is to be commended for
deploying a rich imagination in his praiseworthy efforts
to ensure the implementation of the resolution.
Unfortunately, however, there was no response in kind
to those efforts and Cameroon regrets that the fact-
finding team was, in fact, unable to carry out its
mission on the ground in Jenin. That mission should
have enabled the Security Council to be adequately
informed about what had really happened in Jenin and
would have provided the Council with an equitable and
irrefutable basis for considering the ways and means to
rebuild trust between the parties and thus to relaunch
the peace process.

Cameroon notes the Secretary-General's decision
to disband the team of eminent personalities. We
reaffirm our full support for the Secretary-General's
tireless efforts aimed at finding a negotiated solution to
this crisis. Having studied the Secretary-General's
letter to the Security Council, my country regrets the
decision but understands it, because the Secretary-
General said that time played a critical role. With the
situation in the Jenin refugee camp changing by the
day, it will become increasingly difficult to establish
with any confidence or accuracy the events that took
place there recently. The position adopted by the
Secretary-General was very responsible; he was not
willing to go along with a report that was not based on
the facts.

At one point, we believed that the impossible
could happen, but the Secretary-General warned the
Security Council and asked it through his
representative not to entrust him with an impossible
mission. At a certain point we said - and we continue
to believe - that the Secretary-General must do
everything possible to obtain information about the
events in Jenin and to report thereon to the Council. In
this connection, Cameroon reaffirms its complete
support for the Secretary-General.

I said earlier that Cameroon is following very
closely and fully supports all initiatives aimed at easing
tensions and restoring peace in the region. That is why,
as I said earlier, we welcome the decision taken by the
"quartet" to convene an international conference on the
Palestinian question this summer.

In conclusion, Cameroon would like to assure
you, Mr. President, of its readiness to work with you in
truth, transparency and full respect for the interests of
all as we seek a comprehensive and lasting solution to
this problem so that peace may reign in people's hearts
and minds. Without peace in hearts and minds, there
can be no peace in the Middle East.

