Mr. Siddig (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As this is
the first time I am addressing the Council, I would
like to assure members of our willingness to seriously
and fully cooperate and coordinate with the Security
Council with regard to issues related to the situation in
the Sudan that are under consideration by the Council.
I would also like to thank all States that supported the
position of the Sudan during the negotiations that led
to the adoption of resolution 2479 (2019) earlier today.

In the past, we have assured the Council that the
situation in Darfur was constantly improving, as
confirmed by all the reports submitted to the Council
during the past period. We had hoped that the two
penholders would have taken those reports into account
in the resolution, in particular the report on the strategic
review of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) (S/2019/445), which
includes recommendations for a gradual withdrawal of
the mission from Darfur, based on the options available.
However, the penholders had a different opinion on
the issue.
Let me assure the Council that the Sudan is
determined to restore normal life in Darfur, begin
the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
and achieve the development necessary to address the
effects of the conflict. We therefore see no justifiable
reason for maintaining peacekeeping forces in Darfur.
In fact, their presence would impede and delay the
transition. We hope that the Council will take that into
consideration when renewing the mission's mandate
in October. It is important that the Council change
the way it deals with the situation in Darfur because
peacekeeping is no longer useful now that the armed
conflict has ended.

The hybrid mission, which depends on peacekeepers
from African States, shows that the African continent
is capable of successfully addressing its own issues.
UNAMID has contributed considerably during the last
period to achieving peace and maintaining security
throughout Darfur. The Sudanese people are very
grateful for and appreciative of the sacrifices and efforts
made by peacekeepers. Furthermore, I would like to
assure the Council, and in particular my three brothers
the representatives of the African States members of
the Council, of the determination of the Government
of the Sudan to make UNAMID's mandate and goals a
success. That would ensure that the mission, which was
deployed 13 years ago, is the first successful model of
African solutions for African problems.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
