Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): This is a topic that
should concern us all, and I thank China for convening
this important open debate today. Many of the threats
and challenges faced by our African partners, including
violent extremism, terrorism, serious and organized
crime and armed conflict have no regard for borders.
In our deeply interconnected world, our security
is inextricably linked together, and those threats
undermine our shared pursuit of a more peaceful,
prosperous world for all. It is therefore vital that we
continue to work together to address those complex,
shared challenges.

Effective partnerships between the United
Nations and the African Union and its subregional
organizations are particularly important in that context.
The African Union and its subregional organizations
play a vital role, not only in peacekeeping, but also
in preventing conflict and sustaining peace. I pay
tribute to their work in mediation, brokering political
agreements and supporting peace processes, as for
example in South Sudan, where the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development has worked to revitalize
and support peace negotiations. No such discussion
would be complete without recognizing in particular
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the most impressive of the subregional
organizations, especially its efforts in The Gambia in
2017 and 2018.

Peacekeeping remains one of the most effective tools
of the United Nations for the promotion of maintenance
of international peace and security. So when we do
deploy our peacekeepers, whether in Africa or elsewhere
in the world, we need to collectively ensure that they
are properly equipped to meet the complex threats and
challenges that they will face. That is essential not only
to ensuring that they can effectively implement their
mandates - those that we set here in the Council - but
also to enabling them to ensure their own safety and
security. As the report authored by former United
Nations Force Commander, Lieutenant General Carlos
Alberto dos Santos Cruz, entitled Improving security
of United Nations peacekeepers, made clear, safety
and capability are inextricably linked. Where units
perform poorly, they put themselves, as well as the
civilians they are mandated to protect, at risk. That is
why I will concentrate the remainder of my remarks
on performance.

Again, I welcome the adoption of resolution
2436 (2018), which sets out measures for improving
peacekeeping performance. Let me be clear, though,
that discussing performance in this way should not
be seen as just something aimed at troop-contributing
countries. The Action for Peacekeeping Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations commits all stakeholders, including
the Secretary-General, to developing an integrated
performance policy framework, performance data,
effective field support, clear operational and technical
requirements, and to working with Member States to
generate specialized capabilities. Member States have
committed to providing well-equipped and well-trained
personnel to improve predeployment preparations and
coordinate better on training and capacity-building.
Additionally, the Council has of course been challenged
to write mandates that are better and more realistic.

First, we believe that missions must be robustly
and fairly assessed, using accurate data collected
from the field. That will improve our understanding
of what works and what does not work so that lessons
can be learned. I welcome the work that the Secretariat
has undertaken in that regard to develop and pilot
new frameworks for performance assessment. Where
assessments do identify issues, they must be followed
by appropriate action, including repatriating ineffective
units and replacing them as necessary. The principles
of robust assessment and accountability are particularly
relevant to the conduct of peacekeepers. The United
Nations human rights due diligence policy for all United
Nations support and non-United Nations security
forces - which includes reimbursements - must be
implemented in full, as must the Secretary-General's
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
As the Secretary-General himself said this morning,
the era of silence is over and the era of accountability
has begun.

Secondly, with regard to collaboration, we should
make the best use of our comparative strengths so that
our collective effort is greater than the sum of its parts.
That means ensuring, for example, that African Union
peace enforcement operations complement United
Nations peacekeeping missions, while respecting
the relevant competencies. When we, along with 150
other countries, endorsed the Action for Peacekeeping
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, we committed to enhancing
collaboration and planning between the United Nations
and the relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations and arrangements, while recognizing the
need for a clear delineation of roles. That includes, of
course, the African Union and the European Union,
which have deployed several mandated operations in
recent years.

The United Kingdom also recognizes the importance
of collaboration between organizations and their
member States to ensure that all peacekeepers in the
field are willing, capable of and equipped to effectively
and safely implement their mandates. We are proud that
British peace support teams in Africa provide training
to over 10,000 African peacekeeping personnel every
year. In Somalia, for example, the United Kingdom
continues to support the African Union Military
Observer Mission in Somalia, both bilaterally and
through the European Union and the United Nations,
including through the deployment of personnel to
the United Nations Support Office for AMISOM. and
through predeployment training for regional forces.
We also, of course, have a substantial peacekeeping
presence in South Sudan.

Thirdly, we must recognize when peacekeeping
missions are not best suited to a particular challenge.
For example, due to their composition and character,
United Nations peacekeeping missions are not suited to
engaging in peace enforcement and counter-terrorism
operations. That fact underpins our support in principle
for African Union-led peace support operations that
are in line with the commitments set out in resolutions
2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017) and authorized by the
Security Council under Chapter VIII of the Charter of
the United Nations to access United Nations-assessed
contributions on a case-by-case basis.

In conclusion, let me commend the recent successful
transition from British to Vietnamese forces at the
United Nations field hospital in South Sudan. That
is the first time that unbroken clinical coverage has
been achieved during a United Nations field hospital
transfer, setting a precedent that, we believe, all future
operations should seek to emulate. Many lessons were
learned in that process, one being that some of the
existing Department of Field Support (DFS) regulations
constrained our ability to ensure unbroken clinical
coverage. It is therefore key that we all learn from that
and that DFS regulations be thoroughly reviewed and
adapted so that transitions between smart pledges are
as seamless as possible.

I would like to finish by paying tribute to all the
members of the British military currently serving in
United Nations peacekeeping missions and by reiterating
my admiration and respect for all peacekeepers who
work with bravery, dedication and patience in the
places where we in the Council send them.

