Mr. Wang Donghua (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation is pleased to see you, Sir,
presiding over today's meeting. We also appreciate the
Secretary-General's presence and his important
statement. The Chinese delegation welcomes President
Kagame to the Council and his exchange of views with
Council members on the situation in the Great Lakes
region.

Several days ago, Council members had a candid
exchange of views with President Joseph Kabila,
President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, on
the conflict in that country. China believes that such an
exchange of views is conducive to the efforts of the
parties in the region to seek peace there. Turmoil and
conflict in the Great Lakes region are attributable to
profound historical ethnic factors and also involve
poverty, intrinsic contradictions and external
intervention. From the tragic genocide in Rwanda in
1994 to the ongoing conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we have been able to see that
these contradictions and factors have interacted and are
interlinked.

Various parties have repeatedly emphasized that a
coordinated and comprehensive strategy must be
adopted to deal with the situation in the Great Lakes
region. Only when peace and stability are restored to
the entire Great Lakes region can peace and stability in
the countries of the region be guaranteed. No country
can possibly build its own peace and development on
its neighbours' wars and conflicts. Therefore, the
Chinese side hopes that every country in the region
will seize the opportunity to use political judgement
and decide to settle the conflict peacefully through
dialogue and consultation.

The new Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has repeatedly emphasized its
commitment to relaunching the Lusaka peace process,
to conducting political dialogue and to cooperating
fully with the United Nations. China hopes that the
parties concerned will respond positively to that and
prove to the international community with actual deeds
their sincere desire to seek peace.

The Chinese delegation wishes to emphasize
three points. First, the inter-Congolese dialogue is
critical for the advancement of the Congolese peace
process. However, that dialogue should be free of
external intervention or interference, not to mention
military intervention. Secondly, the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo must be respected. This is a principle that every
Member of the United Nations should observe. Thirdly,
security in the border areas between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the countries concerned
should be guaranteed.

We also believe that the achievement of peace
and stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its neighbouring countries represents the biggest
challenge before the United Nations. The positive roles
of the United Nations and the Security Council are
crucial for the early realization of peace in the Great
Lakes region. China supports the Security Council's
taking concrete measures, increasing inputs and
deploying peacekeepers to the border areas of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and the
other countries concerned as soon as possible, when
conditions permit, in order to address the security
concerns of the relevant countries and facilitate the
settlement ofthe conflict.

