Mr. Arnault: I am pleased to supplement the
Secretary-General's report to the Council dated 23 June
(S/20l7/539) and to inform the Council that three days
ago, on 27 June, the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias
de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo (FARC-EP) met its
obligations under the 29 May road map agreement by
handing over to the United Nations Mission in Colombia
the remaining 40 per cent of the individual weapons
registered by the Mission in March.

A number of weapons will remain at the disposal
of FARC-EP to provide security for the camps and the
United Nations weapons-laydown team sites therein
until 1 August, on which date the containers will be
removed from the camps, and the current zones where
the FARC-EP are assembled will be turned into training
and reintegration areas secured by the Colombian police
and armed forces.

At the "farewell to arms, farewell to war" ceremony
held on 27 June in a FARC-EP camp in a region that
has been at the epicentre of the war, President Santos
and the head of the FARC-EP secretariat, Timoleen
Jimenez, sent strong and moving messages to a
Colombian society often doubtful ofthe promises ofthe
peace process. Mr. Jimenez announced that, with the
laying down of its weapons, the FARC-EP was formally
marking the end of the 53-year armed insurgency and
the beginning of an unarmed, peaceful and democratic
movement. I can only quote President Santos Calderon
when he said that reaching and living that day had
made his presidency of Colombia worthwhile. He
acknowledged the historic significance of the FARC-
EP's fulfilment of its commitment to laying down
its weapons and affirmed his own commitment to
implementing the Final Peace Agreement, as he said,
to the last comma. At the ceremony, religious leaders,
including the President of the Bishops' Conference of
Colombia, acted as witnesses of honour for the final
stage of the laying down of weapons.

The conviction expressed by both leaders - that
half a century of war is now over - has been borne out
by the Mission's review of the ceasefire that has been
in place since the end of August 2016. Indeed, while
in the past nine months there have been a number of
failures to observe the rules of the ceasefire and the
cessation of hostilities, none have showed a pattern
of deliberate violation or any involvement of high-
level decision-makers on either side. We therefore
believe that as the FARC-EP lays down its weapons,
the ceasefire has been consolidated. It will nevertheless
be important to ensure that the tripartite Monitoring
and Verification Mechanism continues to operate for
some time after 1 August, when the current zones and
points are due to disappear. It has been an effective
tool for maintaining and strengthening confidence
between the parties to the conflict, and its presence
at the local level will help to ensure that any incidents
that may occur in the next few weeks and months can
still be dealt with cooperatively. Incidentally, eight
months after the Mechanism began operating, we think
that the merits of its tripartite approach - whereby
the two parties participate directly in verifying each
other's compliance, with United Nations support and
coordination - have been well established. While the
Mechanism's success owes much to the confidence
fostered between the warring parties at the negotiating
table, the Council might wish to consider whether it
could usefully be applied to other peace processes.

With the storing of individual weapons in United
Nations containers, the Mission and the FARC-EP, with
the support of the armed forces and the police, can now
devote their full attention to disposing of hundreds
of arms caches, collecting the weapons in them and
destroying explosives and unstable armaments. So far,
81 arms caches have been Visited and a large amount
of explosives destroyed. Plans are ongoing with the
FARC and the Government to extract another 380 in
the coming weeks, with more to follow. Disposing of
arms caches is undoubtedly a difficult process, but
we are encouraged by the willingness of the FARC-
EP and the armed forces to move forward, and we are
confident that at least a very high percentage of the
caches, if not all, can be dealt with by 1 September,
when the Mission's verification of the caches ends and
responsibility switches to the Government.

The past few days have brought good, encouraging
news to Colombia and the world, and it is perfectly all
right to celebrate these advances, even if there is clearly
no reason to pause and no room for complacency.
While the completion of the laying down of individual
weapons has created new opportunities, it has also
emphasized the urgency of moving forward quickly
with the implementation of the peace agenda.

The first and most urgent challenge is undoubtedly
the reintegration of the 10,000 FARC-EP combatants
and militias, among whom there is a deep sense of
uncertainty about their physical security in the wake
of disarmament and about their socioeconomic future.
As the reports of the Secretary-General have stressed,
reintegration is a particularly daunting endeavour
against a backdrop of entrenched illegal economies, the
spread of armed groups - including organized crime
and FARC dissidents - into areas formerly controlled
by the FARC-EP, and a pattern of violence against
social leaders. One of the merits of the 29 May road
map is that it clearly lays out a number of priorities
relating to the legal, physical and socioecomic security
of FARC-EP members. No effort should be spared in
promptly implementing that agenda.

Beyond the reintegration of combatants, the peace
process must also respond to the needs and expectations
of the more vulnerable sectors of Colombian society. We
fully agree with the three priority areas identified by
the Government - deploying security forces to protect
communities and establish the rule of law in the areas
most affected by the war; mobilizing national and local
institutions to bring goods and services to rural areas
long outside their reach; and implementing the new

peace jurisdiction as quickly as possible so as to deliver
on the promise ofjustice for the Victims of the conflict.
We welcome the fact that, together with reintegration,
these were precisely the priorities that the Government
indicated to the Peacebuilding Fund, and we urge the
international community to support these goals.

We are honoured by the Government of Colombia
and the FARC-EP's request that we establish a second
verification mission, focused on reintegration and
wider security guarantees, to begin operating as soon
as possible. As I have indicated, that is Where some
of the most immediate and pressing challenges to the
consolidation of peace lie. We believe that the terms of
reference indicated in President Santos's letter to the
Secretary-General and the Security Council (S/2016/53, annex) represent a good basis for a credible and
effective verification mandate. Like the first mission,
the second will be as much about fostering cooperation
and building confidence as about verification as such.
In that regard, we believe that the trust that has been
established between the Mission, the two parties, the
State institutions and civil society can help to ensure
the success of the second mandate.

The Security Council's decision in January 2016 to
back the implementation of the agreement on a ceasefire
and a laying down of arms by establishing the United
Nations Mission in Colombia was widely regarded across
Colombian society as a guarantee that the commitments
made in Havana would be duly implemented at home.
Across political divides, and the current polarized
atmosphere notwithstanding, the Security Council
remains a highly significant factor for confidence in
the midst of the misgivings and uncertainties that are
the inevitable sequels to such a protracted and painful
conflict. As the peace process in Colombia enters a
new phase, beyond the laying down of weapons, the
Council's commitment to the peace process and the
determination it expressed in its presidential statement
S/PRST/2017/6, following its Visit to Colombia in early
May, to support the implementation of the Final Peace
Agreement Will remain an invaluable contribution to
the long-term success of this unique endeavour.

