The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) on the Iranian nuclear issue and resolution 2231 (2015) are crucial to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, peace and stability in the Middle East and international security. I would like to emphasize the following points related to these important matters. First, Viet Nam has relentlessly pursued a policy of respecting and upholding the obligations under the Charter of the United Nations, international law, Security Council resolutions and international commitments and agreements. Secondly, we reiterate our support for resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We call on the parties concerned to promote dialogue and negotiation in order to resolve differences and continue to fully implement resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. It is also necessary for the parties to exercise self-restraint and refrain from conducting any acts that may escalate tension and erode trust. Thirdly, we are closely following developments in the Middle East. Maintaining peace and stability in the region plays an important role in international peace and security. The parties to the JCPOA and the States in the region have the primary responsibility for regional peace and stability, as well as the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We reject all illegal means of supplying weapons to parties in conflicts and wars, which could lead to complicity, further tensions or conflicts in the Middle East. Last but not least, peace and security in the Middle East will reverberate far beyond the region. It is very important for the Security Council to carefully consider the issues related to resolution 2231 (2015). Given the results of the voting today and other related recent developments, it is critical that the parties concerned strive for continued dialogue, with a view to achieving a comprehensive solution acceptable to all related parties, in the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA for the sake of common peace and stability in the region. Viet Nam is willing to make a positive contribution to this process.
