Mr. Munir (Pakistan): I thank you, Mr. President,
and congratulate you on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council. Our statement will be within the
four-minute limit.

We appreciate the remarks of the Secretary-
General and the focused briefings provided by his
Special Representative for Children and Armed
Conflict, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, and Executive Director
of UNICEF Anthony Lake. We also commend the
Special Representative for her determined efforts to
protect and advance the rights of children trapped in
armed conflicts.

As the Secretary-General said this morning,
children are one of the primary victims of armed
conflicts. Ominously, this disturbing trend shows
no sign of abatement. Children continue to be killed,
maimed, abducted and subjected to sexual violence as
a consequence of conflict situations, neither of their
making nor choosing. In the wanton destruction of
conflict, countless childhoods have been lost, dreams
shattered and hopes vanquished. Children also pay the
heaviest price in forced migration ofpeople as a result of
conflict. These practices present formidable obstacles
to the normative frameworks of humanitarian and
human rights laws, in particular the rights of children.

We acknowledge the progress achieved during the
last 20 years. Children, Not Soldiers is an innovative
campaign that assures progress by laying emphasis on
priority activities, road maps, benchmarks, deadlines
and reviews, as well as active participation by listed
countries. The theme of children and armed conflict has
also effectively been mainstreamed into the Council's
work. These efforts have contributed to the emergence
of a global consensus that no circumstances justify
recruitment and the use of children in conflict. The
signing of multiple action plans to stop the recruitment
and use of children and the various successful
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programmes to help children become productive
members of the society are tangible manifestations of
this consensus. Yet a lot more needs to be done.

Strengthening the compliance and accountability
mechanisms applied to all parties - conflict States
and non-State armed groups - is essential to stopping
violations ofchildren's rights and preventing recurrence.
Perpetrators of violence against children need to be
identified and brought to justice through national
judicial systems, and where applicable, through the use
of international justice mechanisms. The establishment
of appropriate legal frameworks with investigative and
prosecution capacities remain central to this purpose.
Above all, the goal of protecting lives is intrinsically
linked to the goal of preventing conflict. It is therefore
essential that the root causes of such conflicts are
addressed and inclusive political solutions found.

Pakistan attaches great importance to the
protection and promotion of the rights of children. We
are proud to be one of the six co-initiators of the 1990
World Summit for Children, which provided a fillip to
the accelerated ratification of the Convention on the
Rights of Child. We are also in the process of ratifying
the Convention's Optional Protocol on Children and
Armed Conflict. Pakistan, as one of the world's largest
troop contributing countries, has a proud history of
conscientiously undertaking the task of protecting
civilian lives, including those of children.

Pakistan supports the mandate of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. We, however, believe that this
mandate cannot afford accretion. The legal parameters
of the mandate, as provided by Security Council
resolutions, must be respected. In this context, we want
to state for the record that references to Pakistan in the
Secretary-General's report of20 April 2016 (S/2016/360)
are not within the purview of the established mandate
of children and armed conflict. We hope this principle
will be kept in mind while preparing future reports.

