Mr. Berger (Germany): Germany also welcomes
the unanimous adoption of this resolution, and we
would like to thank France and Nigeria for their
initiative.

The rapidly deteriorating security situation in
Cote d'Ivoire is highly alarming. We are deeply
concerned about reports of increased fighting and
violence against civilians, as well as about armament
and recruitment, including of mercenaries. Cote
d'Ivoire is on the brink of a full-scale civil war. By
adopting this resolution today, the Council has
demonstrated that it is ready to act in the face of the
deteriorating security situation on the ground.

With this resolution the Council sends a strong
and urgent signal to Laurent Gbagbo and his entourage
that the time to step aside has come, in order to prevent
further violence and to enable the start of a political
process that should result in peace, reconciliation and
democracy in the country. Germany fully supports this
resolution, which urges all parties to show the utmost
restraint and to prevent a relapse into civil war.

We commend the work of the United Nations
Operation in Cote d'Ivoire. We encourage the
peacekeeping mission to make full use of its mandate,
provided by the Security Council to ensure, within its
capabilities, the protection of civilians under imminent
threat of physical violence. We are very concerned
about increasing attacks and violence, committed not
only against civilians but also against United Nations
personnel. Those who commit such acts must be
brought to national and international justice, including,
where applicable, to the International Criminal Court.

Today's resolution should not be seen as
substituting for a political process. We strongly
welcome the efforts undertaken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
African Union to seek a political resolution of the
crisis in concert with the Security Council. We
encourage the African Union and ECOWAS to
redouble their efforts to find a lasting political solution.

We are deeply concerned about continued human
rights violations and the dire humanitarian situation for
displaced persons and refugees in Cote d'Ivoire and
neighbouring States, in particular in Liberia. We look
forward to the report of the independent international
commission of inquiry to be appointed by the President
of the Human Rights Council, as well as to reports on
the humanitarian situation.

