Mr. Kim Sook (Republic of Korea): I thank Under-
Secretary-General Feltman for his detailed briefing.
Entering the second quarter ofthe year, the Middle East
peace process seems to be at the fork of two diverging
roads. There must have been a road not taken much
fairer than the one Israel and Palestine have taken thus
far. The choice both sides make today will make all the
difference. Recently, we have witnessed a faint glimmer
of hope that allows for cautious optimism, but there
also exist disappointing elements. Israel and Palestine
should deal with the unforeseen incidents occurring on
a daily basis. No matter how serious these incidents are,

however, both parties should maintain the farsighted
perspective of a negotiated resolution of all issues.

Following the death of a Palestinian detainee on
2 April, protests broke out, and during the clashes two
young Palestinians died. This is an unfortunate vicious
cycle that needs to be broken. My delegation condemns
the rocket attacks from Gaza. Both parties must abide
by the ceasefire agreed to in November. In this regard,
we commend the government of Israel for reopening
the Kerem Shalom crossing.

The continuing plight of the inhabitants of the Gaza
Strip is unacceptable; at the same time, cannot justify
hostility towards humanitarian facilities and staff.
The violent acts of protestors against a United Nations
food distribution centre are deplorable. The safety and
security of United Nations humanitarian property and
staff must be guaranteed regardless of the situation.

In terms of the long-term perspective, my delegation
takes note of three particular developments. First, it
is encouraging that the United States Government
is making efforts to engage both sides, as well as
neighbouring countries, through President Obama's
and Secretary Kerry's visits to the region. We expect
that this shuttle diplomacy will lead to an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of direct talks between
Israel and Palestine. We welcome the reported agreement
to seek ways to assist the economic development of
Palestine. Meaningful progress on the economic track
will, we hope, create positive momentum in breaking
the political stalemate.

Secondly, my delegation is concerned that Israel's
demolition activity has recently resumed in Area C.
We urge the Government of Israel to forego further
construction of settlements. We welcome the agreement
between Israel and Palestine regarding UNESCO's
activity in the Old City of Jerusalem. We hope that this
small progress will lead to a more meaningful trust-
building going forward.

Thirdly, the resignation of Prime Minister Fayyad
of the Palestinian Authority has overshadowed
uncertainties on the future of the Palestinian Authority,
reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas, and the
prospects of the peace process. My delegation hopes
that, under the leadership of President Abbas, a capable
successor will be appointed soon.

In order for all these variables to converge on
the common goal of lasting peace and security in
the Middle East, it is imperative that both Israel and
Palestine refrain from initiating provocative acts and
demonstrate a spirit of compromise. We hope that the
Quartet will resume its work and, combined with the
mediation efforts of the United States, have a synergic
effect.

The situation in Lebanon requires our continued
attention. The resignation of Prime Minister Mikati
could increase the unpredictability of the domestic
political scene. With the Syrian crisis at its doorstep, the
Government's dissociation policy needs to be observed
by all parties in order to prevent the inflammation
of sectarian tensions within Lebanon. The influx of
refugees has increased Lebanon's population by more
than 10 per cent. With the Syrian crisis on the verge of
spilling across its borders, all political players should
unite to secure Lebanon's political sovereignty and
territorial integrity at this critical juncture.
The civil war in Syria is by far the most dangerous
crisis in terms of the scale of its casualties and the
scope of its impact. The crisis has entered its third
year, resulting in well over 70,000 deaths, 4.5 million
internally displaced persons and 1.3 million refugees.
Last week, five United Nations humanitarian agency
heads made a joint statement warning that the
humanitarian response has reached the limits of its
capacity. Their statements demonstrated the urgency of
a political solution to the Syrian crisis.

Particularly heartbreaking is the suffering of the
most vulnerable groups, especially women and children.
The international community should continue to attend
to their suffering and provide support. The Republic
of Korea believes that all perpetrators of violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law must
be held accountable. My delegation urges the parties
to the conflict to immediately cease hostilities and
embark upon efforts towards a political solution. We
also invite countries that have not yet done so to provide
their support for referring the case to the International
Criminal Court.

It is imperative that the international community
rally to support the Syrian people. Their ongoing
plight foreshadows a bleak future for the entire nation.
Therefore, it is also important to prepare for a future
reconstruction process in Syria. In that regard, I wish
to inform the Council that the Government of the
Republic of Korea is planning in June to host the third
meeting of the working group on economic recovery
and development of the Group of Friends of Syria. To
that end, we are now consulting with Germany and the
United Arab Emirates, the co-chairs of the working

group.

It is with a heavy heart that I must accept that the
situation in Syria has not improved since the Security
Council held its open debate three months ago (see S/PV.6906). On the contrary, it has begun to deteriorate
on an exponential scale. As members of the Security
Council, we share a heavy sense of responsibility. I
hope that the Council will break the current deadlock
and make a meaningful contribution to the resolution of
that tragic conflict.

