The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Algeria, Argentina,
Australia, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Cuba,
Egypt, El Salvador, the Federated States of Micronesia,
Georgia, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jamaica,
Japan, Kuwait, the Lao People's Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malaysia, Marshall Islands,
Mauritius, Mongolia, Morocco, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Republic of Korea,
Singapore, South Africa, Sudan, Switzerland, Thailand,
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia,
Turkey, Uganda, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam and Yemen,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Aldouri
(Iraq) and Mr. Mohd Isa (Malaysia) took seats at
the Council table; Mr. Nesho (Albania), Mr. Baali
(Algeria), Mr. Listre (Argentina), Mr. Dauth
(Australia), Mr. Ivanou (Belarus), Mr. Mota
Sardenberg (Brazil), Mr. Heinbecker (Canada),
Mr. Giraldo (Colombia), Mr. Rodriguez Parrilla
(Cuba), Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt), Mr. Lagos
Pizzati (El Salvador), Mr. Nakayama (Federated States of Micronesia), Mr. Adamia (Georgia),
Mr. Vassilakis (Greece), Mr. Rosenthal
(Guatemala), Mr. Acosta Bonilla (Honduras),
Mr. Ingolfsson (Iceland), Mr. Nambiar (India),
Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia), Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr. Neil (Jamaica),
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Abulhasan (Kuwait),
Mr. Kittikhoun (Lao Peoples Democratic Republic), Mr. Jegermanis (Latvia), Mr. Diab
(Lebanon), Mr. Own (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya),
Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. Serksnys
(Lithuania), Mr. Capelle (Marshall Islands),
Mr. Koonjul (Mauritius), Mr. Baatar (Mongolia),
Mn Bennouna (Morocco), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Sevilla Somoza (Nicaragua),
Mr. Kolby (Norway), Mr. Stan'czyk (Poland),
Mr. Sun Joun-yung (Republic of Korea),
Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore), Mr. Kumalo (South Africa), Mr. Erwa (Sudan), Mr. Staehelin
(Switzerland), Mr. Kasemsarn (Thailand),
Mr. Kerim (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), Mr. Hachami (Tunisia),
Mn Cengizer (Turkey), Mr. Semakula Kiwanuka
(Uganda), Mrs. Mulamula (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Paolillo (Uruguay), Mr. Vohidov
(Uzbekistan), Mr. Alcalay (Venezuela),
Mr. Nguyen Thanh Chau (Viet Nam) and
Mr. Alsaidi (Yemen) took the seats reserved for
them at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, which reads as follows:

"In accordance with article 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security
Council, I have the honour to request the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, Permanent Observer of the League
of Arab States to the United Nations, in the
discussion of the agenda item under consideration
by the Council on Iraq, which will start on 26
March 2003."

That letter will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol 8/2003/370.
If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Yahya Mahmassani.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I invite the Permanent Observer of the League of
Arab States to the United Nations, Mr. Yahya
Mahmassani, to take the seat reserved for him at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the requests contained in
the letter dated 24 March 2003 from the Permanent
Representative of Iraq, which was issued as document
S/2003/362, and in the letter dated 24 March 2003 from
the Permanent Representative of Malaysia, which was
issued as document 5/2003/363.

I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting, and I
invite him to take the floor.


