Mr. Oshima (Japan): First, allow me to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of
the presidency for the month of July. You shall have
my delegation's full cooperation. We look forward to
working under your leadership with you and other
Council members. We would also like to pay tribute to
Ambassador De La Sabliere of France for the very
efficient way in which he guided the work of the
Council during the month of June. I would also like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Danilo Turk for his
comprehensive and final briefing on the situation in
Bougainville as the United Nations Observer Mission
in Bougainville (UNOMB) comes to an end. We
congratulate the Secretariat as well as UNOMB on
fulfilling their important roles in the Bougainville
peace process.

We are pleased to confirm at this Council meeting
the successful conclusion of the mandate of UNOMB.
The sense of accomplishment filling the Chamber is
well reflected in the presidential statement issued
earlier. I will not repeat what has already been said in
the statement. I would like to stress, however, that it
was through the efforts of the people of Bougainville,
as well as the Government of Papua New Guinea, that
a satisfactory outcome has been achieved. My
Government pays tribute to the people of Bougainville
and the Government of Papua New Guinea on their
accomplishment.

We wish to take this opportunity to express our
best wishes to Mr. Joseph Kabui, the President of the
Autonomous Government, as well as to other elected
officials, as they begin to undertake efforts for
sustainable peace and the economic development of the
region.

We are pleased that, in order to contribute to that
process, Japan was part of international and regional
electoral assistance efforts by dispatching election
observers and providing the necessary equipment. We
hope that such contributions, together with those from
other countries and regional organizations, facilitated
the efforts for peace.

While the successful completion of elections in
Bougainville marks a turning point in the peace
process, there remain challenges. First and foremost,
the strengthening of law and order in the region is a top
priority. Even after the inauguration of the
Autonomous Government, the security situation
continues to be fragile. If law and order are to be
firmly established, international cooperation is
required, such as for the improvement of police force
and the collection and disposal of weapons in the no-go
zone.

Secondly, the sustained economic development of
Bougainville is critically important for the region in
the new phase of peacebuilding. The continued
commitment of assistance by the international
community will be required until such time that the
Bougainville economy becomes more self-sufficient.
Such support and cooperation should come not only
from within the region, but also from a broader range
of countries, as well as from the relevant United
Nations agencies, as Mr. Tiirk has outlined. As for
Japan, we will remain committed, through close
consultation with the Government of Papua New
Guinea, to providing continued support and economic
and technical cooperation in areas where the needs are
greatest, such as infrastructure, education and health.

Thirdly, the promotion of reconciliation with
those remaining in the no-go zone is equally important.
For the stability of Bougainville to be sustained, all the
people in the region should enjoy the benefits of peace,
and participation in the Autonomous Government
should be inclusive. To that end, the Mekamui should
respect the results of the elections and actively
cooperate with the Government for the economic
development of their region.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that, even after
today's final deliberations in the Security Council on
this subject, Japan will continue to follow closely
further developments as the people in Bougainville
strive to consolidate peace.

