Mr. Adom (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends the presidency of Kuwait for
holding today's briefing on the topic of mediation as
a tool for conflict prevention. I am also pleased to
welcome to the Chamber Ms. Mary Robinson, former
President of Ireland and former United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, as well as Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, former Secretary-General. I would like to
thank them for their significant contributions to our
discussion and to ask them to come back and visit us
here often. We need their wisdom and perspective. I
would also like to welcome the presence of President
Juan Manuel Santos Calderon, who honoured the
Council by participating in our meeting this morning.

The ever-increasing human and material costs of
the multiplicity and complexity of armed conflicts
around the world demand that the international
community move from an approach based on managing
conflicts to one firmly focused on prevention, with
mediation as a priority tool. The Secretary-General's
clear intention to place mediation at the core of United
Nations action is reflected in his report of 27 June
2017 (A/72/115) on the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The pacific settlement of disputes therefore remains
a priority for the United Nations and in particular for
the Security Council. It is enshrined in Chapter VI of
the Charter of the United Nations, which provides for
a range of means that include negotiation, mediation,
conciliation and arbitration. It is in that context that
the Secretary-General is pursuing his tireless efforts,
mediated in theatres of conflict by his Special Envoys
and Representatives, often in difficult conditions.

The High-level Advisory Board on Mediation
was established along the same lines, as it reinforces
the effectiveness of existing mechanisms. However,
in order to achieve maximum efficiency, those
mechanisms require a strong political commitment at
both the national and regional levels. In other words,
ownership by States and regional organizations of those
tools is essential. Civil society, especially women,
young people, and traditional local leaders must also
participate fully in mediation efforts.

Under the Charter, conflict prevention through
mediation is a primary duty of States, which are
responsible for taking every possible measure to create
the sociopolitical conditions essential to maintaining
peace. In the light of that, since the end of our post-
electoral crisis the Government of C6te d'Ivoire has
been working to implement a national strategy for
peacebuilding, based on national reconciliation and
strengthening social cohesion through our Dialogue,
Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a Ministry
dedicated to social cohesion and victims of war. In
line with that Vision, in 2017 we also created a national
coordination centre for our early-warning and response
mechanism, which enables us to identify the causes
of conflicts and to formulate responses aimed at
preventing or containing violence.

National conflict prevention and peacebuilding
strategies must be expanded through the activities of
the regional economic communities, which, under
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations, can
contribute effectively to conflict prevention with the
valuable support of the United Nations. For example,
thanks to its special mechanism for conflict prevention,
management and resolution, and in accordance with the
principle of subsidiarity, the Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS) has often successfully
managed crises at the subregional level. I am pleased
to be able to point to ECOWAS's resolute call for a
return to constitutional order in Mali following the
coup d'etat in 2012 and its successful mediation of the
post-electoral crisis in the Gambia. Furthermore, and in
a subregional context marked by community violence
and transnational organized crime, the establishment of
early-warning mechanisms by regional and subregional
organizations, such as the ECOWAS Warning and
Response Network system, could help prevent emerging
crises, thereby avoiding what are sometimes long and
difficult negotiations.

Cote d'Ivoire is of the view that regional and
subregional strategies would be more effective if
they had greater support from the United Nations, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. My country therefore welcomed
the signing on 19 April 2017 of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security. We commend the
remarkable progress made in the implementation of the
Partnership, including through cooperation between
the United Nations Secretariat and the African Union
Commission, as well as through regular consultations
between the Security Council and the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union.

In conclusion, Cote d'Ivoire would like to reiterate
its belief that mediation remains an effective tool
and can be used at every stage of conflict resolution,
including to prevent conflicts and address their root
causes. However, that effectiveness can be achieved
only if it has the advantage of support from the Council
as it is currently configured and if it is used in good
faith in order to ensure the effective maintenance of
international peace. We must therefore join our efforts to
make mediation a central element of the United Nations
system for the maintenance of peace and security.

