Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): Ijoin other speakers in
commending you, Sir, for convening this important
debate. Sri Lanka associates itself with the statement
made by the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

The Middle East increases anxiety for world peace
with each passing day. The world needs proactive
leadership to address the critical uncertainty in the
region. We believe that it is the responsibility of the
parties to create the necessary environment to facilitate
peace. The continuing settlement activities in the
occupied Palestinian territories are a crucial factor in
the escalation of suspicion and the lack of trust between
the parties to the conflict in the Middle East.

The settlement activity of the occupying Power
is a clear violation of the law and of article 49 of the
Fourth Geneva Convention. The Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Human Rights Council
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as the
International Court of Justice, have all condemned the
settlement activity as illegal. The resumption of talks
has also been tied to that issue. We are further dismayed
by the escalation of illegal settlement activity since the
General Assembly's decision to accord Palestine status
as non-member observer State of the United Nations.
It is an unnecessary provocation in an already difficult
situation.

Despite the brief moment of celebration in
the General Assembly following the adoption of
resolution 67/19 according new status to Palestine,
the Palestinians have yet to realize their right to self-
determination, independence and sovereignty and
remain dispossessed from much of their land. Israel's
practice of demolishing Palestinian homes further fuels
resentment. The continuation of that practice cannot
contribute to confidence-building or the peace process.
We encourage the parties to exercise restraint for the
sake of the greater goal of peace.

The world must not forget the dire humanitarian
situation of the Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian
territory, especially Gaza, where conditions remain
unsustainable. Grievances based on violations of
economic, social and individual rights have the capacity
to ignite violence and even spill over borders. In Gaza,
the blockade, which is now entering its sixth year, has
created an aid-dependent economy and reinforced a
sense of helplessness and extremism. Even a modest
improvement in the situation in Gaza will require the
lifting of the blockade and the full implementation of
resolution 1860 (2009).

The United Nations is required to keep the vast
majority of the people in Gaza supplied with their
minimum necessities. We underline our strong support
for the work of the United Nations agencies in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including the United
Nations Reliefand Works Agency for Palestine Refugees
in the Near East and the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs.

Sri Lanka will continue to encourage political
rapprochement between Gaza and the West Bank.
The political unity and economic advancement of the
Palestinian people will contribute to the viability of the
two-State solution. We are pleased that the Palestinian
Authority, despite severe political and economic
constraints, has made progress in institution-building.
We are particularly dismayed at the severe financial
hardships being imposed on the Palestine Authority.

While Israel must desist from actions that
contravene the established rules of international law
and practice, and as we support the two-State solution,
we are also conscious of the security needs of Israel.
Palestinians and Israelis could enjoy security and peace
as neighbours through a mutually agreed political
solution, with human rights at its heart.

The peace process, which was once so
enthusiastically embraced, is at an impasse and tensions
continue to escalate. A climate conducive to peace
will be encouraged by a mutual approach sensitive
to each other's concerns. Both parties to the conflict
must actively pursue every possibility for peace with a
view to ultimately establishing an independent State of
Palestine, existing peacefully side by side with Israel.
Sri Lanka remains committed to the attainment of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to statehood
and to a two-State solution.

