Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
thank the President for convening today's meeting and
Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her enlightening
briefing. We welcome the valuable work she is doing

with her United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) team.

Peru is closely following the progress made towards
fully forming of the Government of Iraq as well as the
valuable efforts of its political class to find points of
convergence through dialogue and compromise. We
especially hope that the completion of that process will
lead to an increase in women's participation in political
life, which will undoubtedly contribute to the ongoing
process of national reconciliation.

Other challenges include the urgent need to
provide better services to the public, rebuild basic
infrastructure and reactivate the economy. To achieve
that, the Government programme for the period 2018-
2020 must be implemented, the impact of which will be
strengthened upon the full completion of the process of
establishing the various Government agencies.

Along those lines, we welcome the progress made
in the fight against corruption by developing a national
strategy against that scourge, as well as the priority that
Parliament has given to fighting it. That momentum
should be harnessed for greater efforts to promote
the rule of law and strengthen the people's trust in
their authorities.

The international community's support is key in all
those phases, including its contribution to development
aid, the promotion of investment and the monitoring of
the actions of the remnants of Da'esh, which continue
to constitute pockets of destabilization, including
global accountability for acts that may constitute
atrocity crimes.

In that regard, we underscore the progress made in
the past six months by the United Nations Investigative
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, in
coordination with UNAMI. We commend the Team's
efforts to engage in dialogue with religious communities
within Iraq, such as the Yazidis in Sinjar and Christians
in Mosul. We also encourage the Investigative Team
to redouble its efforts to consolidate its operational
capacity to allow for the appropriate use of evidentiary
material in domestic jurisdictions.

Another positive development, in our view, is the
rapprochement of Iraq with its neighbours in order
to bolster cooperation and consensus initiatives that
enable a regional space free of conflict and in support
of sustainable peacebuilding.

However, Peru reiterates its concern about the
extremely vulnerable situation that the 1.75 million
internally displaced persons are facing. According to
the report of the Secretary-General (S/2019/365), they
are hesitant to return to their areas of origin in the short
term. That represents a challenge that the Government
must immediately address.

We stress the importance that UNAMI has to play
on the various fronts of its mandate. We underscore its
support for the development of an operational plan for
the provincial council elections, as well as its work as an
observer in trials and investigative hearings to ensure
due process and respect for human rights, thanks to the
collaboration of the Supreme Judicial Council of Iraq.

Lastly, we would like to highlight the Mission's
efforts to locate and identify missing Kuwaiti persons
and property, given the willingness of the Iraqi
Government and Kuwait's continued support for
that process.

