Mrs. Mele Colifa (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I commend the French delegation for its
leadership in drafting the text ofresolution 2463 (2019).
We know that it was not an easy task, and we reiterate
our appreciation and gratitude to the various high-
level Government officials who have joined us in the
Chamber today.

We take the floor briefly to express our satisfaction
with the adoption today of resolution 2463 (2019), the
first of its kind adopted by the Council on the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since the
momentous holding of elections in December 2018,
which enabled the first peaceful transfer of power
in that country. It was important for us that, without
lapsing into complacency, the new mandate given to the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
should reflect the important historic moment that
the country is experiencing. That is why we insisted
that the provisions should constitute a hopeful way
forward, based on a positive but at the same time
realistic approach. During the first months of his term
in office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi will require
both the support of the international community and
the time and space necessary to form a Government
and consolidate his legitimate authority throughout that
immense country. In recognition of that, the members
of the Council have agreed to a nine-month mandate
extension, without many technical adjustments, in order
to respect the trust that the sovereign Congolese people
has placed in the new Head of State. We will meet again
at the negotiating table at the end of that period.

My country is convinced that, following the
effective conclusion of the political and electoral
processes that we have been following in recent years,
the attention and multisectoral efforts of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, MONUSCO
and the international community now must, without
neglecting the capital, go towards moving the epicentre
of operations from Kinshasa to the eastern part of the
country, with a view to decisively dealing with the acts
ofthe insurgent rebel groups operating in the area. They
are the cause and consequence of the prevailing chaos
that we are seeing. To that end, it will be necessary
to have the political will and courage of all national
and international political stakeholders, particularly
of the countries of the region. We hope to sustain that
conversation not only in the Security Council but also
in the relevant regional bodies to continue to make
progress on the noble goal of silencing the guns on
the continent.

In conclusion, we would like to thank MONUSCO
for the role that it has been playing in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the successful conclusion of
which is ever-nearer. Similarly, we would like to thank
all the countries that contribute with troops, funding
or any other way to the quest for peace and stability in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

