Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
welcoming Ms. Mogherini, High Representative of
the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, back to the Council today. I thank her for her
informative briefing this morning.

As the High Representative and other have set out,
the European Union (EU) and regional organizations
as a whole are fundamental to how the United Nations
operates and how it delivers across the world. Both the
United Nations and the European Union were born of
the scourge of war, so it is unsurprising that we share
so many values, such as peace, human rights and
development, to name but three. Together, our shared
values underpin our collective ability to promote and
maintain international peace and security. Today, I
want to focus on three ways that we do so.

First, the EU and its individual member States play
an active role in peacekeeping by directly participating
in United Nations missions. The EU also provides
complementary support to United Nations missions and
the operations of other regional organizations through
its own Common Security and Defence Policy missions
and through the provision of training, mentoring and

financing. That cooperation is crucial to the success of
United Nations efforts to maintain international peace
and security. We saw that cooperation first-hand during
our visit to Somalia last month. The EU plays a crucial
role there in supporting the African Union Mission
in Somalia, in training the Somali National Army
and in supporting projects to bring long-term peace
to Somalia.

Secondly, in addition to peacekeeping, the EU and
its member States play a significant role in creating the
conditions for peace through mediation and forging
new peace agreements. The EU, along with several of
its member States, is playing an important role in the
International Syria Support Group and the political
process, which is the only way of ending more than
five years of conflict. The EU and its member States
have also played a significant role in supporting Syrian
refugees and internally displaced persons. Such support
comprised nearly two-thirds of the 2016 pledges made
at the Supporting Syria and the Region Conference held
in London this year.

The EU is also actively supporting peace in Libya.
The United Kingdom welcomes the close cooperation
between the EU and the United Nations in the Libyan
political dialogue process that led to the establishment
of the Government of National Accord. The EU support
and that of a number of EU member States, in close
coordination and cooperation with the United Nations,
is supporting the new Libyan Government. That is
crucial and contributes to the unity of the international
community behind the Government of National Accord.
The EU has already provided financial support to the
Stabilization Facility for Libya Project Board to fund
quick-impact projects that will make a difference on
the ground.

That leads me to my third point, namely, the
important role that the EU and its member States play
in providing practical support to address ongoing
crises. The tragic loss of life in the Mediterranean and
the refugee flows into Europe have highlighted the
need for stronger regional and global approaches to
migration and refugees. The United Kingdom and the
EU see a need for greater international burden-sharing
to address those issues. We are actively pursuing
that through the Khartoum process and the Compact
approach, highlighted at the London Syria Conference.

In addition to the EU work on tackling illegal
migration, the EU is building the capacity ofthe Libyan
coast guard. The United Kingdom will play our part
in that effort. My Prime Minister announced in Japan,
at the Summit of the Group of Seven, that the United
Kingdom has increased our contribution to the EU
Operation Sophia. Once the relevant permissions are
in place and the Security Council draft resolution on
the issue is adopted, the next phase of this operation to
intercept naval vessels carrying illicit arms will begin,
and the United Kingdom will deploy a further ship to
the Mediterranean. Together, these developments will
continue to help tackle the migrant crisis and limit the
operational capabilities of Da'esh in Libya.

In conclusion, EU-United Nations cooperation
has proved to be invaluable on numerous
occasions - in peacekeeping, mediation and tackling
crises - and so has the EU cooperation with other
regional organizations. We look forward to continued
cooperation and partnership, which can only serve
to strengthen the principles and purposes of both the
Charter of the United Nations and the EU.

