Mr. Rutikanga (Rwanda): First and foremost,
I congratulate the United Kingdom on its presidency
of the Security Council for this month. I thank you,
Madam President, in particular for organizing today's
open debate and the manner in which you have framed
this important topic. In sharing Rwanda's experience
of reconciliation and lessons learned, my points will
touch on key elements conveyed in the concept note
(8/2019/871, annex).

In the case of Rwanda, the most important driving
force for reconciliation has been the genuine and
consistent political will of the country's leadership to
ensure that unity and reconciliation form the bedrock
of all national reconstruction efforts. The first practical
lesson that we can observe is that political will is
indispensable to ensure that reconciliation efforts work.

After the genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda,
the National Unity Government created the National
Unity and Reconciliation Commission, which has
subsequently played a leading role in establishing
various homegrown initiatives aimed at promoting
national unity and the fight against divisive ideology.
The reconciliation model in Rwanda is nationally
oriented and is both backward- and forward-looking.
It is a process through which a society moves from
a divided past to a shared present and future for the
country. All approaches to national reconciliation have
been developed with the deep understanding ofthe past.
Allow me to share a few key practical peacebuilding
approaches that contributed to reconciliation in
my country.

With respect to transitional justice, the concept
note rightly states that reconciliation has been closely
associated with transitional justice and its restorative
dimension. That is what Rwanda's homegrown
restorative justice model, commonly known as Gacaca,
aimed to achieve. Given the nature of the genocide
against the Tutsi in Rwanda, during which perpetrators
turned against their closest neighbours, it was
imperative that justice for the victims be accompanied
by restorative aims.

With regard to the role of women, after the
destructive genocide of 1994, there was a great need to
mobilize and assist the population in rebuilding their
lives, as well as their communities and the country as a
whole. Rwandan women in different leadership positions
played critical roles in mobilizing fellow women and
men to live together and find common solutions to
their own problems and those of their country. Women
initiated and led community dialogues, which helped to
heal relationships among different groups, particularly
survivors and former prisoners.

Turning to the repatriation, resettlement and
reintegration of refugees, after the genocide the
Government acknowledged that national unity among
the people of Rwanda could not be achieved without a
definitive solution to the problem of Rwandan refugees.
It should be acknowledged that the return of refugees
to their country and their proper reintegration is an
absolute right and represents a factor of peace, unity
and national reconciliation.

On the demobilization and reintegration of former
combatants, the true reintegration of former combatants,
after being demobilized, in fact lied mainly within the
realm of the socioeconomic dimension. Demobilization
and reintegration in Rwanda reinforced reconciliation.
The process was conducted in a manner that built trust
and confidence among combatants and made them feel
accepted by the community. It was based upon building
capacity to earn a living or have assets that could form
a source of livelihood, so that they began to feel a part
of society.

In conclusion, let me stress the importance of
national ownership of the reconciliation process. All
communities have traditional mechanisms of conflict
prevention and reconciliation. Some may have been
eroded due to historical reasons, but it is important
that the international community support nationally led
initiatives based on domestic perspectives.

