Mr. Quarrey (United Kingdom): Please accept
our congratulations, Madam, on your assumption of the
Council presidency for July. I would like to welcome
the President of Serbia, Mr. Boris Tadie; the Foreign
Minister of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier; and the head of the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), General Yves de
Kermabon, to the Security Council Chamber today.

The United Kingdom regrets the violence that
took place in Mitrovica on 2July. I would like to
extend our sympathy to the family of Mr. Mesud
Dzekovic', who was killed on Friday, and all of those
who were injured, as well as the Kosovan Minister of
Parliament, Mr. Petar Miletie, who was attacked on
Monday.

Last week, the United Kingdom's Minister for
Europe, David Lidington, visited Mitrovica to meet
representatives of the local communities. I would like
to underline his statement that there can be absolutely
no place in Kosovo for violence as a means to secure
political objectives. Nevertheless, let me also take a
moment to mark the substantial progress that Kosovo
has made since its independence in 2008. As the
Secretary-General has noted in his two most recent
reports (S/2010/5 and S/2010/169), there has been an
overall decrease in the number of security incidents.
We note General De Kermabon's assessment that in the
past few days there has never been a risk of a general
deterioration of the security situation, either in
Mitrovica or in the rest of Kosovo.

We welcome the prompt action of the Kosovo
police and EULEX in responding to last Friday's
incident. We call on them to undertake their
investigation thoroughly, fairly and swiftly to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. While the
investigation is under way, all parties should refrain
from speculation about the identities of those who may
have committed this crime. The investigation must be
allowed the space necessary to establish the facts. All
parties should refrain from making any provocative
statements or taking actions that might cause the
current calm but tense atmosphere to deteriorate again.

The United Kingdom supports the valuable work
that EULEX is doing in Kosovo. It is important that
Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate with
EULEX so that the rule of law and higher standards of
governance and justice can be delivered to all of
Kosovo's communities.

The main peaceful protest that took place last
Friday was against the opening of an office in North
Mitrovica that will issue documents, such as driving
licences and identity cards, to the citizens who are
resident there. The United Kingdom entirely supports
the right of citizens to peaceful protests, but we would
also underline that all citizens of Kosovo have a right
to expect that such public services be available to
them. Claims by President Tadie that the Government
of Kosovo should bear responsibility for Friday's
events because of its decision to open the community
services centre or that the international civilian
representative should do so because he supported that
decision are plainly unjustified. It was a criminal act
and the individuals responsible for it must be held to
account.

The United Kingdom strongly encourages deeper
cooperation between Belgrade and Pristina and echoes
the Secretary-General's call for flexibility and
pragmatism in finding solutions. Last Friday's incident
reinforces the need for all parties to work together,
through dialogue and with transparency, in the interests
of all communities in Kosovo. We urge all parties to
concentrate their efforts on dialogue and cooperation.
We remain committed to working with Kosovo, Serbia
and the wider international community in promoting
stability, reconciliation, regional cooperation and
economic progress so that both countries can advance
towards an European Union perspective in parallel
with their neighbours. Continued disagreement over
status issues will only serve as a distraction from
achieving that important strategic objective.

