Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): Allow me
first of all to congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
relevant choice of topic under discussion today, and to
thank you for organizing this open debate. Your choice
underlines the importance that your country attaches to
our continent and the pride of place it has.

I would also like to thank the People's Republic
of China for its strong and generous commitment to
Africa, particularly in terms of capacity-building and
logistical support in the area of peace and security.

Our continent, Africa, is undeniably on the road
of development and progress. However, the complexity
of contemporary conflicts and sources of instability
takes on a variety of forms: terrorism, transnational
organized crime, separatism and the struggle to
control natural resources, just to name a few. It is in
that context that we must pay particular attention to the
root causes of conflicts and also strengthen African
capacities in terms of conflict prevention. Effectively
addressing threats to peace and security requires a
better understanding of these challenges, as well as
considerable human, technical and financial resources
that Africa alone cannot provide. The support of the
international community remains crucial. That support
is often provided through regional and subregional
organizations, which continue to demonstrate their
added value and comparative advantages.

Morocco welcomed the signing of the Joint United
Nations-African Union Framework for an Enhanced
Partnership in Peace and Security on 19 April. We hope
that it can be implemented effectively and efficiently,
and we are prepared to offer our support in that regard.
This new agreement will be the culmination of the
efforts of the two organizations and their member
States, which all recognize the need to strengthen the
partnership between the two organizations.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union in the area of peace and security is
not new. This cooperation takes place on the ground
in various forms, such as the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, and the provision
of logistical support mechanisms financed by
contributions intended for African Union-led missions,
such as the African Union Mission in Somalia. The
transition from African Union missions to United
Nations missions in Mali and the Central African
Republic has highlighted some of the shortcomings of
African Union peace operations, which we consider to
be more related to the lack of resources.

However, current circumstances have demonstrated
the limitations of these types of partnerships and the
urgency of adapting this strategic partnership in order
to refocus discussions on the need to find ways to
ensure predictable, flexible and sustainable financing
for African Union peace operations authorized by the
Security Council. In particular, that funding would
make it possible to accelerate African capacity-building
in the area of peace and security.

The reports of the two organizations on this
subject stressed the importance of adequate funding for
African peace operations, offering different options.
African countries have demonstrated their willingness
to commit more to this path by guaranteeing 25 per
cent of the financing of their peacekeeping operations
by 2020. Resolution 2359 (2017), recently adopted,
on the Group of Five for the Sahel force could have
provided an alternative to existing forms of support,
but, unfortunately, the African positions could not be
sustained. Africa is still waiting for a strong signal
from its partners.

In that regard, I would like to congratulate the
African representatives on the Security Council:
Senegal, Egypt and Ethiopia. These countries have
spared no effort to advance the priorities of the
continent, including the issue of financing. They have
been fully invested in the elaboration of the presidential
statement and of resolution 2320 (2016).

Bilateral partners also play an important role in
strengthening African capacities. You, Sir, and the
other members who spoke during this debate, spoke
about the various actions taken to strengthen African
capacities in the area of peace and security.

For its part, the Kingdom of Morocco, a founding
member of the Organization of African Unity,
rediscovered its institutional family in January during
the twenty-eighth African Union Summit, held in Addis
Ababa. In that capacity, my country will play fully its
role in peace and security among its African peers.
Nevertheless, Morocco did not wait to rejoin the African
Union to take steps to proactively support its fraternal
African countries in the area of peace and security.
My country can be justly proud of its experience and
recognized expertise, which it has not hesitated to share
in the framework of South-South cooperation, one that
is fair and active.
During its time on the Security Council, Morocco
played a leading role in drafting the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, but also in the
drafting of the United Nations response to the crisis
in Guinea-Bissau, Libya and the Central African
Republic. Concerning the Central African Republic,
Morocco has had the honour to chair the Central
African Republic country-specific configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission since 2014. In that capacity,
I visited the country last week, which allowed me to
further underscore my belief that capacity-building and
the support ofpartners is essential in our peacebuilding
and peacekeeping efforts.

Morocco's cooperation extends to more than 30
African countries and comprises the following areas:
the training of military and security personnel of all
grades and various fields; donations of materiel and
equipment; predeployment training for contingents
destined for peacekeeping operations; support for,
and provision of, military infrastructure; the training
of magistrates and judges; and the strengthening and
support for the implementation of national human
rights institutions.

I have just referred to the training of magistrates and
to our support for strengthening national human rights
institutions. We believe that those are key because,
in our View, the fight against impunity, human rights
violations and the promotion of the rule of law are some
of the key elements of tackling the deep-rooted causes
of conflicts and instability, and that is particularly true
in Africa.

To conclude, I would like once again to commend
China's commitment alongside Africa and its support
for the implementation and the operationalization of
the recommendations adopted in the various Security
Council resolutions.

Morocco remains steadfast in its determination to
pursue and enhance its cooperation with all African
countries, both bilaterally and multilaterally. My
country will spare no effort to continue to make a
positive contribution to the efforts of the international
community aimed at tackling instability and conflict
in Africa.

The meeting rose at 5.30pm.
