Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda
for her report and her briefing today. The Russian
Federation supports the efforts of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate the situation in
Darfur pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005). We view the
Court's efforts in that area as an important contribution
to combating impunity for the most serious crimes of
concern to the entire international community.

We are concerned by the deterioration in the
security situation in Darfur as a result of rebel combat
activity. The escalation of armed clashes between
various tribes, which is largely the result of heightened
competition for resources, is also a cause for alarm. We
take note of the authorities' energetic efforts to prevent
an increase in inter-communal violence. The way to
resolve the dire humanitarian problems, including
those of refugees and internally displaced persons, is
to normalize the political and military situation, make

progress in the peace process and ensure the social and
economic revival of Darfur.

An important element in that regard is the
practical implementation of the outcomes of the Doha
international conference on allocating resources
for the region's development. Another aspect of key
importance in that connection is to make further
progress on a political settlement of the basis of the
Doha agreements. Parties with influence on the leaders
of the Sudan Revolutionary Front must induce them
to reject a destructive course of action and to join the
peace process.

With regard to the so-called "irreconcilables", the
time is ripe to consider using sanctions against them
pursuant to the Council's resolutions. One could begin
with the individuals guilty of killing leaders of the
Justice and Equality Movement faction who had signed
a peace agreement with the Government of the Sudan
last April. Of interest in that regard is the information
contained in the report of the Prosecutor concerning
the ongoing violence in Darfur with the participation
of both Government forces and rebel groups. In several
instances in that connection there may be grounds for
the Prosecutor to open new cases. We urge the Court to
carry out an objective assessment of illegal activities
carried out by all sides.

It is clear that the task ofthe International Criminal
Court as an independent organ of international criminal
justice is to carry out a strictly judicial function and to
punish the guilty. However, the actions of the Court in
carrying out its mandate to investigate events in Darfur
must not be divorced from overall efforts to normalize
the situation in that long-suffering Sudanese state. In
our view, the instinct of the current Prosecutor to strike
a delicate balance between reconciliation and criminal
justice as she carries out her activities is commendable.

We take note of the Prosecutor's comments with
regard to the Government's cooperation with the ICC
on the issue of Darfur. In that connection, the situation
once again illustrates just how important the support
of the Government is for the success of the Court's
operation. In evaluating the level of compliance by
individual States with the relevant commitments in this
area, we should be mindful of the fact that the scope
of that support can vary. One should also bear in mind
the existing norms of international law concerning the
immunity of high-level State officials.

In our view, the Secretary-General's issuance in
April of a manual to be used by United Nations staff
in their contacts with individuals subject to arrest
warrants was a step in the right direction. That brought
clarity to this complex and important issue of concern
to the mission of the United Nations.

We are carefully following the investigations into
the attack on African Union peacekeepers at Haskanita
in 2007. The events of recent months, which still need
clarifying, have brought proceedings on the actions of
the rebel group leaders to a halt. It is important that
those circumstances do not interrupt the momentum
achieved within the framework of those proceedings.

In conclusion, we would like to comment on the
proposals for follow-up action by the Security Council
in referring cases to the International Criminal Court.
We will review any ideas on this from the point of view
of their practical usefulness and keeping in mind the
prerogatives of the Council, the ICC's mandate and
the international legal context as a whole. For now, we
see no added value in such measures. In this matter,
we proceed from the assumption that the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals, lacking the
necessary mandate, is not a suitable format for deciding
the issue of the ICC.

