More than two weeks ago, the Secretary-General called for a global ceasefire in the light of the spreading coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The situation in Yemen is no doubt a prominent case in point for the dire need for a ceasefire. Once again, however, the promises that we have heard in response to the Secretary- General's appeal have been empty. If anything, the fighting in Yemen has intensified at the very moment when the COVID-19 crisis has reached the country. Five years into the conflict, far too many innocent Yemenis, including thousands of children, have lost their lives. We could not agree more with the Secretary-General's position and the subsequent appeal by Martin Griffiths - the worldwide pandemic does not allow for greater suffering, increased fighting and more deaths. On the contrary, the crisis calls for cooperation, dialogue and a concerted effort to put the protection of human life at the centre of all our concerns. Against this backdrop, we fully support the de-escalation initiative that Martin Griffiths has already been pursuing for a couple of months now. We were heartened by initial positive responses to the call for a ceasefire. The release of prisoners has been an equally necessary and important step, but the Saudi- led coalition to restore legitimacy in Yemen's announcement that it would cease all hostilities for a period of two weeks has had no discernible effect on the ground. It has certainly not helped that we have not seen signs of a clear commitment on the part of the Houthis to also abide by a ceasefire. Instead, over the last few days, we have seen a resurgence of heavy fighting. Against this background, I urge all parties to immediately stop hostilities, return to the negotiating table and finally translate their professed willingness to talk into concrete action by agreeing to a nationwide ceasefire as a first step towards a comprehensive and inclusive political solution to the conflict. We call on the parties to follow the Special Envoy's invitation to meet virtually, agree to his proposals and start meaningful peace talks on this basis. The escalation in the last few days runs counter to the Special Envoy's tireless efforts. It brings even more hardship to the vulnerable and suffering populations, particularly in the light of the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Now that the first cases of the coronavirus disease have been confirmed in Yemen, all actors must now focus on limiting the spread of the pandemic. The country is critically underequipped to face a highly contagious disease like COVID-19, while having to deal at the same time with recurrent outbreaks of cholera. Many health facilities have been destroyed as a direct consequence of the fighting. This is another stark reminder of the cruelty of this war. It also underlines the necessity that all parties fully adhere to international humanitarian law and human rights law and strive to protect vulnerable populations, in particular women and children, as well as the critical health infrastructure required to fight the virus. We recognize the enormity of the efforts to be made to help prevent the spread of the virus. At the same time, full access of international aid workers, medicine and medical supplies into Yemen must be ensured, and these items and personnel must be allowed to reach those in need. In addition to COVID-19-related preparedness and response activities, humanitarian staff must be able to continue providing critical life-saving humanitarian assistance. Commercial and humanitarian imports must also be allowed to enter the country. 13/28 14/28 Respect for humanitarian principles and the safety of humanitarian staff remain crucial for life-saving assistance to get in. In this regard, we appreciate the tireless work of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. We are also concerned about the current situation of the United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA). The COVID-19 pandemic poses particular challenges to the operation and functioning of the Mission. The accommodations on board the United Nations ship docked off the coast of Al-Hudaydah makes the UNMHA personnel particularly vulnerable to a potential outbreak of the disease. We acknowledge the preventive measures and contingency plans put in place by the Mission, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department of Peace Operations with regard to a potential infection. However, there remain concerns about the possible need for medical evacuation. The situation is aggravated by the restrictions of movement put in place by the Houthis. Restrictions by both parties were already an issue before the current crisis. Using the pretext of COVID-19, their restrictions have become even more severe. These restrictions are unacceptable, as they cynically exploit COVID-19 to limit UNMHA's effectiveness. UNMHA must be granted the access and freedom of movement it needs to ensure its operations, including the well-being of its staff. We also urge both parties to adhere to the Stockholm Agreement and cooperate to maintain stability in Al-Hudaydah. We hope the work of the Redeployment Coordination Committee can resume as soon as circumstances permit.
