Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I congratulate you, Sir,
and delegation of China upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for the month of January and
salute Ambassador Kafando and the delegation of
Burkina Faso for their leadership of the Council in
December. Let me also take this opportunity to
welcome the new members of the Council and to wish
them success during their tenure.

I thank the Secretary-General for his statement,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Kai Eide, for his briefing,
and the Permanent Representative of Afghanistan for
his statement.

We commend UNAMA for continuing to play an
important role in leading international efforts towards
security, stability and development in Afghanistan.
Afghanistan faces daunting security, political and
economic challenges. It is incumbent upon all Afghans,
especially the political leaders, to work together
towards national unity and reconciliation and to nurture
democratic governance, peacebuilding and prosperity.

We welcome the conclusion of the electoral
process in Afghanistan, in spite of the flaws and
difficulties encountered.

We call upon all political actors to ensure that the
approval of the Cabinet is finalized without further
delay. The new Government needs to embark on the
urgent tasks ahead, including political reform and
addressing the root causes of insurgency. It needs to
focus with greater impetus on economic recovery,
reconstruction, the delivery of services and improving
the livelihoods of the people. There is also a need for
development partners to work together in a more
coordinated and streamlined manner to support the
national efforts of the Afghan people. In this regard, we
welcome the International Conference on Afghanistan,
scheduled for 28 January 2010 in London.

We note with concern that the security situation
worsened over the reporting period, with increasing
numbers of armed and suicide attacks. This upsurge in
violence, which has resulted in more casualties and
loss of life, is regrettable and must be brought to an
end. My delegation is encouraged by the efforts of the
Afghan Government and its international allies to
improve the security situation.

It is imperative to build the capacity and
capability of the Afghan security institutions,
especially the Police and the Army, to take
responsibility for the country's long-term stability. We
commend the Afghan Government for passing the
Counter-Terrorism, Antitrust and Firearms Laws during
the reporting period. We also welcome the draft law on
the elimination of violence against women and
encourage its endorsement by the Afghan Parliament.

We are deeply concerned about attacks targeting
United Nations staff in Afghanistan, which have had a
negative impact on their ability to carry out their
mandate. We call for the enhancement of measures to
ensure the safety and security of all UNAMA
personnel.

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Kai Eide, for his leadership
and, through him, thank the UNAMA staff for carrying
out their mandate under very difficult circumstances.
We wish Mr. Eide success in his future endeavours.

