Mr. Lewicki (Poland): First of all, let me join
other delegations in thanking the Russian Federation
for providing us with the opportunity to discuss this
timely and important topic. I would also like to thank
you, Mr. Vershinin, Deputy Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation, for presiding over
today's meeting. And we appreciate the insightful
briefing by the Secretary-General and his and his
staff's commitment to advancing peace and security in
the Middle East.

I would also like to align myself with the
statement to be delivered later by the observer of the
European Union.

The crucial importance of the Middle East dates
back to ancient times. Several major religions have their
origins in the Middle East, including the three main
monotheistic ones 4 Christianity, Judaism and Islam.
Unfortunately, the region has also experienced tension
and conflict for many years and today we still face
on-going turmoil in various parts of the Middle East.

That is why it is so crucial - not just for the
Security Council, but for the whole United Nations
community - to address challenges facing the region
and their root causes. In that context, let me underline
that, while tackling the ongoing conflicts in the region,
we must remember the nexus between the three pillars of
the United Nations ~ peace and security, development
and human rights. They are interlinked and mutually
reinforcing. In the longer term, there can be no long-
term peace in the Middle East without development and
the protection of human rights.

We believe that, in order to bring us closer to
peace and to stimulate development, we should focus
on the education of future generations, those who will
be responsible for the future of the region. It can be
an important conflict prevention tool for deterring
extremism and radicalization, particularly among
youth. In that context, we would also like to underline
the need for women's empowerment as a crucial element
for advancing the development of the whole society.

Another factor that should be taken into consideration
is institution building and the strengthening of good
governance. Those elements play a crucial role in the
effective implementation ofpolicies aimed at economic
and social development and the full enjoyment of
human rights, including social and economic rights in
the Middle East.

Like many times before in the Chamber, we
also stress a need for full respect for international
humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians.
The full implementation of the humanitarian imperative
is needed to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. Therefore, allow me to underscore that peace
can scarcely be achieved without justice, including
ending impunity and ensuring accountability. All
perpetrators of grave international crimes committed
in the course of the conflicts in the region should be
identified and held accountable.

We are also deeply concerned that the members
of religious minorities in the Middle East, such as
Yazidis and Christians, are particularly vulnerable and
are far too often targeted victims of conflicts in the
region. Poland strongly condemns Violence targeting
members of religious minorities in the Middle East.
Such violence must stop and its perpetrators must be
brought to justice. We deplore the misuse of religion for
political purposes.

Furthermore, we call for the development and
strengthening of regional political, economic and
cultural cooperation, which would benefit all engaged
countries. In our opinion, it would create a win-win
situation where all disputed matters could be resolved
in a peaceful manner through dialogue.

Let me now focus on more specific parts of the
region. In Syria, in order to reach an appropriate
solution to the conflict, it is necessary to understand the
root causes that led to the outbreak of peaceful protests
that turned into armed hostilities back in 2011. In our
View, the main causes of the conflict were the lack of
significant improvement of living conditions in Syria,
inequality, poverty, the lack of individual security,
nepotism and the denial of basic human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Those causes led to widespread
protests that turned into armed struggle.

What should the solution be? We believe that what
is needed in order to stop the armed struggle and to
put Syria back on the road of sustainable development
is national consensus concerning political transition.
That can be achieved only through direct talks between
representatives of the Syrian opposition and the
authorities in Damascus that could lead to a mutually
acceptable agreement on political transformation.

While supporting direct involvement by the United
Nations in bringing the war in Syria to an end, we
also see its role as a facilitator of a process that would
result in the adoption of a new Syrian constitution.
Reaching a political agreement on a democratic,
pluralistic and open-to-all-citizens State could create
adequate conditions for the return of Syrian refugees
and their participation in elections and the rebuilding
of the country.

Last but not least, let us not forget that the key to
an effective and inclusive reconciliation process in
Syria is delivering justice for the victims. Holding the
perpetrators of the grave crimes committed accountable
remains the sine qua non condition for achieving
lasting peace.

With regard to Libya, Poland underscores the
important role of the United Nations in facilitating
a Libyan-led political solution to the challenges the
country is facing. Therefore, we fully support the
comprehensive and thoughtful engagement of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ghassan Salame, to facilitate the process ofnational
reconciliation in Libya.

I would like to underline that Poland has always
strongly supported all initiatives aimed at stabilization
and strengthening peace and security in the Middle
East. For that reason, we have kept the Middle East
peace process high on our agenda.

On the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, we believe
that the revitalization of the Middle East Quartet and
increased United Nations involvement are steps in the
right direction. A negotiated two-State solution and
resolving final-status issues, including Jerusalem,
settlements, the Palestinian refugees, borders and
security arrangements, still remain a realistic way to
fulfil the legitimate aspirations of both parties and
achieve long-term peace.

We condemn all acts of terror and incitement
to violence, including rocket-firing into Israel, and
we call on all parties to meet their obligations under
international humanitarian law, including protecting
civilians and the proportionate use of force.

We reiterate once again that both the Israelis and
the Palestinians have a right to live in peace and safety.
We should strive to strengthen cooperation with the
countries of the region, especially Egypt and Jordan,
which have a real impact on the de-escalation of
tensions in Israeli-Palestinian relations.

With regard to Iraq, we have always been supportive
ofthereconstruction and development effortsundertaken
by the Iraqi Government and international partners,
which range from humanitarian assistance, investment
and private sector development, military cooperation
and cultural heritage conservation. We strongly believe
that those efforts should be accompanied by promoting
inclusiveness and reconciliation among all components
of Iraqi society, based on justice and accountability,
the rule of law, respect for human rights, tolerance and
peaceful coexistence among all religious and ethnic
communities in Iraq.

We welcome the progress made in relations between
Baghdad and Erbil and in the holding of parliamentary
elections in May. We call on all political actors to
resolve electoral disputes through the established legal
channels and to cooperate constructively in the swift
formation of a new, inclusive Government that would
work towards political, economic and social reforms
and further advance stabilization and reconstruction.
We would also like to congratulate all Iraqi citizens
who took responsibility for determining the future of
their country by casting their votes.

With regard to Yemen, we are deeply alarmed by
the continued deterioration of the humanitarian and
security situation in the country. We emphatically
stress the importance of the full and sustained opening
of all Yemen's ports, including Hudeidah and Saleef
ports, to all commercial and humanitarian imports,
including food, fuel and medical supplies. We urge all
parties to fully respect the principles of international
humanitarian law and to ensure the protection
of civilians.

There is no military solution to the conflict in
Yemen. We call for the resumption of the United
Nations-facilitated intra-Yemeni inclusive political
process, while reaffirming our strong support for the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen,
Mr. Martin Griffiths. We call on all parties to engage
constructively with his efforts. We reiterate the
necessity ofthe full implementation of all aspects ofthe
arms embargo, as required under the Security Council
resolutions. We condemn the ballistic missile attacks
by the Houthis against Saudi Arabia.

On Iran, we believe that it is in our common
interests to stabilize the situation in the Middle East,
reduce tensions in the region and, most important,
prevent further proliferation of nuclear weapons. In
our view, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action
(JCPOA) is an important step towards achieving one
such objective - nuclear non-proliferation. Moreover,
it has become an important element of the global
non-proliferation architecture. The JCPOA does not
explicitly prohibit the development of delivery systems
or address the question of Iranian influence in the
region, which some countries perceive as negative.

In that connection, Iran should refrain from actions
that are not in the spirit of the JCPOA and that could
undermine the implementation of the commitments
under the Plan of Action. That is why Poland shares the
concerns about Iranian activities undertaken contrary
to the provisions of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015),
as meticulously reported by the Secretary-General.

In conclusion, let me stress the necessity of
maintaining the unity of the Council on the question
of peace and security in the Middle East. We believe
that more needs to be done by all of us, in particular
regional actors, to find lasting peaceful solutions to all
regional conflicts and challenges.

