Mr. Benitez Verson (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation feels the need to speak once again in
response to the comments that you have made on
Cuba's original statement.

The complaint submitted by Cuba regarding the
release of the known terrorist, Luis Posada Carriles, is
of key importance to all Member States and to the
credibility of the Security Council. We cannot beat
about the bush here. Cuba did not come to this debate
to make statements full of empty rhetoric or for word
games that mask the truth. We are here on behalf of the
3,478 Cubans who have died and the 2,909 who have
been injured as a result of the countless terrorist acts of
which the Cuban people have been victims over a
period of more than 45 years, the majority of which
were planned and organized from United States
territory with support, protection and funding from
successive Governments of that country.

The decision to allow the release of Posada
Carriles is the clearest possible demonstration of the
double standards used by the North American
Government and a clear contradiction of its alleged
combat against terrorism. It cannot expect us to
unquestioningly accept the hypocritical call to "Do
what we say, not what we do".

The Government of the United States has gone to
truly shameful lengths to protect Posada Carriles. Even
after he was arrested, several months after President
Fidel Castro publicly denounced his presence on
United States territory, the Government of the United
States charged Posada Carriles only with minor
offences relating to immigration. The charges made no
reference whatsoever to terrorism, despite the fact that
the Government of the United States is very well
aware, and has every proof, of the countless terrorist
acts committed by Posada Carriles.

We need cite only a few examples to illustrate the
nature of this person. Posada Carriles was trained by
the CIA at the College of the Americas from 1971 on.
Declassified documents from the United States
Government itself reveal that, for most of his career,
Posada Carriles had close links with the CIA. He was
responsible, together with Orlando Bosch Avila,
another terrorist - who has been freely walking the
streets of Miami for years - for the bombing of a
Cuban aircraft off the coast of Barbados that cost the
lives of 73 innocent people.

He was involved in Operation Condor - a
genocide operation - carried out by Latin American
dictatorships and the CIA to track, kidnap, torture,
assassinate and "disappear" thousands of people, solely
because of their leftist or nationalist philosophies.

In 1997 Posada Carriles prepared and directed a
series of terrorist acts using explosives against hotels
in Havana. In an interview with the New York Times
published on 12 and 13 July 1998, Posada Carriles
proudly claimed to have headed this terrorist network.
In November 2000, he was arrested in Panama along
with three of his accomplices as they planned an attack
against President Fidel Castro on the occasion of the
tenth Ibero-American Summit. The plan was to place a
powerful bomb in the auditorium of Panama University
when Fidel Castro would be meeting with hundreds of
Panamanian students and professors.

The Government of the United States has
protected Posada Carriles to prevent any knowledge of
the terrorist acts he committed against Cuba, Venezuela
and other countries when working under the orders of

the CIA and in particular of the father of the current
President of the United States, who headed that United
States agency dedicated to espionage and subversion in
1975 and 1976 - a time when terrorist acts against
Cuba were more violent and more heinous - and who
was Vice-President of the United States during the
1980s, a time when a "dirty war" was being conducted
against the Government of Nicaragua.

In conclusion, I should simply like to point out,
as the Government of the Republic of Cuba said on 19
April last, even now, after his release, the Government
of the United States has all the information and all the
legal mechanisms required to re-arrest Posada Carriles.
What is lacking is merely the political will seriously to
counter terrorism. Let us recall that, according to
President Bush, if you give refuge to a terrorist, if you
support a terrorist, if you feed a terrorist, you are as
guilty as the terrorists themselves.

