Mrs. Rodham Clinton (United States ofAmerica):
I thank you very much, Minister Westerwelle, for
calling us together at this critical moment to discuss
peace and security in the Middle East on the heels of
two tumultuous weeks, during which violent protests
rocked countries across the region. Although anger
was directed against my country, the protests exposed
deep rifts within new democracies and volatility that
extremists were quick to incite and exploit.

As President Obama made clear yesterday in his
address to the General Assembly (see A/67/PV.6),
the United States rejects the false choice between
democracy and stability. Democracies make the
strongest, most capable partners. We know that it takes
a lot of hard work and oftentimes struggle, but the fact
of new emerging democracies here in the twenty-first
century should be cause for great satisfaction and hope.

These emerging democracies, however, need
champions, not fair-weather friends. During this past
week, as I met with leaders from Tunisia, Libya, Egypt
and Yemen, I expressed to each of them America's
unwavering support for their countries' continued
journey along the democratic path. But making good on
the promise of those transitions will take many hands
working on many fronts. Of course, there are political
and economic dimensions to the work that must be
done, but today I would like to focus on the security
concerns, because that has to be the starting line on the
road to true democracy.

Of course, the Arab revolutions come from within,
and the greatest responsibility for their success or
failure lies with the people living them each day. But the

nations gathered in this Chamber also have a powerful
stake in seeing that those democracies succeed, and it is
our shared responsibility to help countries in transition
to find the right path forward.

International support is critical. Consider what
happened when the League of Arab States and the
Security Council came together to protect civilians in
Libya. That show of solidarity helped produce a strong
Security Council resolution (resolution 1973 (2011))
that saved Benghazi from destruction at the hands of
a tyrant. Thanks to the support of that broad coalition,
the people of Libya now have the chance to write their
own future. We saw, earlier this year, Libyans turning
out in droves to cast their ballots, most for the first time
in their lives.

Then, this past Friday, we saw thousands of Libyans
pour into the streets to condemn the attack on the
United States diplomatic post in Benghazi that killed
Ambassador Chris Stevens and three other Americans.
They made it clear that those who would promote
violence and division do not speak for the new Libya
and that armed bands who would sever Libya's ties with
the world are not welcome. The new Government of
Libya is working closely with us to find the murderers
and bring them to justice.

Now, each country in transition has its own security
challenges, and therefore each one needs our support in
different ways. In Tunisia, where the Arab awakening
began, extremists seek to hijack its progress, but
Tunisians are working steadily to dismantle a long legacy
of dictatorship and lay the foundation for sustainable
democracy. The riots underscored the challenges of
building security forces focused on protecting people,
not regimes. Those nations are not the first to struggle
with the challenge of policing a new democracy, and
the international community has stumbled in the past,
failing to offer needed support or offering the wrong
kind of support.

So we should heed the lessons we have learned
from our successes and our failures, including this most
basic understanding: training, funding and equipment
will only go so far. It takes the political will to make
hard choices and tough changes that will build strong
institutions and lasting security, so I am pleased that
Tunisia has agreed to host a new international training
centre that will help security and criminal justice
officials pursue policies grounded in the rule oflaw and
human rights.
Egyptians chose their leadership for the first time in
history, and we are committed to helping that transition
succeed. The Egyptian people, proud of the freedoms
they have claimed, must decide what kind of country
they want to build, and the choices of the largest Arab
nation will echo far beyond its borders. Like all nations,
Egypt knows that it too has responsibilities, not only
to its own citizens but also to its neighbours and the
international community - responsibilities to honour
international commitments, to share power broadly, to
keep faith with all the Egyptian people, men and women,
Muslim and Christian. We want to help Egypt and all
new democracies live up to these vital responsibilities.

In Yemen, we are working through the Gulf
Cooperation Council-led transition process. But
providing basic security for the Yemeni people is a
great challenge that is heightened by Yemen's unique
needs. Yemen has a fast-growing population of young
people and not enough jobs, a familiar story, not only
through the region but the world. In addition, Yemen
is facing the depletion of their oil and water supplies,
and Al-Qaida in the Arab Peninsula remains a serious
threat. The urgency of these threats must be matched by
the urgency of our response. In the Friends of Yemen
meeting later this week, countries are coming together
to address Yemen's challenges, in both the immediate
and the long term.

Unfortunately, inthe Syrian Arab Republic President
Bashar Al-Assad clings to power, and his campaign of
brutality has sparked a humanitarian crisis. The United
States has committed more than $100 million to help
the Syrian people, and we continue to insist that the
violence must end and a political transition without
President Al-Assad must move forward. The League
of Arab States suspended Syria from its activities and
has strongly condemned the Al-Assad regime's brutal
violence against its own people. The Arab League
created a plan for peaceful political transition that was
endorsed by an overwhelming majority in the General
Assembly, a resolution that launched Arab League and
United Nations mediation efforts, led first by the Joint
Special Envoy, Mr. Kofi Annan, and now by the Joint
Special Representative, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi.

Yet the atrocities mount while the Security Council
remains paralysed. I would urge that we try once again
to find a path forward that can bring the Security
Council together on the urgent business of both ending
the violence in Syria and preventing the consequences
that all of us around this table fear.

Although this forum was not primarily intended
to discuss the peace process, I certainly would like
to reiterate United States President Barak Obama's
message from yesterday. The future of Israel and
Palestime must belong to those who embrace the
hard work of peace, not those who thrive on conflict
or who reject the right of Israel to exist. The United
States stands ready and prepared to work towards a
just agreement to finally accomplish our clear goal:
a secure Jewish State of Israel and an independent,
secure, prosperous Palestine, fulfilling the aspirations
of the Palestinian people.

No discussion ofthe Middle East would be complete
without a discussion of the Islamic Republic of Iran and
the profound threat its activities pose to the region and
beyond. Despite numerous demands by the Council,
Iran still has not taken the necessary steps to cooperate
fully with the International Atomic Energy Agency
and to resolve doubts about its nuclear programme. In
addition, Iran continues to sponsor terrorist groups and
smuggle weapons for the Al-Assad regime's use against
the Syrian people. Meanwhile, the Iranian people
themselves suffer gross violations of their rights at the
hand of their own Government.

Syria's challenges, like these, call for leadership
and partnership. Yesterday, I was privileged to sign
an agreement with the Arab League through its
Secretary General, Mr. Nabil Elaraby. I was delighted
that Secretary General Elaraby and I could build
on the unprecedented cooperation of the last two
years. We support Germany's call to make Security
Council and Arab League cooperation more systemic
and sustainable. The United States is also one of 28
countries and international organizations working
through the Deauville Partnership with Arab Countries
in Transition to support democratic transitions in the
Middle East and North Africa. When violence came to
our doorstep at embassies around the globe, this body
joined the Arab League, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the African Union, and the European
Union to give voice to the world's condemnation of the
attacks and call for restraint. They stood with us and
now we must stand together in support of the common
aspirations of the people, of all people, for security
and safety for our familites, the freedom to live lives
according to our own conscience, the dignity that
comes only through self-determination.

As President Obama said yesterday, the United
States will never shrink from defending those values,
and we will not walk away from those new democracies.
We are not alone in this commitment. That is the work
of all responsible nations, and we look forward to
working closely with anyone who speaks out on behalf
of our shared values.

