The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.

I should like to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2012/624, which contains the
text ofa letter dated 10 August 2012 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council.

Following consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council welcomes the progress
made by the Governments of the Sudan and South
Sudan in negotiations under the auspices of the
African Union High-level Implementation Panel
(AUHIP) to fulfil their obligations under the
African Union's road map and Security Council
Resolution 2046 (2012). The Security Council
expresses its gratitude to AUHIP Chairman Mbeki
and United Nations Special Envoy Menkerios for
their 9 August briefings and for their tireless efforts
to broker agreements between the two parties.

"The Security Council affirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of both the Sudan and South Sudan. It
recalls the importance of the principles of good
neighbourliness, non-interference and regional
cooperation.

"The Security Council welcomes significant
reduction in violence and tension between the two
countries.

"The Security Council commends the African
Union (AU), including the AUHIP, the Peace and
Security Council, and the AU Commission, for its
constructive leadership in this process as further
demonstrated by the AUPSC communique of
3 August, and underscores its continued support for

those mediation efforts. In this respect the Council
supports the convening by the AUHIP, supported by
the Chairperson of the lntergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), of a round of interactions
with the parties, including a summit meeting of
the two Presidents, to enable them to reach the
necessary agreements on all outstanding issues.

"The Security Council welcomes the fact
that the Sudan and South Sudan have reached an
agreement on oil and related financial arrangements
that should help alleviate the sharply deteriorating
economic conditions affecting each of them. The
Council encourages the parties to swiftly finalize
the details and the signing of the agreement and
move forward with transparent implementation
of the agreement, in order for production and
transportation to resume as soon as possible.

"The Security Council notes the decision by
the Sudan and South Sudan to constitute a joint
delegation to approach various countries and
institutions to request financial assistance to address
the urgent needs of both countries.

"The Security Council notes with interest the
agreement by the parties to establish a panel of
experts to provide an authoritative, non-binding
opinion on the status of the border, and hopes that
this process will facilitate a speedy outcome in
accordance with the AU road map and resolution
2046 (2012).

"The Security Council welcomes the
memorandums of understanding reached separately
by the Government of the Sudan and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N)
with the United Nations, the AU, and League
of Arab States to enable the urgent delivery
of humanitarian assistance to affected civilian
populations in South Kordofan and Blue Nile states
in accordance with the tripartite plan proposed by
the United Nations, the AU and League of Arab
States. It calls on the Government of Sudan and
SPLM-N to fully and faithfully implement its
terms to expedite the unhindered delivery of this
assistance as rapidly as possible, in accordance with
applicable international law, including applicable
international humanitarian law and the accepted
principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and
independence in the provision of humanitarian
assistance. The Security Council stresses the
urgency of immediately delivering humanitarian

relief supplies to the affected civilian populations,
so as to avoid any further suffering or loss of life.

"The Security Council recalls the 2 August
deadline imposed in resolution 2046 (2012) and
regrets that the parties have not yet been able
to finalize agreements on a number of critical
issues, particularly the establishment of the Safe
Demilitarized Border Zone (SDBZ); the activation
of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism (JBVMM) and of the Ad Hoc
Committee; resolution of the status of the disputed
and claimed border areas and the demarcation of
the border; the status of nationals of one country
resident in the other; and the temporary security
and administrative arrangements for Abyei agreed
by the parties on 20 June 2011, as well as agreeing
on the final status of Abyei.

"The Security Council strongly urges the
Government of the Sudan to accept the AU
administrative and security map of November
2011 without further delay in order to enable the
full activation of the SDBZ and the JBVMM. as
required by the Council, and reiterates that the
centre line of the SDBZ in no way prejudices the
current or future legal status of the border, ongoing
negotiations on the disputed and claimed areas, and
demarcation of the border. The Security Council
commends the Government of South Sudan for its
formal acceptance of the AU map but calls on it
to withdraw any forces located to the north of the
SDBZ centre line.

"The Security Council expresses serious
concern at the 20 July security incident, condemns
all violations ofresolution 2046 (2012), in particular
aerial bombardments, harbouring of or support to
rebel groups, and cross-border military movements,
and demands an immediate halt to such actions.

"The Security Council acknowledges that the
majority of security forces has been withdrawn
from the Abyei Area by the Governments of the
Sudan and South Sudan, and reiterates its call on the
Government of the Sudan to redeploy the Sudanese
Oil Police from Abyei without preconditions.
The Security Council further calls on the Abyei
Joint Oversight Committee to speedily finalize
the establishment of the Abyei Police Service, to
enable it to take over policing functions throughout
the Abyei Area, including the protection of the oil
infrastructure. It also underlines the urgent need for

the establishment of an Abyei Area Administration,
Council and Police Service, in accordance with the
20 June 2011 agreement, and calls on the parties to
reach agreement on these without further delay and
to refrain from unilateral actions in this regard.
"The Security Council recalls its decision in
resolution 2046 (2012) that the Government of the
Sudan and the SPLM-North extend full cooperation
to the AUHIP and the Chair of IGAD to reach a
negotiated settlement on the basis of the 28 June
2011 Framework Agreement.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution
2046 (2012) and the African Union road map and
demands that the Sudan, South Sudan and the
SPLM-N urgently and in good faith finalize and
fully implement agreements on all relevant issues
as specified in resolution 2046 (2012), and in this
regard the Council reiterates its intention to take
appropriate additional measures under Article 41 of
the Charter as necessary.

"The Security Council recalls its resolution 2046
(2012) and reiterates its request to the Secretary-
General, in consultation with the AUHIP, the Chair
of IGAD and the Chairman of the AU Commission,
to report to the Council by 2 September on the
status of negotiations. The Security Council also
looks forward to reviewing the AU's determinations
as indicated in paragraph 18 of the AU Peace and
Security Council communique of 3 August and
requests in this regard the Secretary-General to
report to the Council thereafter on the status of
negotiations, including detailed proposals on all
outstanding issues.

"The Security Council expresses its sadness at
the untimely passing of Ethiopian Prime Minister
Meles Zenawi. The Council acknowledges and pays
tribute to his tireless efforts as chair of IGAD in
supporting and contributing to the efforts of the
AUHIP in realizing its mandate on the Sudan and
South Sudan. The Council recalls in particular the
readiness of Prime Minister Zenawi to deploy 4,200
Ethiopian troops to Abyei in the United Nations
Interim Security Force for Abyei."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2012/19.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 3.20pm.
