Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): My delegation, too,
will miss our dear neighbour, Ambassador Merimee, that
paragon of diplomatic skill, unfailing coartoisie, sartorial
excellence and la francophonie. We wish him all the best
in Rome.

A year ago a Security Council mission visited
Mozambique to see what more the Security Council could
do to help implement an agreement between belligerents
there, an agreement that pulled the country out of years
of civil war. I had the honour to serve on that mission.
We witnessed processes of demobilization and voter
registration which eventually culminated in free elections.
The United Nations Operation in Mozambique
(ONUMOZ) peace-keeping operation is today a term in
United Nations history. Fortunately, it is a term denoting
success.

The success of Mozambique and of ONUMOZ is a
shining example. Our experience there should be studied
and its success factors distilled and applied wherever else
they are applicable. Liberia seems to offer a chance for
applying these lessons.

The first building blocks of a lasting peace have at
long last been put in place. At long last all the main
factions of the civil war there have installed a Council of
State and have agreed on a process of disengagement,
encampment, disarmament and demobilization and,
finally, on preparations for elections to be held next 20
August.

The devil is in the details. The implementation of
this plan will surely run into any number of logistical
difficulties and into the occasional unwillingness of this
party or that, or of their local followers, to take this or
that concrete step. There will be ample opportunity for
local flare-ups, and heaven knows there is an ample
supply of arms in the country.

This is where the Mozambique example comes into
play. In it we can find inspiration as to how to wrestle to

the ground the devil of the details.

Even so, today's success is tremendous, and we
congratulate the parties themselves. We congratulate the
countries of the Economic Community of West African
States, which have been shouldering the tremendous
burden of fielding the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG), and most certainly we congratulate the
statesmen of Ghana and of Nigeria for their steadfastness
and singularity of purpose, which have been so
appropriately crowned with success.

My delegation wholeheartedly supports the draft
resolution before us. The Czech Republic has been
making its own modest contribution to the peace process
in Liberia. Ours is the only European country which has
fielded a certain number of military observers to take part
in the work of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL), as, indeed, our observers took part in

 

Mozambique. My authorities are currently studying a
request to further augment the number of our observers
serving in Liberia.

We hope that the people of Liberia and their leaders
will stay firmly on the course they have outlined for
themselves for Liberia to emerge yet again as a bastion of
peace in Western Africa.

