Mr. Lamamra (spoke in French): I would like
first to associate the African Union with the words of
solidarity and sympathy that the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, expressed for the people and
Government of Haiti following the earthquake that has
cruelly struck that country. I would also like to express
our deepest sympathy to the families of all United
Nations colleagues on mission in that country.

I wish to express congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
and to thank you for having organized this debate, the
outcome of which should further promote the potential
partnership between the United Nations and regional
organizations in matters of peace and security.

The African Union is all the more happy to
participate in this exercise as its special relationship
with the United Nations continues to increase in range,
effectiveness and ambition. This exercise is thus
important and timely. It should open new possibilities
for complementarities and synergies so as to maximize
the impact of action on the part of the various
international actors across the whole range of
activities, including conflict prevention, management
and resolution, peacebuilding and post-conflict
reconstruction.

It is particularly fortunate that this exercise is
taking place today as an extension of the two-day
retreat that the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon,
held with the leaders of regional organizations. The
retreat was particularly promising, and its success
paves the way for measures that will lay out plans for
cooperative work that have been opened by common
reflection.

The African Union has made peace and security
the first of four pillars on which its strategy and
programmes of action are based. The promotion of
peace and security is conceived and conducted on the
basis of developing doctrine, of operationalizing the
architecture and of action by all entities concerned in
order to promote the elimination of conflict throughout
the African continent. Those three areas of action have
all seen far-reaching, mutually reinforcing results that
also pave the way for further progress.

Building in that way on the successful
cooperation and complementarity between the African
Union and the regional economic communities and
regional mechanisms, the African Union has developed
wide-ranging partnerships, such as that which Mr. Amr
Moussa, Secretary-General of the Arab League, has
just described to illustrate the level of coordination
between our two organizations. Such African Union
partnerships also extend to other friendly
organizations, such as the European Union, which is
making significant contributions to the funding of a
number of our activities. Such consultations and
cooperation are also developing with the International
Organization of la Francophonie, the Commonwealth,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Organization of American States, NATO,
and so forth.
The partnership between the African Union and
the United Nations has already produced considerable

achievements in various situations and with various
operational methods. Ongoing consultations and
cooperation adapted to the demands of effectiveness
are being developed on the basis of the criterion of
comparative advantage and taking due account of all
relevant factors.

That strategic partnership has been realized in a
symbolic way in the first and only hybrid peacekeeping
operation - the AU-UN Hybrid Mission in Darfur
(UNAMID). It has also been demonstrated in an
equally significant way through the United Nations
logistical support unit to the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). The partnership is also
manifested in the annual consultative meeting between
this Council and the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, as well as in the increasingly effective
coordination between the leadership of the United
Nations Secretariat and that of the African Union
Commission.

Cooperation between our organizations raises
issues of conception, organization, coordination,
harmonizing procedures, streamlining methods,
capacity-building and stable and predictable funding of
the peacebuilding operations conducted by regional
organizations. Some of these issues have been
considered in the Prodi report (see 8/2008/813) and
other studies, whose recommendations we should now
begin to implement.

Beyond that, there exists a major challenge in the
need for the regional organizations and the universal
Organization that is the United Nations to meet on shared
values and to develop shared, adequate and effective
responses to events and situations about which they
sometimes take different positions. That is particularly the
case with regard to unconstitutional changes of
Government, religious extremism, terrorism - including
financing terrorism through ransom payments in cases of
hostage-taking - climate change and environmental
security, as well as in situations where the regional
consensus agenda and decisions made by organizations
such as the African Union are not universally
supported. That can lead to shortcomings and
weaknesses in what should be collective action
promoting the complementarities among various
international actors.

Beyond the modesty of its approach and the
prudence of its tone, Chapter VIII of the Charter of the
United Nations has proved very flexible and adaptable
in dealing with new realities that nobody in 1945 could
have imagined. That creativity should be encouraged
and stimulated so that the United Nations and the
regional organizations can together make advantageous
and appreciable gains in effectiveness.

The African Union, which has proclaimed 2010
the Year of Peace and Security, will continue to work
with regional economic communities throughout the
continent, as with all our partners, to ensure that
today's discussions honour their promises and have the
outcomes they deserve, in the concerted multilateral
approaches that will improve the international
community's success in the conduct of its civilizational
work of building a universally shared peace.

