Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We have listened carefully to the briefing by
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Valentin Inzko. His regular briefing on the
twentieth anniversary of the Dayton Agreement has
confirmed that the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
are independently tackling and solving very complex
issues on their national agenda. They are doing so
successfully, especially when they are not interfered
with.

The priority task at this stage is to complete the
implementation of the "5-1-2" agenda. Pending problems
within that framework must be resolved by Bosnians
themselves through inclusive dialogue and on the basis
of the agreement of all three constituent peoples. The
exclusive task of the High Representative is to promote
such dialogue among the local parties and to assist in
the search for common ground. However, the report
of the High Representative (S/2015/84l, annex) does
not include a detailed account of what has been done
in that area. Once again, the document lists only, in
chronological order, all the events that took place in
the country during the reporting period. Unfortunately,
that is not an innovative approach, nor does it reflect
the quality of the work undertaken. The analysis of the
report is superficial and does not attempt to consider
in depth the contemporary issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

First and foremost, this concerns the idea of Banja
Luka to carry out a referendum of no confidence in the
central Bosnian judicial bodies, which was actively
discussed in the Chamber today. Instead of seeking
and understanding the real reasons for the situation in
which one of the constituent peoples justifiably state
that their rights have been brazenly trampled upon, the
High Representative limits himself to merely stating
his View with regard to the violations of the Dayton
Agreement. The document is drawn up in such a way as
to leave one with the impression that the leadership of
the Republika Srpska consistently does nothing other
than violate the Dayton Agreement and impede and
delay socioeconomic reforms with a view to splitting
from Bosnia and Herzegovina.

That thesis, unfortunately, again is further backed
by assessments of the April congress of the Alliance
of Independent Social Democrats, where a decision
was approved at the party level to carry out in 2017 the
referendum on the independence of the Republika of
Srpska if the violations of its legitimate rights continue.
There is no reference at all to the plans of the other
parties to turn Bosnia and Herzegovina into a unified
State or the popular idea of the creation of a third
entity. In other words, Serbians are not the only ones
experiencing problems. Other constituent peoples are
experiencing them as well.

In this situation, we call upon Mr. Inzko not to look
for people to blame or those who are guilty, but to carry
out his work on the basis of promoting national dialogue.
Experience has shown that only through such national
dialogue can one address serious concerns, especially
in a complex State like Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We encourage and call upon all members to look
very carefully at the documents. The arguments for
holding a referendum are exhaustively spelled in a letter
from the President of Republika Srpska, Mr. Milorad
Dodik, to the Secretary-General. If members read
President Dodik's letter carefully, the commitment of
Bosnian Serbs to international law and the letter of the
Dayton Agreement is unquestionably clear.

We would like to recall that the High Representative
acts on behalf of the entire international community.
His mandate derives from a Security Council resolution,
which obliges him to keep his activities in line with
the recommendations of this body. In practice, we are
forced to note that none of our comments addressed to
the High Representative were implemented.

We believe that the primary duty of the High
Representative is to maintain an unbiased and
balanced approach to his assessment of the internal
political situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, focus on
strengthening relationships of trust among the peoples of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and promote genuine national
reconciliation. That is the basis for the development of
a single State in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Progress in
that regard was noted today, within the framework of
the upcoming anniversary of the Dayton Agreement.

We again underscore the lack of alternative to the
further reduction of the budget of the Office of the High
Representative as part of the closure process adopted
by all of us. Arguments that he should retain the ability
to carry out his mandate, especially in the light of what
we have heard today, do not stand up to criticism. His
work hinders the further development of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a modern European State that does not
pose a threat to international peace and security and
that deserves respect instead of external interference,
which is close in nature to that of a protectorate. In that
context, discussions regarding the Office's possible
use of emergency tools or other instruments against
the Republika Srpska are absolutely unacceptable and
harmful.

