Mr. Cooney (Ireland): First allow me to welcome
you, Mr. President, to the Security Council today.
Ireland is very pleased that you are here today to chair
this important debate at the very beginning of the
Colombian presidency. I would also like to take the
opportunity to congratulate the Chinese delegation on
the manner in which they conducted their presidency
last month.

Later in today's debate, Belgium will make a
statement on behalf of the European Union. Ireland
fully associates itself with that statement, and I will
therefore be brief in my remarks.

We welcome the President's initiative in ensuring
that the Council picks up the question of small arms
quickly in the follow-up to the recent United Nations
Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and
Light Weapons in All Its Aspects, which was so ably
chaired by Ambassador Camilo Reyes of Colombia.
The Conference was both the culmination of a long
preparatory process with many activities at subregional
and regional levels around the world and the launching
pad for what Ireland hopes will be a dynamic follow-up
process.

While Ireland, with its partners in the European
Union and a number of other countries, would have
liked to see even stronger commitments emerge from
the Conference, we very much welcome and endorse
the very significant achievements that were reached.
The Programme of Action represents a reasonable
balance between different and sometimes competing
interests. It recognizes that one-size solutions do not fit
all and that while the fight against the scourge of small
arms and light weapons is one shared by the entire
international community and cooperative international
action will be needed to defeat it, responses may need
to be tailored to meet different regional needs.

There is no question that the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons is a significant
contributing factor in many of the conflicts that come
to the attention of the Security Council. It also
underlies many of the cross-cutting problems the
Council is obliged to address - for instance, child
soldiers and the increasing suffering of women and
children in armed conflict.

It is possible to draw a number of conclusions
from previous Security Council discussion on small
arms and other, associated issues. First, the present
capacity of the international community to control
small arms and light weapons is unsatisfactory.
Secondly, primary action to address the issue of
small arms and light weapons must be taken at both the
national and regional levels. Action at the national
level is essential because it is the primary
responsibility of Governments to take action in
promoting effective national legislation or
administrative measures to regulate trade in small arms
and light weapons. All parties must address this issue
in an open and self-critical manner in order to achieve
tangible progress in the near future. We must not
permit the United Nations to be used as a vehicle for
reinforcing obstacles deriving from domestic,
legislative or constitutional provisions. Action at the
regional level is also imperative simply because many
of the issues can be addressed only in the context of
regional security and through mutual cooperation.

Thirdly, it is incumbent on Governments to
ensure full compliance with Security Council arms
embargoes.

Fourthly, it is necessary to examine the issue
from both the supply and demand sides. Manufacturing
countries must put in place effective controls on gun
holdings and also exercise restraint in exporting small
arms and light weapons, including through the
monitoring of the activities of dubious arms brokers.
Although weapons are not manufactured in Ireland, the
European Union and the countries associated with the
European Union represent a major part of the world's
weapons production. This is particularly true in the
case of small arms and light weapons and places a
special responsibility on the European Union to check
the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all
its aspects and to cooperate in the alleviation of its
consequences.

Fifthly, the problem must be addressed in a
comprehensive and integrated manner.

Finally, international cooperation between
concerned Governments, their licensing and judicial
authorities, as well as the enforcement agencies, is
essential if progress is to be made.

In your paper for this open debate, Mr. President,
you invited us to reflect on the Council's contribution
to the implementation of the Programme of Action of
the Conference. I think the first thing to say is that the
Council can and must show leadership on the issue.
Our debate today is a welcome signal that the Council
maintains a strong interest. It is important that the
Council, in its own actions, reflect the thrust of the
Programme of Action. The Council is already doing
this in the attention it has begun to pay to the problem
of child soldiers and in the importance it is attaching in
post-conflict situations to the effective disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants and
the effective disposal of their weaponry. We have heard
a number of very practical proposals today, not least
those put forward by Ambassador Durrant; these are
worthy of further discussion.

The Small Arms Conference was an important
step in a process that must be followed up. Ireland
takes very seriously the politically binding
commitments it has entered into in the Programme of
Action and will work actively and cooperatively with
other countries in the fulfilment of these, both inside
and outside the Security Council.

