Mr. Burleigh (United States of America): May I
also welcome you with us here today, Madam President.

My Government strongly supports this important
resolution on Kosovo. It underscores our growing concern
that Belgrade's repressive actions have created a
potentially catastrophic humanitarian situation as winter
approaches. It increases pressure on Belgrade to negotiate
seriously with the Kosovo Albanians to achieve a political
settlement that provides for democratic self-government
for the people of Kosovo and avoids the devastating
consequences of continued conflict. It also affirms that
the situation constitutes a serious threat to peace and
security in the region.

To date, approximately a quarter of a million people
have been displaced by the offensive actions of the Serb
security forces. At least 50,000 Kosovo Albanians are
living in open valleys and forests, without shelter or basic
necessities. The international community must act to
prevent a disaster this fall.

The best way to stem this crisis is for Belgrade to
heed our demands for an immediate cessation of offensive
actions and the pull-back of its security forces. We also
call for a meaningful dialogue, without preconditions and
with international involvement, leading to a solution to

 

the Kosovo question, as set out in this resolution. My
Government is continuing its efforts to assist in such a
dialogue and to coordinate with members of the Contact
Group and others in this effort.

In particular, the authorities in Belgrade must be held
to account for creating the current crisis. It is their
responsibility to create the conditions to allow all refugees
and displaced persons to return to their homes in safety.
Belgrade is responsible for the well-being of the people of
Kosovo, as well as for the security of all diplomatic
personnel and non- governmental humanitarian personnel on
the ground.

This resolution endorses international monitoring and
humanitarian efforts and demands that there be full and
unimpeded access, without interference in international
monitoring or delivery of assistance and humanitarian
supplies.

Adequate resources for humanitarian assistance in the
region are vital. My Government has earmarked $20 million
in assistance, in addition to $11 million previously
identified, as well as other donations. We appreciate the
very important contributions of others, including Members
of this Council, and urge all United Nations Member
States to respond to the urgent appeal by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

We also underline the importance of full cooperation
with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

We all hope that this resolution and the ongoing
efforts to reach a settlement will convince Belgrade to
comply with the demands of the international community.
Planning at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization for
military operations if these efforts do not succeed is
nearing completion. The international community will not
stand idly by as the situation in Kosovo deteriorates.

Today the Security Council sends a strong,
unequivocal message. The Council will not tolerate the
continued violence, lawlessness, repression, and violation
of human rights in Kosovo.

