Mr. Danesh-Yazdi (Islamic Republic of Iran): I
wish to begin by congratulating you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council this
month, as well as by thanking you for having convened

this open debate to discuss the situation in the Middle
East, especially the most recent expansionist policies
and practices of the Israeli regime in Al-Quds
Al-Sharif. Nor should I fail to express our appreciation
to the Russian Federation for its able and effective
presidency of the Council in the month of January. Our
thanks also go to Mr. De Soto for his comprehensive
briefing today.

We would like to express our delight and
satisfaction over the recent agreement reached between
our Palestinian brothers to form a national unity
government. We congratulate them on that important
achievement. That is a welcome step towards
strengthening and enhancing solidarity among
Palestinians at this crucial juncture.

My delegation would also like to join other
speakers in strongly condemning today's heinous
terrorist acts in Lebanon. We express our condolences
to the families of the victims and to the people and the
Government of Lebanon.

The recent atrocious acts by the Israeli regime
and its insolent expansionist policy vis-a-vis the holy
Al-Aqsa mosque have once again heightened the
concerns of the international community over Israel's
unlawful activities, and has consequently exacerbated
the already dire situation in the volatile Middle East
region. Israel's recent heinous action against the
blessed Al-Aqsa mosque and the holy city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif, and its demolition of a historic road
connecting Bab Al-Maghriba with the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque compound, as well as two rooms adjacent to
the Al-Buraq wall, have yet again put on display the
aggressive and racist nature of that regime.

Moreover, Israel's continued excavation work
beneath the holy Al-Aqsa mosque compound is indeed
a provocative and insulting measure that undermines
the sanctity and foundations of the holy Al-Aqsa
mosque compound and threatens it with collapse. We,
along with the other members of the international
community, strongly condemn that shocking act.
Equally provocative and condemnable is Israel's
continued policy of denying Palestinian worshippers
access to their religious sites, and its intention to
construct a tourist site below the holy Al-Aqsa
compound.
As pointed out by the representatives of Cuba and
Azerbaijan, speaking on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement and the Organization of the Islamic
Conference, respectively, since 1968 the Security
Council has adopted no fewer than 16 resolutions that
have repeatedly declared the measures and
arrangements taken by Israel aimed at changing the
legal status, demographic composition and character of
the city of Al-Quds Al-Sharif null and void and Without
any legal validity. Nevertheless, the Israeli regime's
defiance of all those calls by the Council and the
international community has continued unabated.
Indeed, this latest illegal Israeli act is a nefarious
attempt to colonize and Judaize Al-Quds Al-Sharif.

Undoubtedly, such deplorable policies and
practices are in line with other Israeli war crimes and
atrocities, such as extrajudicial killings, targeted
assassinations, the wanton destruction of homes,
infrastructure and agricultural lands, the detention and
imprisonment of thousands of Palestinians, the
construction of the expansionist wall and the
imposition of collective punishment on the entire
Palestinian population. There is an absolute need for
the international community to decidedly weigh in and
to prevent Israel from carrying out its dangerous
designs against Palestinians and against the holy
Al-Aqsa mosque compound, which will further
jeopardize peace and security in the whole region. The
Council has an immense responsibility to shoulder in
fulfilling its Charter-based mandate by preventing
Israel from continuing to flout the will of the
international community incorporated in numerous
United Nations resolutions.

It is unfortunate that a single delegation,
exploiting its permanent presence on the Council and
its privilege of the veto, has always prevented the
Council from pronouncing itself, let alone taking any
meaningful action, on numerous Israeli crimes in
Palestine and elsewhere in the region. We hope that all
members of the Council recognize the need to take
decisive action in the face of the new Israeli crimes in
the region, and that they will not choose to allow a
further erosion of the Council's authority as a result of
a failure to address the grave situation created in the
wake of recent Israeli expansionist policies and
actions. There should be no doubt that those who
impede justice and accountability for Israeli war crimes
by repeatedly abusing the power of the veto bear
responsibility for the bloodshed that we witness in the
occupied Palestinian territories time and again.

Throughout the period under review, and while
the Israeli war machine has been relentlessly at work to

shatter the lives and livelihoods of Palestinians, the
Israeli regime has persisted with its aggressive policy
towards Lebanon, as well as towards others in the
region. It has continued to occupy the Syrian Golan
Heights and parts of Lebanese territory. That regime is
adamantly violating Security Council resolution 1701
(2006), including by violating Lebanese airspace.
Israel's violation of Lebanese territory in the area of
Maroun Al-Ras last week was a flagrant breach of
resolution 1701 (2006) and a showcase example of
Israeli contempt for the Council and its decisions.

The tragedy of Palestine, as a major source of
anger and frustration that is felt throughout the Islamic
world, lies at the heart of the Middle East conflict. The
criminal Israeli acts against the Palestinians and other
peoples in the region constitute the gravest threat
currently posed to regional and international peace and
security. It is evident that durable peace in Palestine
and throughout the Middle East will be possible only
with justice, an end to discrimination, an end to the
occupation of Palestinian, Syrian and Lebanese
territory, the return of all Palestinian refugees and a
democratic mechanism through which all the
inhabitants of Palestine, as well as Palestinians driven
from their homeland, will have the opportunity to
determine their future in a democratic and peaceful fashion.
If history is any guide, peace in the Middle East cannot be
achieved through State terrorism, occupation, intimidation
and aggression.

Before concluding, I would like to place it on
record that my delegation rejects the baseless
allegations raised against my country in the Council
today by the representatives of Israel and the United
States. This is yet another tired practice of the Israeli
regime and its advocate, intended to divert the
attention of the international community from Israeli
crimes in Palestine and elsewhere in the region, by
raising unfounded allegations against others.

