The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Greece.
Like previous speakers, I wish to extend my
warm congratulations to the Chairpersons of the three
Committees - Ambassador Mayoral, Ambassador Loj
and Ambassador Burian - for their comprehensive
briefings and to thank them for their hard work and
dedication.

Greece associates itself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of Finland
on behalf of the European Union (EU). I would like,
however, to make some additional remarks.

Greece fully subscribes to the conviction that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever
purposes, is unacceptable and can never be justified.
We firmly believe, however, that the fight against
terrorism should be carried out in tandem with respect
for international law, international human rights and
humanitarian law and refugee law.

Terrorism is a global threat, and as such it can be
defeated through a global, consistent and coordinated
response. For this reason, we welcome the unanimous
adoption by the General Assembly of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy (General Assembly resolution 60/288). The adoption of that
important document not only demonstrates that we
stand united in our common endeavour to combat
terrorism through a comprehensive strategic plan and
action-oriented measures, but it also reaffirms the vital
role that the General Assembly can play in this regard.
We must now work together to ensure the effective and
expeditious implementation of the Strategy.

At the same time, we must step up our efforts to
conclude the negotiations on a draft comprehensive
convention on international terrorism, the adoption of
which will provide legal clarity regarding the
definition of terrorist acts and will complement the
General Assembly's legal framework in the field of
counter-terrorism.

The briefings that we heard today by the
Chairmen of the three subsidiary Committees of the
Security Council are indicative of the intensive and
tireless efforts of the Council to address and eradicate
terrorism in all its forms.

Greece welcomes the progress that the 1267
Committee has achieved in improving its Consolidated
List by adding new and useful information with respect
to the names of several entries. In addition, the
assignment of a permanent reference number to each
person included in the list and the addition of his or her
name in the original alphabet have enhanced the
effectiveness of the list.

We welcome the recommendations contained in
the fourth and fifth reports of the Monitoring Team,
many of which have been adopted by the Committee,
greatly contributing to the improvement of the
sanctions regime.

Greece attaches great importance to the revision
of the Committee's guidelines concerning listing and
de-listing procedures. The Committee intensively
discussed the revision of its listing procedures, and
some new draft guidelines in this respect are now ready
for adoption. However, concerns expressed by Member
States about the need for fair and clear procedures for
placing individuals and entities on sanctions lists and
for removing them, as well as for granting
humanitarian exceptions, have not so far been
addressed by the Committee. We urge the Committee
to embark upon the consideration of these issues at the
earliest opportunity, also taking into account the
proposals submitted to the Committee by Denmark and
France, as well as the various options offered by recent
academic discussions on this issue. As we have stated
on many occasions, ensuring fair and clear procedures
will ultimately strengthen the effectiveness of targeted
sanctions.

Last but not least, we are pleased about the
progress made in the cooperation between the
Committee and Interpol.

Greece commends the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and its Executive Directorate for
their continuous active engagement with Member
States in pursuing the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001). The visits carried out by the Executive
Directorate are useful tools that enhance interaction
with Member States, and the Committee should now
focus on better preparation and follow up.

We welcome the excellent report (S/2006/737) of
the CTC to the Council on the implementation of
resolution 1624 (2005) regarding a number of issues
related to incitement to terrorism. The report contains
useful information on domestic practices and
legislative measures in this field, and provides the
Committee with important elements and information in
connection with the fulfilment of its mandate under
resolution 1624 (2005). This report could also be a
source of inspiration to those States which have not yet
submitted such information.

The CTC has made good progress in integrating

human rights into its policy. We are of the view,

however, that much remains to be done to better

incorporate human rights concerns into its dialogue

with Member States in the implementation of
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

With regard to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), the first priority
remains the completion of the first cycle of national
reports. We therefore urge the remaining 59 States
which have not so far submitted their national reports
to do so as soon as possible.

In this regard, the Committee has undertaken a
series of outreach activities, including regional
seminars, which we fully support. Mention should be
made of the recent Beijing seminar, which produced
tangible results, as well as of forthcoming seminars, to
be held, with the financial assistance of the EU, in
Accra, Ghana, and Lima, Peru, for the African and
Latin American and Caribbean countries, respectively.
We hope that these seminars will have an impact on the
non-reporting States in terms of the submission of their
missing reports. Cooperation with regional
organizations is of the essence in this respect.

The continued updating of the Committee's
database is of great use, as it serves as a tool for
information-sharing among States. Through the links
contained in it, users can find information relating to
the legislative and regulatory measures taken by States
in order to implement resolutions 1540 (2004) and
1673 (2006).

Cooperation with the other Security Council
Committees is progressing smoothly. A tangible result
of this cooperation is the document on a common
strategy dealing with non- or late-reporting States,
elaborated by the groups of experts of the three
Committees. We envisage a further enhancement of
this cooperation in the future.

It is noted that the Committee continues to act as
a clearing house for technical assistance to States that
have expressed a desire to receive such assistance in
order to fulfil their obligations deriving from
resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).

We hope that the members of the Committee will
agree soon on its new programme of work, which will
allow the Committee to perform its duties smoothly for
another year.
I now resume my duties as President of the
Council.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, His Excellency
Mr. Nicolas Maduro Moros, to whom I give the floor.

