Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Sir, for having convened
today's debate on the situation in Afghanistan. We are
grateful for the latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/493) and are appreciative of the briefing by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Staffan de Mistura. We also thank Mr. Zalmai Rassoul,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan, for his
statement.

The Kabul Conference marked a new phase in the
partnership between the Afghan Government and the
international community: the Kabul process and a
renewed commitment to a secure, prosperous and
democratic Afghanistan. The Conference demonstrated
the Afghan Government's determination to take full
responsibility for Afghanistan's own development,
security and governance, and the international
community's willingness to realign international
assistance in accordance with Afghanistan's priorities
and action plans. The success of the Kabul process will
largely depend on detailing and implementing the
commitments flowing from the Kabul Conference.

The holding of the National Assembly elections
on 18 September, in which over 2,500 candidates
contested, was an important step forward in
strengthening the democratic framework in
Afghanistan. We appreciate the leading role of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in providing overall coordination of
international support to the electoral process.

India and Afghanistan enjoy a relationship based
on history, civilization, trade and cultural exchanges,
and shared values and interests stretching back
thousands of years. India is committed to the unity,

integrity and independence of Afghanistan,
underpinned by democracy and cohesive pluralism and
free from external interference. India has contributed to
these goals through our development partnership,
which is implemented entirely in accordance with the
priorities of the Afghan Government and people. Our
assistance programmes are spread all over Afghanistan
and cover all aspects of development: humanitarian
assistance, infrastructure, institution- and capacity-
building, small-scale quick-gestation projects, and
agriculture. The ultimate aim of our assistance, which
presently stands at over $1.3 billion, is to strengthen
the capacity of the Afghan State and people to stand on
their own feet in the areas of governance and services
for the Afghan people.

Afghanistan's stability and economic
development depend significantly on its neighbours
and the region as a whole. Afghanistan's greatest
economic potential perhaps resides in its immense
potential as a trade, transport and energy hub, and as a
bridge linking Central, West and South Asia and the
Gulf. Its prosperity also depends on the consumer
market of nearly 1.5 billion people in the South Asian
subcontinent. The recent reports of Afghanistan's great
mineral wealth also open up possibilities for mining
and investment.

But if Afghanistan is to realize its full potential in
these areas, its neighbours need to come together to
forge greater regional cooperation and facilitate trade
and transit. Growing economic interdependence will
also help to wean disaffected youth away from
insurgency and militancy and to create a zone of
co-prosperity in the region. We support the wishes of
the Government of Afghanistan to take the lead in this
direction.

Peace and reintegration efforts in Afghanistan can
succeed provided they are fully Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned and bring all sections of Afghanistan's
population together, and provided they abide by the
redlines agreed to at the London Conference: giving up
violence, cutting off all links with terrorism, and
accepting the democratic and pluralistic values of the
Afghan Constitution, including women's rights.

The international community must learn lessons
from past experiences in negotiating with
fundamentalist and extremist organizations, and ensure
that any peace process is conducted in an inclusive and
transparent manner. Adequate capacity of the Afghan
security forces and other Afghan institutions is a sine
qua non for protecting Afghanistan's sovereignty,
plurality and democracy. The gains of the past nine
years stand to be squandered if this aspect does not
receive the attention that it deserves as the
international community ponders its next steps
regarding Afghanistan.

The international community should also ensure
that there is no selectivity in dealing with terrorism. The
fight against terrorism cannot be compartmentalized.
One cannot distinguish between Al-Qaida and the
plethora of terrorist organizations that have imbibed the
goals and techniques of Al-Qaida. The security and
stabilization of Afghanistan will remain a distant goal
unless we are able to isolate and root out the syndicate of
terrorism, which includes elements of Al-Qaida, the
Taliban, the Lashkar e Toiba and other terrorist and
extremist groups operating from within and outside
Afghanistan's borders. It is therefore essential to ensure
that support, sustenance and sanctuaries for terrorist
organizations from outside Afghanistan are ended
forthwith.

As we debate today, it is worrisome that there has
been a continued and continuing deterioration in the
security environment. The Secretary-General's report
notes that there has been a 69 per cent increase in
security incidents compared to the same months in
2009.

In conclusion, the international community as a
whole has made a great contribution to assisting
Afghanistan to stand on its own feet. The Kabul
Conference was a big step in the right direction. It is
important that the international community remain
steadfast in its commitment to supporting Afghanistan.
We welcome these efforts and are fully supportive of
them. We support the good work done by UNAMA.

