Mr. Schieb (Germany): Small arms and light
weapons fuel and sustain violent conflicts. We are
forced to witness that on a daily basis in crisis hotspots
around the globe. The illicit proliferation of small arms
and light weapons is a major cause of massive human
suffering that can take many forms: civilian casualties,
forced displacement or humanitarian crises. To reduce
this suffering, it is vital to implement a more effective
control of small arms and light weapons, embedded
into a robust framework of security sector reform and
the rule of law.

The draft resolution put forward by Lithuania and
the recent report of the Secretary-General (S/2015/289)
contain many valuable ideas and recommendations.
Germany is ready to join forces with other Member
States to put these ideas into practice. Let me highlight
a few points.

First, the mandates of United Nations missions
should include appropriate, feasible and adaptable
control elements for small arms and light weapons. We
appreciate proposals to strengthen the implementation
ofarms embargos, including those for better cooperation
among peacekeeping missions, sanctions committees
and expert panels. In this context, let me point out the
relevant results that the high-level review of United
Nations sanctions, which was sponsored by Australia,
Germany, Greece, Finland and Sweden, has identified.

Secondly, Germany has supported the United
Nations Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat and
Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects since its inception. In the
Group of States Interested in Practical Disarmament
Measures, we facilitate the dialogue between countries
requesting assistance and potential donors.

Thirdly, Germany's focus is on small arms and light
weapons activities in Africa. We chose the extended
Sahel region for a new pilot project on improving control
coordination together with the African Union, as part of
our Group of Seven (G-7) presidency. One main lesson
learned is that close cooperation and coordination
among the numerous national and international actors
are crucial.

Fourthly, the Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) represents a
major success and has the potential to exert a significant
positive influence on small arms control globally.
It complements other regimes and draws a clear link
between the international arms trade and human rights
violations. Germany supports the implementation of the
ATT with several projects worldwide, including via the
United Nations Trust Facility Supporting Cooperation
on Arms Regulation.

Fifthly and lastly, small arms control policy and
regulations need to keep track of new technological
developments. The increasing use of new materials
poses a challenge to marking, registering and tracing,
as stipulated in the International Tracing Instrument
and the Firearms Protocol, possibly demanding
clarifications or amendments.

In conclusion, we have achieved a lot, but much
more still needs to be done to put an end to the
illicit proliferation of small arms and light weapons
and its human cost. One of the several important
challenges pointed out is improved coordination
among Member States, international organizations
and non-governmental organizations. Germany pays
particular attention to this within the framework of
its current G-7 presidency and will continue to do so
during our presidency of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe next year.

