Mr. Romero-Martinez (Honduras) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
behalf of the delegation of Honduras, for the initiative
you took in holding this important debate on a subject
that concerns us all.
In keeping with the Charter of the United
Nations, the Security Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international

07-4920]

peace and security. Therefore, these topics cannot be a
matter of indifference to us, as countries of Latin
America that have also experienced conflict and that
aspire to a lasting and sustainable peace throughout the
world.

We appreciate the presence of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ban Ki-moon, this morning, and of the
Deputy Secretary-General, Mrs. Asha-Rose Migiro. We
also welcome the statements by our colleagues,
Mr. Leo Merores, on behalf of the presidency of the
General Assembly, and Mr. Leslie Kojo Christian,
acting Chairman of the Organizational Committee of
the Peacebuilding Commission. Their presence reveals
the interest and support that they attribute to initiatives
of this kind.

As stated in the report of the Secretary-General
(A/60/891), conflict prevention, which is the
responsibility of national governments, is one of the
main obligations in the Charter of United Nations.
Indeed, major advances have been achieved in terms of
standard setting and on the political and institutional
fronts. However, as has been repeated, a gap continues
to exist, at times unbridgeable and unacceptable,
between word and deed.

We all agree that prevention is one of the
cornerstones of peacekeeping. We all also agree that a
lack of justice is a decisive factor in the emergence of
conflict in any part of the world where it occurs. The
proliferation of small arms, the inappropriate
exploitation of natural resources, the lack of
appropriate and just gender equality, the indifference to
efforts to combat HIV/AIDS, ongoing violations of
human rights, the denial of education and a tremendous
lack of awareness of the value of human life constitute
severe blows to the integrity of a world that is
expanding and yet increasingly alienated. That is in
addition to the thousands of smiles on the faces of
young children whose hopes have been frustrated by
the terrifying sound of machine guns or the exchange
of their school books for the terrible weight of a
weapon.

For this reason, today's debate provides us with
an opportunity to reflect deeply on our responsibilities
within this world Organization. This debate allows us
to analyse past experiences and consider new
approaches that, as promises of good things to come,
have been submitted by different delegations today,
innovative initiatives that allow us to find solutions in

the short term, under the current circumstances. It is
now important to find the mechanisms, creativity and
political will to carry out actions that will, in the short
term, allow us to glimpse a solution that will move us
towards social and political stability on every
continent.

We commend the work of the African Union and
the recent memorandums of understanding that have
been signed. The concluding document of the African
Union Summit of January 2007, held in Addis Ababa,
stated that the maintenance of international peace and
security, as we stated at the outset, is the primary
responsibility of the United Nations Security Council.
Likewise, in the World Summit Outcome, heads of
State and Government meeting in New York
encouraged and supported the initiatives of the African
Union and of the subregional African organizations to
prevent conflict, engage in mediation or settle conflicts
with the assistance of the United Nations.

It therefore follows that Honduras and its
delegation believe that conflict prevention is vital in
any part of the world, and we support a peaceful
solution to international disputes and mandatory
compliance with the rulings of the International Court
of Justice. We believe in a volition for prevention, and
we believe that there should be a framework and a
legal commitment of national and international
guarantees, and if we create that, we will be making
progress in the genuine establishment of a vocation for
peace and universal understanding.

To conclude, we would like, on behalf of my
country, to state that we hope to see the establishment
of an appropriate mechanism for the prevention of
international conflicts.

Today's debate has been an important initiative of
focusing on the brothers in Africa, and we are sure that
in the short term, with political determination, it will
culminate in successful processes of stabilization and
restoring peace.

Today should serve as an example of deep
meditation and reflection on the thousands of conflicts
that can emerge in any corner of the hemisphere. No
region is immune.
While great inequality, injustice and, above all,
the denial of the value of human life persist, then the
threat of conflict will remain. Therefore, we must all
accept as a firm commitment that which is set out in

the Charter of the United Nations, namely "to reaffirm
faith in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and
worth of the human person, in the equal rights of men
and women and of nations large and small".

