Mr. Pemagbi (Sierra Leone): The delegation of
the Republic of Sierra Leone wishes to express its
profound appreciation to the Security Council for the
resolution that has just been adopted. We warmly
welcome the resolution, mainly because it marks
another significant phase in the United Nations
experiment in post-conflict peacebuilding, with Sierra
Leone as the laboratory. In particular, the
transformation of the United Nations Integrated Office
in Sierra Leone (UNIOSIL) into an integrated
peacebuilding outfit, the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL), on
the basis of the achievement of carefully measured
benchmarks is a reassuring indication of the country's
progress in consolidating peace and stability.

Since the armed conflict ended in 2002, Sierra
Leone has conducted two democratic presidential,
parliamentary and local council elections, and has
made considerable efforts to revive the economy, to
recover from the ravages of the war and to relaunch the
country on the path of development. We have not done
those things alone. We thank the United Nations and
our other international community partners, as well as
our bilateral supporters, for their investment in the
efforts to achieve lasting peace, to pursue the ideals of
08-44826
democracy and human rights and to lift Sierra Leone
from the bottom of the human development index.

We have made gains, but we are far from having
crossed the bridge. As an example, we need sustained
support to achieve the goals set in the Sierra Leone
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework, namely, those
related to developing the energy, justice and security
sectors, youth employment and integration, governance
and capacity-building in the public service. It is no
overstatement to suggest that a gap will appear in the
success story of the United Nations in Sierra Leone if
the goals in those priority areas, set by Sierra Leone
and the Peacebuilding Commission, are not fully
accomplished. I assure members that the Government
08-44826
and the people of Sierra Leone remain f1rmly
committed to fulfilling their own part of the agreement.

Finally, for Sierra Leone and many countries in a
similar situation and with similar experiences, the
current food and oil crises pose potential risks to peace
and security that the Council can ill afford to ignore.
Already, the crises have stretched our fragile economy
nearly to the limits of its elasticity. We need more help.

