Mr. Lofven (Sweden): I want to thank Prime
Minister Dessalegn for inviting us to this very important
event. I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
leadership, including his inspiring intervention at the
General Assembly yesterday (see A/72/PV.3) and in the
Security Council today. I thank as well Chairperson
Mahamat and Mr. Ramos-Horta for their briefings.

Few things inspire me more than the energy and
enthusiasm, knowledge, will and determination of our
younger generations. Zaida Catalan, a Swedish United
Nations expert, had all of that. She dedicated her life
to helping others. Earlier this year, at the age of 35, she
and a fellow expert, Mr. Michael Sharp of the United
States, were killed while on a United Nations mission
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Women and
men from countries all over the world have made many
sacrifices in the line of United Nations duty. Some have

lost their lives. I would like to take this opportunity,
here in the Security Council, to honour Zaida's memory
and the memory of all those who have lost their lives in
the service of peace. We also wish to offer our deepest
sympathies to their families.

The adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and of our pledge to leave no one behind
illustrates the potential of multilateral cooperation. The
joint resolutions on sustaining peace, adopted by both
the Council and the General Assembly, compel us to
prevent and address violent conflict.

Those commitments must guide our work. We
must do everything in our power to prevent outbreaks
of violence, mass atrocities and armed conflict; to
ensure that refugees do not risk their lives making
unsafe journeys; to ensure that the current levels of
humanitarian suffering - the worst humanitarian
crisis since the creation of the United Nations - are
never experienced again. That is because only people
who feel safe and secure will have faith in the future
and contribute to the advancement of their societies.
Now more than ever, we need to come together for
peaceful and sustainable development instead of going
at the task alone and increasing tensions and divisions.
Identifying, addressing and preventing the risk of
conflict must be front and centre of all our efforts.

For seven decades, United Nations peacekeeping has
been instrumental to promoting peace and providing the
conditions necessary for political solutions. We need the
political will, courage and ability to adapt peacekeeping
so that it can remain relevant and adequately resourced
and serve as a means to support political processes and
solutions. That is because achieving and sustaining
peace will always require political solutions, no matter
how effective our missions are in themselves. Let
me mention three dimensions that I believe need to
underpin United Nations peacekeeping in the twenty-
first century.

First, we must address emerging threats and tackle
the root causes of conflict. Drivers of conflicts are
often transboundary and complex. Many of the crises
that the world is facing have come about not because we
failed to see them coming - on the contrary, the signs
of exclusion, marginalization, human rights violations
and political, social and economic inequality were
there - but because we failed to respond early enough
or quickly enough. However, prevention means that
not only must we choose to heed the warnings when
they come, but that we must invest in peaceful societies
in order to avoid the drivers of conflict emerging in
the first place. We must address the toughest issues
and find responses that may need to be unique to
each setting, yet broad in scope. A renewed focus on
preventing violent conflict and sustaining peace are the
expressed priorities of the Secretary-General. We, the
Security Council, should whole-heartedly support him
in his endeavour.

Let us recognize the role of peacekeeping in that
regard. More than 118,000 military, police and civilian
personnel - Blue Berets and Blue Helmets - are
currently serving in 16 peacekeeping operations, from
Haiti in the West to Jammu and Kashmir in the East. We
thank the women and men in peacekeeping missions for
the work they do every day on our behalf. Peacekeeping
and prevention can, should and must go hand in hand.

Secondly, we need stronger partnerships. Combining
the efforts of the United Nations for peace with those
of regional and subregional organizations is crucial for
success. The partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union (AU) is of particular importance.
I commend the new partnership framework signed
earlier this year. The African Union and its member
States are assuming an ever-greater responsibility
for peace and security. If we want that partnership to
achieve its full potential, we must ensure sustainable
and predictable financing, as well as clear and clever
cooperation on the ground.

I would also like to highlight the importance of the
European Union (EU) as a committed and contributing
partner to the United Nations. The Treaty on European
Union enshrines the core principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. I hope that the partnership between
the EU and the United Nations can be developed
even further. I hope for the same with respect to the
trilateral relationship between the EU, the AU and the
United Nations.

Thirdly, United Nations peacekeeping should
evolve on the basis of evidence and lessons learned.
The experience we gain from our contributions can
help to improve and develop United Nations missions
in order to make them fit for purpose. Seventy years
of peacekeeping have taught us about the need for
the full, equal and active participation of women.
Sweden constantly seeks to increase the number of
women taking part. We have so much more to do. We
have learned about the need for realistic, flexible and
properly sequenced mandates. The United Nations
system is at its best when it works together as one in
countries in conflict, using every tool available to
ensure lasting peace.

With Sweden's largest current force contribution
to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali, we are seeking to
develop our toolbox by focusing on intelligence.
Intelligence and information are key to protecting
United Nations peacekeepers and civilians alike, and
they underpin informed and strategic decisions. We are
learning to work smartly and to pool our resources. We
have painfully learned that peacekeepers must do all
they can in order to protect civilians under imminent
threats. Additionally, we have learned that there must
be nothing but full adherence to the zero-tolerance
policy of the United Nations with respect to sexual
exploitation and abuse.

Since 1948, more than 80,000 Swedish women and
men - troops, police and civilians - have participated
in United Nations peace operations, primarily in Africa
but also in other parts of the world. They have worn
their United Nations helmets in deserts, dirt, dust and
danger. We see their Blue Berets in Cyprus and the
Congo. That has come at a price. Yet our commitment to
peacekeeping will not falter. It is not weakened despite
the tragic loss of Zaida Catalan and many others.
Rather, we owe it to them and to humankind to succeed.

I would like to conclude with the words of former
Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold, a great leader
who lost his life while serving us at the United Nations:
"Only they who keep their eyes fixed on the far horizon
will find the right road."

We all know the right road to take. As national
leaders and members of the Council, we must choose
peace, invest in peace and deliver peace.

