The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Germany and Italy in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the Council's
agenda. In conformity with the usual practice, I propose,
with the consent of the Council, to invite those
representatives to participate in the discussion, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kastrnp
(Germany) and Mr. Francese (Italy) took the seats
reserved for them at the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1999/77, which contains the text
of a letter dated 26 January 1999 from the representatives
of the Russian Federation and the United States of America
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of the statement on Kosovo, Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, issued by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Russian Federation and the Secretary of State
of the United States of America, in Moscow, on 26 January
1999.

Members of the Council have received photocopies of
a letter dated 29 January 1999 from the Permanent
Representative of the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council, transmitting the
statement of the Foreign Ministers of France, Germany,
Italy, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United States
of America (the Contact Group) following their meeting
in London on 29 January 1999. This letter will be issued
as a document of the Security Council under the symbol
S/ 1999/96.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its deep
concern at the escalating Violence in Kosovo,
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. It underlines the
risk of a further deterioration in the humanitarian
situation if steps are not taken by the parties to
reduce tensions. The Council reiterates its concern
about attacks on civilians and underlines the need
for a full and unhindered investigation of such
actions. It calls once again upon the parties to
respect fully their obligations under the relevant
resolutions and to cease immediately all acts of
violence and provocations.

"The Security Council welcomes and supports
the decisions of the Foreign Ministers of France,
Germany, Italy, the Russian Federation, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the United States of America (the Contact Group),
following their meeting in London on 29 January
1999 (S/1999/96), which aim at reaching a political
settlement between the parties and establish a
framework and timetable for that purpose. The
Council demands that the parties should accept their
responsibilities and comply fully with these
decisions and requirements, as with its relevant
resolutions.

"The Security Council reiterates its full support
for international efforts, including those of the
Contact Group and the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe Kosovo Verification Mission,
to reduce tensions in Kosovo and facilitate a
political settlement on the basis of substantial
autonomy and equality for all citizens and ethnic
communities in Kosovo and the recognition of the
legitimate rights of the Kosovo Albanians and other
communities in Kosovo. It reaffirms its commitment
 

to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.

"The Security Council will follow the
negotiations closely and would welcome members of
the Contact Group keeping it informed about the
progress reached therein.

"The Security Council will remain actively seized
of the matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1999/5.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 10.55 pm.

