Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank you, Sir, for convening
today's debate and to commend the excellent work done
by France during its presidency of the Security Council.

Portugal fully supports the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and wishes to make some
additional comments in its national capacity.

Collective reflection on how to better combat
and prevent the financing of terrorism is essential.
Terrorists and their supporters constantly seek new
ways to finance their activities and bypass existing
mechanisms. Our response must therefore be as
agile as the evolution of the threat. We must adapt
instruments and measures to prevent terrorist groups
from engaging in criminal activities. In that regard, we
commend the work of the Security Council in recent
years, which has laid the foundation for a normative
framework and created an environment conducive to
stronger international cooperation. I would also like to
highlight the deepening of that normative framework
through resolution 2462 (2019), adopted today, which
we co-sponsored.

Let me also commend the Secretary-General for
his efforts to strengthen the counter-terrorism capacity
of the United Nations. The Office of Counter-Terrorism
plays a pivotal role in the implementation of the overall
strategy, in particular by strengthening the capacities
of Member States in that context.

Portugal has a strong and effective regime in place
for combating terrorist financing, in line with the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force.
My country is also active within the European Union
in its efforts to improve the collective response to this
constant threat. The operational authorities responsible
for terrorist-financing investigations have access
to a wide range of financial intelligence, including
comprehensive national databases, and cooperate
proactively with each other and with their foreign
counterparts for investigative purposes. Portugal has
adopted all the relevant international legal instruments
on terrorism, with the exception of the Convention
on the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Relating to
International Civil Aviation, whose ratification process
is ongoing.

In conclusion, terrorism is a serious and complex
threat. To end it, we must work together in a flexible and
coordinated manner. Portugal undertakes to support
measures to strengthen international cooperation
in that regard, including the effective prevention of
its financing.

