Mr. Burian (Slovakia): I would like at the outset
to thank Mr. Tom Koenigs, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing
and observations. We wish him all the best in his
demanding mission. We would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his report on the situation in
Afghanistan and its implications for peace and security.
The report provides a clear and objective analysis of
the current situation in Afghanistan, and we share the
view of the Secretary-General on the progress made so
far, as well as on the serious challenges that remain to
be tackled.

Slovakia fully associates itself with the statement
to be delivered later by the Permanent Representative
of Austria on behalf of the European Union. That is
why I will limit my statement to a few comments.

We believe that the launch of the Afghanistan
Compact represents a genuine milestone in the Afghan
reconstruction process, in which the United Nations
has a central and impartial coordinating role. The
Compact provides a solid framework for the next stage
of the transition of Afghanistan with Afghan ownership
and international support establishing the conditions in
which the Afghan people can enjoy representative
government and self-sustaining peace and
development.

We agree that the tasks in all four key areas and
the timelines for their implementation set out in the
Compact are very demanding. At the same time, we are
convinced that they are realistic and achievable,
provided that both sides fulfil their commitments. It is
necessary to make sure, however, that measures in all
key areas - security, governance, development and
eliminating the narcotics industry - are implemented
in a coordinated manner and that meaningful progress
is achieved in each of those areas. In this context, we
welcome the decision to establish a Joint Coordination
and Monitoring Board, co-chaired by a senior Afghan
Government official and by the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, with the purpose of ensuring
coordination and coherence of the implementation of
the Compact. In this connection, I would like to ask
Mr. Koenigs to share with us a few more details on the
composition of the Board and a prospective date when
it will be fully operational.

Security remains essential for long-term
reconstruction and development in Afghanistan. We
note with satisfaction that progress has been achieved
in security sector reform. However, we are concerned
about the numerous recent acts of extremist violence
and terrorism, which remind us that Afghanistan
remains a very insecure place. The international
community must provide all necessary assistance to the
Afghan people and Government to extend and exercise
authority across the country and create the environment
required to enable reconstruction and nation-building
activities to continue.

In this regard, we welcome and commend the
decision to strengthen the NATO-led International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) and to expand the
areas of its operation to the south and east of the
country. We believe that ISAF will also provide crucial
support and assistance in the security sector reform
process, including the disarmament and demobilization
of illegal armed groups.

Last but not least, we believe that the promotion
of human rights, with special attention being paid to
the rights of women and children, should be a very
important cross-cutting priority in the process of
transformation. In this regard, we agree with the
Secretary-General that a measure of success in meeting
Afghanistan challenges will also depend on the extent
to which respect for human rights is institutionalized.

The United Nations has a vital role to play in
supporting the Afghan Government. We attach the
utmost importance to the work of the United Nations
Mission of Assistance in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and
other agencies of the United Nations, and we believe
that UNAMA should continue to play an important role
in the foreseeable future. We support the extension of
its adjusted mandate, as proposed in the Secretary-
General's report, and we agree with Mr. Koenigs that,
when we consider UNAMA's field expansion and
presence in the provinces, special attention needs to be
placed on security measures and resources for United
Nations personnel.

Slovakia strongly supports the political and
economic transition of Afghanistan. We will continue
to contribute to the transformation and stabilization
processes through maintaining our peacekeepers in the
country and providing assistance to the Afghan police
and army. Financial resources for official development
assistance projects have been approved for 2006, and
Afghanistan remains one of our priority countries.

