Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): As we
inevitably move towards the expiry of the mandate
of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons-United Nations Joint Investigative Mechanism
(JIM), the Security Council - our Council - which
is responsible, pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations, for the maintenance of international peace
and security, is unfortunately once again divided on
the critical issue of chemical weapons use in Syria.
Everybody around this table agrees about the relevance
of the Mechanism, not only with respect to deterrence
but also to dealing with ongoing allegations about the
use of chemical weapons in Syria, in a context where
there is a risk of chemical terrorism.

The delegation of Senegal voted in favour of
the draft resolution submitted by the United States
(S/2017/962), bearing in mind the indescribable
suffering of the Syrian population. They have been the
victim of all kinds of atrocities, including painful, slow
deaths as a result of burns from chemical weapons.
We did so as well because we are persuaded of the
utility of the Joint Investigative Mechanism tasked
with implementing, in an independent, impartial and
objective manner, the mandate conferred on it by 2235
(2015), a mandate unanimously renewed by resolution
2319 (2016). That is why we welcome the openness and
spirit of compromise demonstrated by the United States
as the penholder, including by taking into account
the legitimate concerns of many Member States with
respect to improving the methodology of the work of
the Mechanism so as to ensure the quality of its reports.

Despite the outcome of this vote and the deeply
diverging views in the Council on the seventh report
(S/2017/904, annex) my delegation is of the view that
it is still possible for us to arrive at a consensus, at
the unanimity that prevailed at the establishment of
the Mechanism and to arrive at its renewal. We also
welcome the reaffirmation by the American delegation
to persevere in its efforts along those lines. We invite all
other members to pursue those efforts, to demonstrate
compromise to preserve the Mechanism, which for us is
an important component of the global non-proliferation
architecture. Hence, my delegation reiterates its
complete support for the Joint Investigative Mechanism,
which has made commendable efforts, pursuant to the
relevant Council resolutions, to establish responsibility
for the unacceptable use of chemical substances as
weapons against the civilian population in the Syrian
Arab Republic.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates the imperative
of arriving at a negotiated political solution to the Syrian
crisis on the basis of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and resolution 2354 (2017).

