Mr. Ruzieka (Slovakia): We are definitely not
living in an easy time. Even the summers are not as
they used to be.

Allow me to express our appreciation to you, Sir,
for organizing this important open debate on conflict
prevention. Its importance is reflected in the Council's
adoption of resolution 2171 (2014), on the topic under
discussion. We would like also to thank the Secretary-
General and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for their briefings and the work that they
do.

Slovakia fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. In addition, I would like to make a
few remarks in my national capacity.

Efforts aimed at preventing conflicts right from
their inception have long been an integral part of the
Organization's efforts in securing peace and stability.
Nevertheless, the need for effective prevention of
violent conflicts has been steadily gaining in relevance,
especially since the end of the Cold War. Cases such
as the genocides in Rwanda, the ethnic wars in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the State failure in Somalia point
to the need to find the means to prevent conflicts from
escalating into war, human disasters and regional
instability. Slovakia attaches great importance to
conflict prevention processes within and outside the
United Nations framework.

The causes of conflict and the processes of peace
are complex - political, economic, social, territorial,
historical, ethnic and religious. There are also new
causes of conflict, such as terrorism and organized
crime, both of which have conflict in their nature and
are difficult or even impossible to mediate or negotiate
beforehand. But certain signs are almost always there.
It is up to the parties, countries, nations and people
at risk to utilize all possibilities and to mobilize the
international community to take preventive action.

Today we have various useful tools that can assist
in the effective prevention of conflict. Among them,
I will mention two - the 2011 report on the theme
"Preventive diplomacy: delivering results" (S/2011/552)
and General Assembly resolution 65/283, entitled
"Strengthening the role of mediation in peace settlement
of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution".

The United Nations is not alone in advancing
preventive action. Regional bodies have also
increasingly taken up their own initiatives for preventive
diplomacy and conflict prevention. There may possibly
be no regional body that has no programme for conflict
prevention. What we have to do and what we need is
closer cooperation and interaction on this issue between
the United Nations and regional organizations.

Prevention cannot be entirely successful without
addressing the root causes of conflict as well as its
enabling and facilitating factors. Credible and in-depth
security sector reform (SSR) has been proven to
play a crucial and decisive role in reducing or even
eliminating conditions facilitating conflict outbreak.
SSR contributes to conflict prevention in a direct and
indirect way. Transparent oversight and uniform control
over all forces and factions directly prevent the renewal
of national as well as inter-State conflicts through
spreading trust and predictability. Security sector
reform may not be a primary preventive instrument,
but it definitely is a preventive tool to create conditions
to avoid a relapse of the conflict, especially if duly
executed in its complexity, starting with security,
democratic governance and the rule of law and followed
by development activities.

Since poverty, unemployment and poor living
standards are among the main causes of conflict,
timely and appropriate investment in sustainable
development - inter alia, but not exclusively, to the
eradication of poverty, programmes for inclusive
education and activities for employment, especially for
young people - are crucial for long-term investment in
sustainable peace in the conflict area.

We also have other tools. The concept of the
responsibility to protect, especially its first preventive
pillar, is another tool for preventing mass atrocities. I
would also like to highlight the important role of the
International Criminal Court. It serves not only as an
independent and impartial judicial body, prosecuting in
those situations where a national jurisdiction is unable
or unwilling to address the issue of accountability, but
its authority also has a preventive impact.

In conclusion, some studies consider following
principles to increase the understanding of conflict
dynamics aligned with local specifics to serve conflict
prevention efforts. We may wish to look at these.

First, share, but do not align conflict analyses.

Secondly, align conflict analyses with local
understandings and terminology.

Thirdly, research drivers of peace separately from
drivers of violence.

Fourthly, study the micro-determinants of success
in preventive action.

Fifthly, begin a dialogue on the coordination
of preventive actions on the regional level and on an
internal level with the non-governmental organizations.

Lastly, ensure sufficient and flexible financing
for preventive action. The ratio is 1:60 - $1 for peace
protection, $60 for peace restoration.

In conclusion, let me assure the Council that
Slovakia will fully contribute to the implementation
of the commitments set out in the resolution adopted
today.

