Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to associate the views of my
delegation with the contents of the letter (8/2012/257)
sent yesterday by the Chairman of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries relating to the agenda item for
today's debate.

In that regard, I wish to reiterate that we believe
that the Security Council must stay within its mandate
as articulated in Article 24 of the Charter of the United
Nations and not delve into discussions that fall
primarily within the functions and competencies of the
General Assembly and other relevant organs of the
United Nations.

The item before us today, and its related issues, is
one of the most daunting challenges facing the
international community today. Lax border controls
pose major risks to the security and socio-economic
state of all of our nations. The pervasive nature of
transnational crime, including drug trafficking,
terrorism, human trafficking, the illicit trade in arms
and other forms of transnational crime, has made it an
international problem that can be curbed only through
collective and concerted efforts based on the principle
of shared responsibility.

In most of the Council's deliberations on border-
related issues, as manifested in a number of resolutions
and presidential statements adopted over the past
couple of years, there are references to the issue of
drug trafficking that have focused specifically on the
connection between drug production and security and
terrorism and organized crime. In those decisions the
Council recognized the need for the international
community to come up with an integrated and balanced
approach for addressing those problems based on the
principle of responsibility.
The Islamic Republic of Iran, because of its
location in a region of tension and conflict that is also
considered a meeting point for illegal activities such as
illicit trading in small arms, organized crime, terrorism
and drug trafficking, has incurred much damage
resulting from such activities. However, Iran has
spared no effort to combat such illegal activities,
including preventing and combating the illicit trade in
small arms and human trafficking and has made
significant progress in that regard.

On the issue of controlling narcotic drugs, over
the years the Islamic Republic of Iran has maintained
many tens of thousands of military and disciplinary
forces mobilized along its long border areas and has
allocated billions of dollars to the fight against narcotic
drugs. Iran has also strived to reinforce and reorganize
the fortifications, facilities and intelligence control
systems of its transit and border checkpoints in order to
prevent the entry of trafficking caravans into the
country.

All of those measures have resulted in the
confiscation of massive volumes of various types of
narcotics that have set records among opium and
heroin seizures worldwide. We have shouldered a great
burden, largely to deal with that threat. Given the fact
that the menace serves to create a breeding ground for
terrorism, Iran's efforts in that regard have
undoubtedly also made a fundamental contribution to
the global fight against terrorism.

On the issue of small arms and light weapons, we
believe that States bear the primary responsibility for
preventing and combating the illicit trade in small arms
and light weapons in all of its aspects, including
identifying and solving the problems associated with
that trade. Taking that into account, we have developed
and established a comprehensive set of laws,
regulations, guidelines and directives in the Islamic
Republic of Iran that enable relevant national
authorities and agencies to prevent and combat the
illicit trade in small arms and light weapons and its
associated problems. Based on existing regulations, the
illicit manufacturing, possession, storage or trade of
any small arms is considered an offence and all
individuals involved in such activities shall be arrested
and punished accordingly.

Trafficking in persons, especially women and
children, is one of the most serious manifestations of
transnational organized crime. It is an affront to human
12-31963
dignity and a modern form of slavery. Active
cooperation at the global level should be developed in
order to efficiently target the demand side of the
problem. The Islamic Republic of Iran, as a transit
country, has also taken serious steps in implementing
several projects on enhancing border control in order to
better fight transitional organized crime, including
human trafficking.

Before I conclude, let me emphasize the need for
a review of the relevant regional and international
policies and programmes in order to overcome
shortfalls and effectively counter such global problems
as illicit cross-border trafficking and movement. The
Islamic Republic of Iran emphasizes once more its
strong determination to combat those global problems
and expresses its readiness to cooperate with other
partners to resolve decisively such problems.

Finally, with regard to the baseless allegations
made this morning against my country, in particular by
the representative of the Israeli regime, I would like to
mention that the representative of the Israeli regime, in
line with the regime's warmongering and propaganda
campaign against my country, has once again used this
body to level baseless allegations against Iran.

That regime, with a history of criminal behaviour,
referred to arms smuggling from Iran while, with its
brutal, killing apparatus, that regime has embarked on
many criminal acts, including State terrorism. A vivid
example of that is the assassination of Iran's nuclear
scientists.

The Israeli regime's baseless allegations against
the peaceful nature of our nuclear activities is another
attempt to divert the attention of world public opinion
from its clandestine development and unlawful
possession of hundreds of nuclear warheads, nuclear
weapons arsenal and other weapons of mass
destruction, which threaten the region as a whole and
act against international peace and security.

I therefore do not deem it necessary to respond to
those absurd allegations.

