Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I would
like thank the United States presidency for convening
today's open debate on children in armed conflict. We
also wish to thank all of the briefers for their extensive
and important briefings.

Armed conflicts continue to inflict violence and
deprivations of many kinds upon children. Given
their lack of capacity to make choices, be it social or
political, children are increasingly exposed to various
threats, such as being orphaned and suffering injuries
and disabilities. Unfortunately, traumatic and violent
experiences are not easy to forget and have long-term
implications for affected children and societies at large.

My country remains concerned about the
negative impact of armed conflicts on children, and
strongly condemns all violations of international law,
international humanitarian law and human rights
law committed against them. The emergence of high
numbers of refugees and internally displaced persons
(IDPs) as a result of the numerous conflicts and wars,
many of whom are children, are a daily reminder of the
gross violations committed against children. However,
where the right of return continues to be challenged
and impunity prevails, reconciliation and sustainable
peace seem hardly to be attainable. Mechanisms of
reconciliation and transitional justice should safeguard
the rights to restitution, compensation, rehabilitation
and reparations.

We cannot but agree with the View that children
have no place in war under any circumstances and that
the best way to protect is to prevent. Protection efforts
and related international support policies must be free
of selectivity and politically motivated approaches
and preferences. In that regard, we appreciate the
critical role played by the Security Council and the
related mandate-holding bodies in bringing the issue
of children's rights and protection to the forefront of
international development and the humanitarian agenda.
In that connection, I would also like to commend the
Children, Not Soldiers campaign.
The work ofthe Security Council, as well as various
initiatives pursued by the United Nations system, has
been instrumental in making a change on the ground.
Yet serious challenges remain. In the context of the
protection of children's rights, particular consideration
should be granted to internally displaced children in
terms of ensuring their inalienable right to return and
to the implications of illegal policies and practices in
situations of foreign occupation. We commend the
attention paid to the situation of IDPs, particularly child
IDPs, by Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, during her recent address to the Human
Rights Counciljust a week ago.

Children who have become hostages or are reported
missing pose another challenge deserving urgent action.
The resolution of that issue should not be contingent
upon the political settlement of conflicts.

Ensuring the protection and sustainability of war-
affected children should be a high priority for the entire
United Nations system, both during and after armed
conflict. It is important to develop and support policies
and programmes that provide war-affected children with
access to the quality education and training in technical
skills that will enable them to pursue productive and
sustainable livelihoods.

In conclusion, I express our support for the
Secretary-General's recommendations contained in his
report on children and armed conflict (S/2014/339).

