Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like to welcome the Secretary-General
and to thank him for his statement.

My delegation voted in favour of the present
resolution, convinced that there must be convergence
of all international efforts if stability is to be achieved
in Iraq for the benefit of its people, who have suffered
greatly in the past and who continue to suffer from
daily acts of violence, which have repercussions on the
stability of the entire region.

Indeed, the State of Qatar has a sincere desire for
peace and prosperity in Iraq, given our geographic
location and the historical social ties linking us to that
fraternal country. That is why we stress the need to
implement this resolution in close cooperation with
Iraq and without undermining the mandate of the
coalition forces in Iraq, which have the responsibility
to ensure peace and stability in the country in
accordance with international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention, relative to the protection of
civilian persons in time of war.

We attach particular importance to the need not to
endanger the civilian population during military or
other types of operations so that the Iraq people do not
once again find themselves caught between terrorist
acts and counter-offensive operations. The
international community must understand that it is vital
to rebuild Iraq and its institutions, to resolve its
problems and to support its national sovereignty,
without interference in its internal affairs.

Since this is the last Council meeting to be
attended by our colleague Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones
Parry, I should like to take this opportunity to wish him
every success in the future. My delegation was
delighted to be able to work with him. He has always
been able to address issues in a professional and
balanced manner in order to achieve consensus.

I also wish to welcome Ambassador J ean-Maurice
Ripert, Permanent Representative of France. We are
certain that we will be able to work with him in fruitful
cooperation, and we wish him every success in his new
duties.

