Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Just over a week
ago, North Korea sent a brazen message ofprovocation,
a message of belligerence - a sixth nuclear test,
carried out once again in clear contempt for the
Security Council, the region and the international
community. Today, through the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2375 (2017), we have sent a message of
our own in response. Through this vote we have made
clear that we will not stand idly by in the face of such
aggression, that we will not be intimidated or cowed,
that we will match North Korean provocations with
clear, targeted consequences.

Today we have enacted strategic measures that,
together with existing obligations, add up to the most
stringent United Nations sanctions regime placed on
any nation in the twenty-first century. We have enacted
measures today that show our determination to act. This
resolution does three big things. First, it will curtail gas,
petrol and oil imports. Secondly, it will ban all textile
exports, thereby taking hundreds of millions of dollars
from revenues that the North Korean regime uses to
fund its nuclear and missile programmes. And, thirdly,
it will end future work authorizations of North Korean
overseas labourers, stopping a sickening industry built
on modern slavery and used to divert funds to the
regime. Therefore, make no mistake: we are tightening
the screw, and we stand ready to tighten it further. Until
the regime sees that diplomacy, not duplicity, is the
way forward, we must use all of our diplomatic tools to
bring pressure to bear on Pyongyang.

Some observers doubted that the Council would be
willing or able to react speedily or in unison, or even
at all, to this new provocation. With this resolution
we have shown that we are united in condemning this
illegal and reckless act, and that we are determined
that the North Korean regime change course. The
unanimous agreement today of the States around this
table is a powerful step. We now call on all States to
redouble their sanctions implementation, while taking
note of the decisions that we have made today under
international law.

North Korea is engaged in a dangerous policy of
provocation. Ourrole as a Council, and as aninternational
community, is to constrain them so that they change
course. Sanctions are a vital part of that effort. It is the
regime that bears full responsibility for the measures
that we have enacted today. It is their continued, illegal
and aggressive actions that have brought us here. Such
actions are in no way a proportionate response to the
legitimate defensive military exercises of South Korea
and the United States.

There is a way out. Diplomacy can end this
crisis. First, North Korea must change its reckless
course. There must be an end to the tests, an end to
the provocations. Until North Korea changes course,
we must maintain the maximum pressure possible.
Through this resolution today, we have done just
that. The onus now falls on Pyongyang to do the right
thing - to step back from confrontation and to step
towards de-escalation.

