Mr. Valdes (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): Like
previous speakers, I should like to express the
condolences of Chile to the Governments of India and
Pakistan for the tragedy that has affected so many of
their citizens.

I should like to thank you, Mr. President, on
behalf of the delegation of Chile for convening this
meeting to consider the report of the Secretary-General
on the situation in East Timor and to give our views on
the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET).
Ensuring the success of the United Nations mission in
East Timor is the collective responsibility of the
international community, and that is why this open
debate is so important. We must also take note of last
Monday's meeting between the members of the
Council and the countries, including Chile, that
contribute troops to UNTAET. That exchange of views
led to conclusions that will prove very useful for the
Council when it must make decisions.

Chile takes particular pride in being associated,
as a contributor to UNTAET, with the United Nations
work in reconstructing East Timor. Chile's
participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations is a key element of our foreign policy, and
this was reaffirmed by the visit to East Timor last
November of Mr. Ricardo Lagos, President of the
Republic of Chile. I should like to pay special tribute to
the staff of the United Nations in Timor, under the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General Sergio Vieira de
Mello, for their selfless dedication and admirable work.
I should also like to welcome the presence in our midst
of Jose' Ramos-Horta, one of the most distinguished
leaders of the independence movement of his country,
who has the unique task of conducting the process of
nation-building and transfer of power to the Timores,
for which the United Nations is providing solid
support.

We studied with great interest the report
submitted by the Secretary-General, and we fully share
its conclusions. The situation in East Timor and the
progress of the work of UNTAET must be seen from
the perspective of the magnitude of the task that was
entrusted to this Organization. Almost two years ago,
the United Nations was required to undertake, together
with the leaders and people of East Timor, the
extraordinary task of building a nation-State - a task
that is not normally among the responsibilities of any
multilateral institution and for which there were no
precedents or comparable situations in the history of
the Organization. This task, begun under extremely
adverse conditions following a true tragedy for the
people of Timor, had to be taken on, given the
prevailing risks to regional peace and security.

The magnitude of the tasks was outlined this
morning by Sergio Vieira de Mello. Among them, the
establishment of the Truth Reception and
Reconciliation Commission, which is scheduled to
begin its work in the coming months, seems to us to be
particularly relevant. This marks a very significant
development in the field of human rights in that
country; it is an inevitable requirement of any
democratic transition. Chile can attest to the fact that
reconciliation will not be sure, nor peace real, without
true justice in the area of human rights.

At the same time, we have taken note of the
continuing areas of concern, particularly the general
situation with regard to security and to refugees, and
the militia problem. We are reassured by the positive
signs that we see in the bilateral relations between East
Timor and Indonesia, which are essential for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1319
(2000) on the collection of weapons and the
elimination of the militias' ability to make threats. In
this regard, we also welcome the improvements in the
implementation ofthe recommendations of the Security
Council mission relating to the expansion of the
opportunities for bilateral consultation between the two
countries. Furthermore, account must be taken of the
relations between UNTAET and the population and the
local authorities so that the necessary measures can be
taken to ensure that they remain as good as possible.
As we have heard this afternoon, this will be crucial to
the transition and the successful conclusion of the
democratic elections.

As regards the future, the main question of
concern today is to determine whether the main
objective of UNTAET has been accomplished, in
accordance with resolution 1272 (1999). The view of
Chile, based on the Secretary-General's report, is that
this has yet to happen and that it is therefore essential
to renew the mission's mandate, at least for the rest of
the year. We fully share the View expressed this
morning by the President ofthe General Assembly that
East Timor will require the presence and assistance of
the international community for a long time, be it in
relation to peacekeeping or to national reconstruction.

The opinion expressed by some in favour of a
rationalization of UNTAET and a reduction of its
peacekeeping resources could be very premature. In
View of the complexity of the current security situation
in Timor and the time needed to organize the East
Timorese defence forces, we feel that the continuation
of the Security Council's role is fully justified. Any
change or withdrawal of its current functions would, in
our view, be a serious mistake.

At the appropriate time, moreover, we will have
to deal with the question ofthe support that East Timor
will require after its independence, which further
underscores the need for the Security Council to
continue to be seized of the matter. We hope that the
Council will approve the recommendations contained
in the report, particularly the extension of UNTAET's
mandate until the end of the year.

