Mr. Manjeev Singh Puri (India): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing today's debate on the
protection of civilians, which in our view is very
timely and relevant. I would also like to thank the

Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO),
Under-Secretary-General Valerie Amos and Assistant
Secretary-General Ivan Simonovie for their useful
briefings and statements. Indeed, in my opinion, the
very presence here of representatives of those three
organs of the United Nations allows us to place our
discussions and debate in the right context.

It has been India's consistent view that the
foremost responsibility of every State is to protect its
population. In fact, one of the cardinal provisions of
the Indian Constitution is that the right to life is one of
the fundamental rights of all citizens, from which no
derogation is permissible, even in times of emergency.

India has demonstrated its commitment to that
right at the international level as well. India has
contributed more troops to peacekeeping operations
than any other Member State. Our troops and police
officers have been at the forefront of turning this
Council's word into deed. They were protecting
civilians long before the term became common usage
in the Council. More than five decades ago, Indian
soldiers defended the civilians of the Congo as part of
the United Nations mission. Our contribution continues
today in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
other United Nations missions.

We have remained at the cutting edge of many
United Nations operations in places where civilians
were under threat. Today, we have a female formed
police unit ~ the first such formation composed
entirely of women - in the United Nations Mission in
Liberia. Thus, India brings to this table a quantum of
experience in actually protecting civilians in
peacekeeping missions that is unique in its relevance,
variety and depth.

We have also participated actively in the
normative debates of the Council and the General
Assembly on protection issues. In that tradition of
constructive engagement, a seminar held recently in
New Delhi broke new ground in drawing from the
operational experience of peacekeepers to further
evolve that agenda. 1 am very glad to see that our
colleague from DPKO was present in New Delhi at the
time of that seminar.
An enormous amount of the Council's attention
has been focused recently on protection issues, with the
Council adopting a number of resolutions and
statements on the protection of civilians and related
issues of violence against women and children in

situations of armed conflict. In bringing those
protection issues within the purview of matters relating
to international peace and security, the Council has
placed them squarely at the centre of the conflict
resolution and peacekeeping agenda. That intense focus
has, in some situations of conflict, shifted attention
from the tried and tested methods of mediation and
negotiation that are the staples of conflict resolution.

When applied as a basis for Security Council
action, efforts to protect civilians must respect the
fundamental aspects of the United Nations Charter,
including the sovereignty and integrity of Member
States. Any decision to intervene that is associated with
political motives detracts from that noble principle and
needs to be avoided. Also, the response of the
international community must be proportional to the
threat, involve the use of appropriate methods and
make adequate resources available.

It is important that the principle of protecting
civilians be applied in a uniform manner. In the case of
conflict, all sides need to abide by it. We must also be
clear that the United Nations has a mandate to
intervene only in situations where there is a threat to
international peace and security. Any decision of the
Council to intervene must be based on credible and
verifiable information, which in turn requires much
greater information flows when the Council is seized
of a situation.

In that context, I cannot but ask the question:
Quis custodiet ipsos custodies? Who watches the
guardians? There is a considerable sense of unease
about the manner in which the humanitarian imperative
of protecting civilians has been interpreted for actual
action on the ground.

Let me now turn to the question of protecting
civilians in peacekeeping missions. In the View of my
delegation, the central issue in the implementation of
the protection agenda is the question of resources. The
resources that are being made available to current
peacekeeping operations so as to fulfil those ambitious
objectives are simply insufficient.

It is also important that expectations regarding
the work of peacekeepers be realistic and take into
consideration the multiple resource constraints under
which they function. The United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, for example, has one peacekeeper for every
1,500 square kilometres. The Mission lacks enabling
assets to allow the existing complement of
peacekeepers to move and deploy in the areas of
operation. The manner in which those Missions are
being made to operate on shoestring budgets and being
constantly asked to do more with less does not augur
well. All efforts of the Council to further the protection
agenda will come to naught if that resource gap is not
addressed.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to stress
that force is not the only way of protecting civilians. It
should be only the measure of last resort and be used
only when all diplomatic and political efforts fail.
There can be no substitute for national will and
national efforts in creating an environment where
civilians are secure. The efforts of the Council and the
international community must be directed at assisting
national authorities in developing those capabilities.
That is the only sustainable method of protecting
civilians because, as I said at the beginning of my
statement, the foremost responsibility of every State is
to protect its civilians.

