Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
first of all like to congratulate you, Sir, and to express
our best wishes for the success of your presidency. I
also wish to thank Ambassador ngu and her entire
team for their effective presidency in the month of
October. I would also like to thank Prosecutor Luis
Moreno-Ocampo for his report and briefing today. I
should like to make three comments.

First, on resolution 1970 (2011), since
mid-February of this year, in the face of the outrages
committed by Libya's leaders, the League of Arab
States, the African Union and the Secretary-General of
the Organization of the Islamic Cooperation
condemned the serious violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law. The Security Council
itself, on 26 February, responded swiftly by
unanimously adopting resolution 1970 (2011), which
referred the situation in Libya to the Prosecutor of the

International Criminal Court (ICC). When a
Government attacks its own citizens, rather than
protecting them, and when the crimes committed are an
affront to the conscience of humankind and affect the
stability of an entire region, the international
community has the responsibility to intervene to
protect civilians. That is what we did in Libya with
resolution 1970 (2011). The imperative of ensuring
justice, underscored in the resolution, continues to be
valid today. That is true in the case of Libya just as it is
for all countries in which civilians' aspiration to
respect for their freedom and fundamental rights is met
with repression on the part of authorities who ignore
the calls of the international community. As the
violence in Syria and Yemen continues, the Council
must reiterate its message as to the primacy of law and
the need to combat impunity in all cases, just as it did
following the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire.

Secondly, with regard to the work of the
International Criminal Court, following the adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), the Prosecutor mobilized his
entire team and was able to complete his investigation
in three months. On 16 May, he issued a request for
three arrest warrants - against Muammar Al-Qadhafi,
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi. On
27 June, the Court's judges decided to issue those
warrants for murder and persecution as crimes against
humanity. The warrants detail the systematic attacks
against civilians, the methods employed to crush any
form of opposition - forced disappearance, arbitrary
detention, torture - as well as the role of Muammar
Al-Qadhafi and his circle in organizing the violence.
The International Criminal Court, the sole permanent
court of a universal character, was able to gather legal
evidence of those acts even as the violence was taking
place. It has therefore demonstrated its ability to react
swiftly, thereby putting pressure on those organizing
and carrying out the crimes. That is a message we
should bear in mind. When faced with the commission
of atrocities, the international community and the
Security Council can turn to an impartial and
independent judicial institution that can begin to work
immediately to identify those primarily responsible for
committing crimes. International justice henceforth has
a role to play in deterring crimes both during and after
a crisis. After the Libyan example, inaction is more
inexcusable and intolerable than ever.
Lastly, with regard to the process, the judicial
process is now under way and must follow its course.

Investigations must be carried out if necessary. I am
thinking in particular about investigations concerning
sexual violence, to which the Prosecutor referred. Also,
as he explained, the ICC will pursue only the
principals, those who organized and ordered crimes.
The first of those, Muammar Al-Qadhafi, has been
killed and will not be able to answer to justice. But the
other two individuals who have been indicted, Saif
Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Abdullah Al-Senussi, must
turn themselves in or be arrested.

We welcome the good cooperation and dialogue
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the Libyan
authorities. In the light of the scale of the crimes
committed and given the risk of violence still affecting
the country, and to meet the aspirations of the whole of
Libyan society for more law and justice,
complementarity between the actions of the ICC and
those of the new Libyan authorities will be essential.

France welcomes the fact that, in accordance with
resolution 1970 (2011), States and regional
organizations have offered the Prosecutor their full
cooperation, thus enabling his investigation to progress
rapidly. Today, two arrest warrants remain outstanding.
The Council must continue to track the implementation
of those warrants, and the entire international
community - including, if necessary, States in the
region - must assist the authorities and the Prosecutor
to ensure that the two individuals concerned finally
answer for their acts before the law.

