Mr. Inguanez (Malta): I wish to thank the
delegation of Peru, in its capacity as the President of the
Security Council, for convening today's open debate on
the situation in the Middle East, including the question
of Palestine. I also wish to join others in thanking the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
Mr. Mladenov, for his comprehensive briefing.

Malta aligns itself with the statement delivered by
the observer of the European Union and would like to
add a few elements in its national capacity.

Malta notes with deep concern the recent
developments throughout the Middle East, which
continue to propagate instability and insecurity in
the region and beyond. There is an urgent need for
de-escalation, be it between the Israelis and Palestinians
or in Syria. We call on all sides to avoid actions that
undermine the prospects for peace. In the context of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, I reiterate that Malta's
position is quintessentially pro-peace. Prospects for
a two-State solution are in danger, and it is our firm
conviction that the international community is duty-
bound to ensure that they be safeguarded.

Lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians
can be based only on a two-State solution, including
addressing the needs and aspirations of both sides as
well as all permanent status issues. Malta reiterates
that the status of Jerusalem is a final-status issue,
and maintaining international consensus on the issue
is of the utmost importance. Malta also opposes
further settlement activity, as settlements are illegal
under international law and are an obstacle to peace.
In addition, Malta condemns all acts of violence by
all sides, especially against civilians and minors, and
urges an end to incitement and provocations, which
serve only to widen the gap between the two sides.
Furthermore, the freedom of expression and peaceful
assembly should be respected by all.

Intra-Palestinian reconciliation is one of the
key elements towards reaching a two-State solution.
Therefore, Malta encourages the Palestinians to
persevere on that track. We certainly commend Egypt
for its mediation role. Intra-Palestinian reconciliation
is also an important element to improve the dramatic
humanitarian situation in Gaza. In that regard, Malta
also advocates an end to the closure of Gaza, while
addressing the security concerns of Israel. I take this
opportunity to reiterate Malta's full support to the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East. It is as crucial for Palestinian
refugees as it is for the stability of the whole region.
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is in dire need of
a political horizon and the resumption of dialogue.
Confidence needs to be restored and trust rebuilt.
That is easier said than done, but forgiveness and
restraint - in words and in action - remain crucial
as the underlying basis for rebuilding confidence and
trust. The international community and multilateralism
have an important role to play in establishing a political
horizon and in facilitating the resumption of dialogue
between the two sides.

I also take this opportunity to underscore the
importance that Malta attaches to the resumption of
the United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva,
as emphasized yesterday at the second Brussels
conference on supporting the future of Syria and the
region. There can be no military solution in Syria. Only
a political solution in line with resolution 2254 (2015)
and the 2012 Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex)
can yield a sustainable solution for Syria and for peace
in the region.

