Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): We thank the
delegation of Jordan for organizing this timely debate
and the briefers for their presentations.

Radicalization and violent extremism pose an
increasingly pressing threat to international peace and
security. Today, foreign terrorist fighters have come
from some 100 States, as recruitment networks expand
their global reach. Young people fall into the trap of
those networks for multiple reasons, as diverse as the
individuals themselves. Identity issues, peer pressure,
online and personal connections, the failure to see the
distinction between the violent world of Video gaming
and reality, alienation, social exclusion, a misguided
search for the meaning of life, and perceived injustices
in the world - many things can trigger radicalization.
Many have little if any idea about the faith that they
claim to defend.

Some are abducted, forcefully converted and
forced to fight, like the Yazidi victims of Daesh or
the girls, some as young as eight years old, turned by
Boko Haram into suicide attackers in Nigeria. Some
are pushed onto the deadly path by circumstances
of extreme desperation and hopelessness. Some are
radicalized in prisons. Many even come from normal
families and safe environments where they enjoyed all
the comforts of life and opportunities for the future.
It is particularly troubling that such young people
should reject all that society has to offer and choose
the obscurantist, murderous ideologies that radical
extremists and terrorists profess. It is even more mind-
boggling to think that, while many girls and women
across the globe are fighting against abuse and for their
rights and human dignity, girls from normal families
would willingly choose to become jihadi brides, serving
those who abuse and rape and sell women into slavery.

While it is obvious that the causes are as diverse
as the individuals, it remains important to establish
at least some patterns in order to counteract violent
extremism and radicalization. There is no one-size-fits-
all model of how and why a young person is radicalized.
Correspondingly, there is no one-size-fits-all way of
addressing the issue. As we seek to develop effective
counter measures against that highly dangerous
phenomenon, it is important to make sure that we
avoid profiling people on religious, ethnic or any other
grounds. Since Violent extremism is multifaceted
and multidimensional, our responses too must be
multidimensional and multifaceted, and they must
be articulated at all levels, from local to national to
regional to international, with the involvement of role
models, moral authorities, religious and community
leaders, former recruits who have managed to escape
and reintegrate, civil-society groups, the private sector,
academia and Governments.

We do not need to start from scratch. Violent
extremism has been high on the agenda of the United
Nations for some time. Last year, for instance, concern
about the spread of the violent extremist ideologies
that underpin the terrorist narrative was reiterated
both during the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy Review and in resolution 2178
(2014) on foreign terrorist fighters. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee, with the support of its Executive
Directorate, has developed a wealth of expertise over
the past decade with regard to associated risks, gaps
and recommendations on future actions. The Executive
Directorate's recent creation of a network of academic
partners can play an important role in support of the
work already carried out. Joint efforts by the United
Nations machinery, along with regional, national and
local actors, are needed, based on the comparative
strengths and expertise of each partner involved, to
develop effective, target-specific antidotes to violent
extremist propaganda. Rule of law institutions also have
a critical role to play. Border and security cooperation,
as well as information- and intelligence-sharing to
facilitate the tracking of the cross-border movements of
young people, need to be strengthened, since stopping
potential recruits at the border can often be the last
line of defence for preventing them from falling into
terrorist hands.

As recruitment flourishes on the Internet, it is
essential, as others have said, to engage with Web
professionals and the wider community of Internet
users in order to develop adequate security measures
without impinging on the freedoms of expression and
opinion.

Education is highly important, and the education of
girls in particular. No wonder terrorists are attacking
girls' schools and their teachers with such fury. They
know that an educated girl, conscious of her choices
and rights in life, is an excellent antidote against the
blind subservient ignorance that they are seeking to
impose. Fostering critical thinking is key to cutting
through extremist narratives. Human rights and
tolerance education should be part and parcel of broader
education efforts. Clear perspectives for the future,
through education, skills development and job and
entrepreneurship opportunities, matter everywhere,
but they are especially important in conflict-affected
areas, including among internally displaced persons
and refugees, so that in their desperation such people
do not fall prey to radicalization. Particular attention
should be paid to juvenile and young prison inmates,
since prisons and detention centres are often prime
locations for recruitment.

It is imperative that we improve strategic
communication at all levels and that we develop
effective, targeted messages that demolish the gloss
and false righteousness of the narratives of the likes
of Daesh and Boko Haram. We must expose their
hypocrisy and the monstrosity of the crimes that they
commit under false pretexts. Since terrorists like to hide
behind a veneer of faith, it is also key to cut through that
veneer and expose the abysmal gap between what faith
really is and what is being done in its name by violent
extremists. We have to be very clear that, whatever
the ills or injustices in the world the extremists claim
to be rectifying by their deadly choices, beheadings;
maiming; throwing people from high towers; burning
them alive, such as the monstrous murder of a Jordanian
pilot; or stoning to death do not address any injustice or
ill. On the contrary, such depraved acts add in a most
brutal and sick way to the ills of this world and are
nothing but the most brutal and cynical criminality.

While all levels should be involved in tackling
the issue of youth radicalization, the grass-roots level
is particularly important. It is at the grass-roots level
in local communities that vulnerabilities are felt
and exposed, and disaffections and marginalization
take place, providing fertile ground for recruiters.
Non-governmental organizations, volunteer groups
and civil-society activism offer important ways to
strengthen the connection between young people and
the communities they live in, foster a sense ofbelonging
and ownership, help overcome a sense of alienation and
provide positive life models for young people to follow.

