Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): I should like to
thank Special Representative Moussa for his statement
and for his continued work on the issues under
consideration.

For over 20 years, the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) has blighted the heart of Africa. Led by the
odious Joseph Kony, the LRA remains a murderous
band of criminals that preys on civilians, targets women
and children and terrorizes communities across Central
Africa. But an end to that scourge is in sight. The
concerted efforts of the countries affected, the African
Union (AU), the United Nations and other partners
have substantially weakened the LRA. Permanently
eradicating the threat it poses is now within our reach.
But that can be achieved only through sustained focus
and by creating and consolidating security and stability
in the affected countries.

The release of the United Nations regional strategy
on the LRA was a welcome step towards achieving
that aim. The United Kingdom welcomes the progress
already made in putting the strategy into effect.
However, for further progress to be made, we need the
LRA-affected countries, the African Union and the
United Nations political, development, humanitarian
and peacekeeping missions in those countries to deliver
fully on all the pillars of the strategy. In that regard,
the United Kingdom believes that the development of
an implementation plan for the strategy will be the
key to success. Such a plan should outline the priority
actions, articulate key milestones and outcomes and
be fully costed. It should also identify and articulate
underfunded parts of the strategy to the broader donor
community.

The United Kingdom also urges the Governments
of the LRA-affected coutries to renew and strengthen
their collaboration to end the threat posed by the LRA to
thousands of innocent civilians. I encourage the heads
of State ofthose countries, alongside the United Nations
and the African Union, to convene a high-level meeting
to discuss how to implement successfully the African
Union Regional Cooperation Initiative. Furthermore,
the United Kingdom urges the LRA-affected countries
to develop and agree their concept of operations for
the AU Regional Task Force. That will significantly
improve tactical coordination, information-sharing and
joint planning among the relevant militaries.

Alongside the efforts of regional countries,
the United Kingdom believes that the international
community also has a responsibility to support the
region. That is why the United Kingdom is proud to
have pledged recently £500,000, over a period of two
years, to a UNICEF programme that will ensure that
the Regional Task Force is trained in best international
practice to improve the care and handling of children.
We urge other members of the international community
likewise to contribute resources.

The United Kingdom commends the increased
cross-border cooperation of the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the LRA-affected countries,
in particular the development of region-wide
disarmament, demobilization, repatriation, resettlement
and reintegration initiatives.

I would now like to comment on the broader role
in the region of the United Nations Office in Central
Africa (UNOCA). UNOCA's ultimate aim should be to
play a strong and constructive regional coordination
role. The United Kingdom therefore welcomes
UNOCA's recent efforts to facilitate and encourage
closer regional cooperation in Central Africa.
UNOCA's work with other regional bodies, such as the
Economic Community of Central African States, has
helped to improve cooperation in areas such as conflict
prevention and governance.

The United Kingdom remains concerned by the
threats to maritime security on Africa's western
seaboard. We welcome the leadership shown by
the United Nations on this issue. UNOCA has an
important role to play in ensuring that the international
community works together to build maritime capability.
A regional response is essential in order to minimize
the impact on economic development and stability.
Successful maritime policing could bring real benefits
to the region, including through fishing revenues and
increased regional trade.
