The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic for his
kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is the Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, His Excellency Mr. Ravan
Farhadi, to whom the Council has extended an invitation
under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to make
his statement.

Mr. Farhadi (Afghanistan), Acting Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People: I take pleasure at the outset in
conveying to you, Sir, my congratulations on your
accession to the presidency of the Security Council during
the month of April. I am sure that under your presidency,
with your long experience as a diplomat and your great
and memorable experience at the United Nations, the
Council will be able to discharge its responsibilities for
the maintenance of international peace and security. I
should also like to thank most sincerely Ambassador
Legwaila of Botswana for discharging with such great
 

wisdom his responsibilities as President of the Security
Council last month.

I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Security Council for having given me the
opportunity, as Acting Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People,
to participate in this important debate on the decision by the
Israeli Government regarding the blockade and closure of
Israeli borders with Palestinian territory. The resulting
economic hardships and aggravation of tensions in this area
is of great concern to our Committee. The closure has
brought about restrictions on freedom of movement within
the Palestinian territory. This action by the Government of
Israel has made life extremely difficult for the people of the
Palestinian territory. This situation may exacerbate
difficulties in the relations between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority.

The Israeli Government has also stated that it is its
intention to take further implacable measures in the
occupied Palestinian territory, including Jerusalem. These
measures include the further destruction of houses, the
confiscation of land, the expansion of settlements and some
restrictions on the movement of persons and goods within
the Palestinian territory, as well as into and out of the
territory.

This Israeli policy has resulted in rapidly escalating
hardships for the entire Palestinian population. Uncertain
food supplies and massive unemployment have reached
crisis levels. Patients and medical staff alike are unable to
travel from one area of the West Bank to another to reach
hospitals and clinics, even in emergency situations.
Education, agriculture and business activity have been
severely disrupted. International non-governmental-
organization staff, including foreign nationals, have been
prohibited from moving between population areas in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip. At this time when the
services of international non-governmental organizations are
desperately needed, they are unable to provide even the
most basic services.

It should also be stated that the closure of the border
of the West Bank with Jordan and that of the Gaza Strip
with Egypt, obstructing the movement of persons and
goods, is effectively isolating the Palestinian territory from
the neighbouring countries.

The Committee believes that these measures are in
violation of the relevant provisions of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949, which is applicable to all the
territories occupied by Israel in 1967, including
Jerusalem, as well as of the relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

This policy of the Government of Israel totally
contradicts the concept of peacemaking on the basis of
the agreements that have been reached between the two
parties thus far.

The Committee is also of the View that the response
to acts of violence committed by some elements should
not be directed at the Palestinian people as a whole. It
should not undermine and hinder the peace process, the
success of which the Committee has striven to ensure, in
accordance with the General Assembly's resolutions.

On behalf of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, I call upon
the Security Council and the sponsors of the peace
process to use their strong influence to persuade the
Government of Israel to end its unjust policy of closure
of Israeli borders with the Palestinian territory. The
international community must also persuade the parties
concerned to proceed rapidly with the peace process
which they have agreed to pursue together. This the only
way that a lasting peace can be achieved in the region.

The Committee is also extremely worried about the
negative impact on all Palestinians of the recent armed
conflicts and of Israeli shelling and air raids in south
Lebanon and in the suburbs of Beirut. This reveals the
close relationship between the Palestinian problem and the
question of the Middle East, which constitutes the major
dimension of the overall situation.

The President (interpretation from Spanish): I thank
the Acting Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People for his
kind words addressed to me.

The next speaker is Mr. Engin Ansay, Permanent
Observer of the Organization of the Islamic Conference
to the United Nations, to whom the Council has extended
an invitation under Rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.


