Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and Head of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas
Haysom, and thank him for his briefing on the current
situation in Afghanistan. We would also like to thank
Ambassador Tanin for his statement.

Chile welcomes the progress achieved since our
previous meeting on Afghanistan, held on 18 December
(see S/PV.7347), and we welcome the start of the
transformation decade 2015-2024. We welcome the
goodwill that President Ashraf Ghani Ahmadzai and
Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah have shown in
the process of forming the new Government. The
stability achieved in the first months of the transitional
Government made it possible to focus efforts on
priority areas related to security and development in
the country. We hope that the process of forming a
Government will be completed without problems.

In that regard, we cannot fail to mention that one
of the short-term priorities should be holding this
year's parliamentary and municipal elections in an
orderly and peaceful manner, with the active and broad
participation of women. The consolidation of peace
and national reconciliation are essential in this period.
The Government's efforts to carry out a process that is
owned and led by Afghans themselves require support
from all of us. Civil society must play an active role in
an inclusive peace process.

We recognize that Afghanistan continues to face
enormous challenges to its stability, such as corruption,
drug trafficking, terrorism and a humanitarian crisis. In
that regard, we call on donor countries and international
financial institutions to maintain their commitment
to long-term development assistance, particularly in
View of the sharp slowdown expected for the Afghan
economy in the next few years.

We are concerned about the impact the security
situation continues to have on the Afghan civilian
population, particularly on children and women. The
complex security situation - a product of terrorism and
the fight against anti-Government elements - requires
a comprehensive and coordinated response to ensure
adequate protection for civilians. In that regard, the
support and cooperation of regional and international
partners continues to be important and necessary.

Given the critical time that Afghanistan is going
through and the important role of UNAMA in supporting
the Government, we favour the renewal of the Mission's
mandate for 12 months. Likewise, we emphasize the
evaluation process for the six-month period beginning
on the date of the adoption of resolution 2210 (2015) to
examine all the functions, structures and activities of
all United Nations entities in Afghanistan. Finally, we
thank Spain for all the work done to make it possible to
submit the resolution approved today.

