Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): I have listened
very closely, and I would first like to thank the Security
Council for the expressions of support, but also for the
suggestions. I think it is important to be able to express
our views. We should attempt to do that on a regular
basis so that members can be kept abreast of what is
going on, what we are doing and what our problems
are, and naturally to give members an opportunity to
express their views and tell us what they think would
be useful in our work.

Regarding the question posed to me by Malaysia
on the outreach programme, it is true that we have this
programme more for Rwanda than for the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. That is up to the
Registrar of the Tribunal. We have spoken about that
here and of the question of financing; whether or not
that programme is developed depends on the financial
situation. We have thought about it and we are working
on it; it is important that hearings and trials held, for
example, in Arusha, be able to be held in Kigali. That
is a type of outreach programme. That means that the
people of Rwanda can attend some hearings. In this
context, we are in touch with the Minister of Justice
and the President of the High Court; there is a room I
myself have visited, and with donations from States
and from the European Union we are in the process of
fixing it up and providing all the security needs so that
we can hold hearings. I spoke about this with the
President of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, following the same principle of holding
hearings on site. They agree in principle. There is the
legal possibility of holding these hearings on site, but it
should be known that it is up to the judge to take the
decision.

Regarding the vacant posts in Rwanda Tribunal
and the translation problems, it is true that we had a
considerable problem regarding the vacant posts last
year. We must not forget that working in Arusha or
Kigali calls for a great sacrifice because the conditions
are what they are. Therefore, it is not easy to find
candidates for the posts in the Office of the Prosecutor
in Arusha. We have received assistance from the
United Nations Secretariat, which sent us a task force
to review this problem, to try to identify candidates
who might occupy these posts.

Things are much better now. The problem as such
does not exist any longer, apart from the regular
rotation of those posts. As members know, senior trial
attorneys or prosecutors who remain for three or four
years will really want to leave their posts. It is no
longer a very difficult problem; it is more a normal
question of rotating posts.

Georges Ruggiu has been convicted, although the
representative of Rwanda has stated that the sentence
was too short. I shall not comment on judicial
decisions. For a prosecutor it is important that there be
a conviction and that a sentence be imposed. As to the
length of such sentences, the judges must apply the law
in the light of all circumstances, which may be a
subjective analysis. It falls beyond the central task of a
prosecutor, which is to see to it that the indictment is
borne out and a sentence imposed. The principal is that
the sentence is up to the judges. As to where the
sentence will be served, two years have already been
spent in detention, and because Mr. Ruggiu has Belgian
and Italian nationality, he has requested that the
remaining 10 years, or less depending on parole, be
served in Italy. We have made contact with the Italian
Government with a view to enabling him to serve his
sentence in an Italian prison; these contacts are
informal because it is for the Registrar to make such
determinations about sentences.

Turning to the question of gachacha, I may have
used unsuitable adjectives, but gachacha truly is the
solution: I have seen many detainees who have spent
four and a half or five years in detention without even
hearing. That is a problem for Rwanda of which the
Minister of Justice is keenly aware; we discuss it often.
I should describe gachacha as a traditional form of
justice; it takes place at the village level, in the
community. In my view it is a kind of local justice and
can even encourage reconciliation, because it is
accepted either by indictees themselves or by those
who are called upon to pass judgement upon them. The
mechanism can seem rather complex to us. The
Minister of Justice tells me that a bill on this matter is
before Parliament and that he hopes it can be adopted
within a few months, because the problem has become
increasingly difficult.
The report of the Expert Group to Conduct a
Review of the Effective Operation and Functioning of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has
the full support of the office of the Prosecutor. We are
prepared to adopt any of the measures set out in that
report, because we wholeheartedly agree with the
report's suggestions. But I have to say that we have
been told that there will be a problem of resources and
financing. We are nonetheless awaiting these changes,
which can only be for the better and will assist us in
our work.

As to intervention by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) in Kosovo, I can only report
what the decision was, and it was correct to say that it
is necessary to see what factors led to that decision.
Before making this information available to the
Security Council, I wish first to show those who
submitted denunciations and possible suspects what
caused us to pursue the matter. The Council will then
be able to examine the approximately 95 pages of
material and see the law and the reasons for the
decision that was taken.

Turning to recruitment, to which the
representative of Rwanda referred. It is true that there
are some problems in that area. Without trying to shirk
my duties, I must note that this does not fall within the
purview of the office of the Prosecutor, but rather that
of the Registrar. I know that there are problems.
Information is now coming to us from the Rwandan
authorities, and we pass it on to the Registrar so that
the problems can be resolved. The representative of
Rwanda was right to say that this is a sensitive and
possibly dangerous problem.

I was astonished when the representative of the
Russian Federation said that our work had been
politicized. I completely reject that accusation. I have
been trying for 10 months to get in touch with Russian
Federation authorities to explain our work and how we
do it. Unfortunately, it has been impossible to establish
such contacts. I therefore take this opportunity to ask
the representative of the Russian Federation to help
establish such contacts to enable me finally to explain
our work and to show that there is nothing political
about it: there is law that must be applied; there are
investigations that must be carried out; and no more.

I believe I have now responded to all the
questions put to me. As has been noted, I will be
returning approximately every six months, and I look
forward to my next opportunity to address the Council.
