Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to
begin by thanking Judge Meron, Judge Joensen,
Prosecutor Brammertz and Prosecutor Jallow for their
comprehensive reports and briefings today.

Lithuania supports and commends the work of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). The principle of
accountability for the most serious crimes of concern
to the international community must be upheld and
actively pursued. The task of ending impunity for mass
atrocities is often at the very heart oftransitionaljustice
and reconciliation efforts leading to a sustainable peace.

The ICTY and the ICTR were established by the
Security Council to deal with horrific crimes in view of
a lack of independent judiciary capacity. Guided by the
principles of fairness, impartiality and independence,
both Tribunals have championed respect for the rule
of law, developed capacity at the national level, and
contributed to the difficult but necessary process of
reconciliation and peace. The reports and today's
briefings clearly show that both Tribunals are moving
successfully towards the completion of their mandates.

With regard to the work of the ICTY, all the
indictees have been brought before the Tribunal,
including several long-term fugitives. The Tribunal has
concluded proceedings against 141 of the 161 indicted
individuals. We expect the Tribunal to complete its
work in the nearest future. It is important to emphasize
that nothing should undermine its ability to deliver
justice in due process. While acknowledging the heavy
workload of the Tribunal and the considerable progress
that has been made, we encourage the ICTY to take all
necessary measures to keep the delays to a minimum.

Accountability for war crimes and crimes against
humanity depends on the effective completion of the
last cases by the ICTY and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, as much as it does
on the success ofnational prosecutions. In fact, effective
and efficient national prosecutions of war crimes will
remain a critical component of the ICTY's legacy. We
share the concern expressed in the report (S/2014/351, annex I) regarding the slow processing of war crimes
cases, and in particular cases of sexual violence, by
national institutions in countries that emerged out of
the former Yugoslavia.
Conflict-related sexual crimes are particularly
heinous and have lasting effects on the Victims, their
families and entire communities. We call upon the
national authorities to devote sufficienttime and attention
to these cases and to truly commit to the resolution
of the outstanding case load. Regional cooperation is
very important in this regard. The conclusion of the
Protocol on Cooperation in Prosecution of Perpetrators
of War Crimes, Crimes against Humanity and
Genocide between the Prosecutor's Offices of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and Montenegro on 29 April was a
positive step in that respect.

The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
has done significant work in pursuing justice and set
important precedents in the development of international
criminal law, such as the first-ever prosecution for rape
as an act of genocide. As the closure of the Tribunal
approaches, nine fugitives indicted by the ICTR remain
at large, six cases have been referred to Rwanda, and
the remaining three indictees are to be tried before
the Residual Mechanism. The work is not yet fully
complete, and we should not let down our guard. We
call on all parties to intensify their cooperation in order
to achieve the arrest and surrender of all remaining
fugitives as soon as possible. A successful conclusion
to the Tribunal's work, and the delivery of justice to
the victims and survivors of the unspeakable horrors
committed two decades ago, would be a fitting tribute
to the memory of the human tragedy whose twentieth
anniversary is being commemorated this year.

An issue of concern is the human rights situation
faced by those who have been acquitted but are still
waiting to be relocated. We call on all States in a
position to do so to respond positively to the Tribunal's
request for their relocation.

After two decades of activity, the Tribunals are
working together to ensure a gradual and effective
transition of their work to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. The Residual
Mechanism is essential to ensuring that there will be
no impunity for the remaining fugitives and that the
appeals will be completed and witnesses protected.

Finally, I would like to note that the scale and
horrendous character of the mass atrocities of the past
few decades have clearly demonstrated the necessity of
a permanent court ofjustice aimed at ending impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern, in
situations where justice cannot or will not be ensured
otherwise. Both ad hoc Tribunals have played a crucial

role in and made a considerable contribution to the
creation of the International Criminal Court (ICC). As
the work of the ICTY and the ICTR is about to end,
it is more important than ever that the Council fulfil
its responsibilities in putting an end to impunity and
ensuring justice and accountability. In that regard,
political support for the ICC is essential in order to
make sure that it can deliver on the expectations of
the numerous victims of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide, for whom this body may be the
only recourse to justice.

