Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Feltman
for his briefing. I have also listened carefully to the
statements made by the observer of Palestine and the
representative of Israel.

The core and root causes of the Middle East questions
remain the Palestinian issue, to which dialogue and
negotiation represent the only viable solution. China
is concerned about the long-term stagnation of the
peace talks. Recently, the international community has
stepped up efforts to promote peace, and both parties
have expressed their willingness to resume peace talks.
China welcomes those developments and hopes that
both sides will seize opportunities, overcome obstacles,
bridge their differences, take measures to build mutual
trust and restart negotiations as soon as possible.

China is open to all initiatives conducive to
bridging the differences between the two parties and
restarting dialogue and negotiations. This year marks
the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Oslo
accords, and we hope that it will not be another futile
year for the peace talks between Palestine and Israel.

Israeli settlement activities are the direct cause of
the stagnation of the peace talks and the major obstacle
to their resumption. Israel should take the initiative
by ending its settlement activities in the occupied
territories and addressing the issue of Palestinian
detainees in order to create the necessary conditions for

the restoration of mutual trust and an early resumption
of the peace talks.

Currently, the security and humanitarian situation
in the occupied Palestinian territories, including the
Gaza Strip, remains grave. The relevant United Nations
resolutions must be effectively implemented, and we
hope that Israel will lift its blockade of the Gaza Strip
as soon as possible and alleviate the humanitarian
situation there. We call on the Quartet to take concrete
measures to promote the resumption of talks between
Palestine and Israel, while the Security Council also
needs to play a bigger role in promoting a settlement
of the issue.

China continues to believe that Palestine and Israel
should settle their disputes through political dialogue,
on the basis of the relevant United Nations resolutions,
the principle of land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative
and the Middle East road map. The ultimate goal is
to establish a sovereign and independent Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, on the basis
of the 1967 borders and living side by side with Israel
in peace.

China firmly supports the just cause of the
Palestinians for the restoration of their legitimate
national rights, and has been promoting the peace
talks through its own means. The Chinese special
envoy on the Middle East issue, Mr. Wu Sike, will visit
Palestine and Israel from 25 to 30 April to exchange
views with both sides on the latest developments in the
peace process in the Middle East and to carry out peace
facilitation work.

China stands ready to work with the international
community to play a constructive role for the early
realization of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace
in the Middle East.

A political solution is the only viable way to resolve
the Syrian issue. Currently, the Syrian issue is at a
critical stage. We urge the parties concerned in Syria,
on the basis of the Geneva communique of the Action
Group for Syria (S/2012/523, annex), to achieve a
ceasefire and end hostilities as soon as possible, launch
a political dialogue and implement a Syrian-led political
transition process. The international community should
also step up mediation efforts in order to play a positive
and constructive role in the just, peaceful and proper
settlement of the Syrian issue.

