The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter from the
representative of Haiti, in which he requests to be
invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cazeaa
(Haiti) took a seat at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/60, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council commends the
Haitian people on the holding of the first round of
national elections on 7 February 2006 with high
voter turnout, and congratulates them on taking
this fundamental step towards the restoration of
democracy and stability in their country. The
Council calls on all parties to respect the outcome
of the elections, remain engaged in the political
process and renounce all forms of Violence. The
Council wishes to thank the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), the
Organization of American States and others in the
international community for providing crucial
assistance to the Transitional Government and the
Conseil Electoral Provisoire during this period.

"The Security Council underlines that the
electoral process should lead to the inauguration
of a representative Government. The Council
reiterates the importance of national, municipal
and local elections as pillars of democratic
governance in Haiti. The Council emphasizes
that, once the new Government takes office,
Haitians should continue to promote national
reconciliation and political dialogue in order to
strengthen their democracy and to ensure social,
economic and political stability.

"The Security Council, while recognizing
the importance of the elections for democratic
institutions and procedures, stresses that they do
not constitute the sole means to address Haiti's
longer-term problems and that significant
challenges remain, in particular in the fields of
rule of law, security and development. Tackling
these challenges will require the long-term
engagement of the international community."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2006/7.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

