Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): Allow me to join
other speakers in expressing our appreciation to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tom Koenigs, for his briefing on the latest
developments in Afghanistan.

Since the launch of the Bonn Agreement in 2001,
peace and stability have been taking root in
Afghanistan. Progress in the political and socio-
economic sectors of the country has been notable.
Nonetheless, violence threatens to disrupt those
attainments. Suicide bombing and violent attacks are
increasingly common in Afghanistan. The increase in
violent attacks within the country in the past several
months, we understand, has undermined confidence in
the future and prevented access by the Government and
aid organizations to many districts.

My delegation believes that addressing the
security challenges is a matter of urgency in order to
prevent Afghanistan from sliding back into conflict. In
that regard, we recognize the importance of the
measures taken by the Afghan National Army, in
collaboration with the International Security Assistance
Force, in responding to the insurgency activities. We
are also encouraged by the efforts to augment the
Afghan National Police.

While recognizing the significance of the
effective integration of a civilian-military strategy
within the security plan for Afghanistan, Indonesia
attaches great importance to respect the protection of
civilians and the principles of international human
rights and humanitarian laws whenever security
operations are carried out in the country.

Indonesia also believes that the military approach
cannot fully address the root causes of the
re-emergence of the insurgency. We therefore underline
the importance of political dialogue and reconciliation
involving all factions in Afghanistan. We look forward
to further progress in the implementation of the Action
Plan on Peace, Reconciliation and Justice. We hold the
View that it is important to help every single Afghan
embrace a new Afghanistan. It is important to find
ways and means to prevent them from turning to
militancy. It is also important to include them in the
political, social and economic processes at all levels.

Achieving a secure and stable Afghanistan
becomes more daunting with the continued presence of
the narco-economy. The sharp increase in opium
production in 2007 has exacerbated the security
condition in Afghanistan. It poses a grave threat to both
reconstruction and nation-building in the country.

Since players in the narco-economy work across
borders, cooperation between Afghanistan and its
neighbours in counter-narcotics operations is very
important. Accordingly, Indonesia welcomes the
signing of a trilateral agreement between Afghanistan,
Iran and Pakistan in June 2007. Indonesia also believes
that the international community should support the
Afghan-led plan to address that problem, going beyond
eradication efforts.

As Afghanistan is steadily embracing democracy,
the need to strengthen the institutional foundation of
the democratic transition in the country remains vital.
Additional efforts must be exerted in order to ensure
that such institutions as the Anti-Corruption
Commission established by President Karzai deliver
results.

The key to a robust democracy in Afghanistan is
the adoption of the electoral law by the end of 2007.
The adoption of such a law by the Afghan Government
and the National Assembly will be instrumental to the
upcoming cycle of presidential elections in the country.
My delegation underlines in that regard the importance
of continued support and assistance from the
international community for the institutional
strengthening and capacity-building of democratic
institutions in Afghanistan.

A peaceful and stable environment is important to
Afghanistan in order for it to achieve internal
sustainability. We welcome in that regard Afghanistan's
commitment to contributing to regional security and
prosperity through concrete steps, including its
accession to the South Asian Association for Regional
Cooperation, the Afghanistan-Pakistan peace jirga and
the participation of President Karzai in the summit of
the Shanghai Cooperation Organization. The
inauguration of a transit bridge between Afghanistan
and Tajikistan in August 2007 has both symbolic and
substantive meaning.

The continued engagement of the international
community with Afghanistan remains vital. Thus
Indonesia welcomes the convening of the high-level
meeting on Afghanistan in New York on 23 September
2007. My delegation is hopeful that the reaffirmation
of support by delegations participating in the meeting
will bring peace and stability to Afghanistan.

Finally, I would be remiss if I did not say a few
words on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA). The role of UNAMA becomes
more important with the increasing number of
challenges to Afghan security and reconstruction
efforts. As the Mission's engagement has been
reinforced by resolution 1746 (2007), there is in our
view an urgent need for ensuring that UNAMA and
other international actors engaged in Afghanistan have
the mandate and resources needed to fulfil the required
tasks and to move the country's development in a
positive direction. My delegation wishes to reiterate its
full support for UNAMA and its work in Afghanistan.

