Mr. Guillen (Peru) (interpretation from Spanish): I
have the pleasure to extend my Government's
congratulations to you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency, as well as to your distinguished predecessor.
I would also like to thank you for this opportunity to
speak under rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure
of the Security Council, whereby Member States have an
opportunity to speak on matters before the Council.

Peru has taken the floor on this occasion, first of all,
to welcome the fact that the Security Council authorized
the Secretary-General to carry out his mission to see to it
that the most basic tenets of law prevail, in fulfilment of
the decisions adopted by the United Nations.

Fortunately, the Secretary-General's mission took
place under circumstances and with a mandate quite
different from those of January 1991. The Memorandum

 

of Understanding of 23 February 1998, which the Security
Council has now endorsed, highlights not only the initiative,
skill and authority of the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi
Annan, but also the importance of his functions. The
Government of Peru vigorously supports the Secretary-
General's action.

This success in reaching an agreement also shows that
the norms of international law should be the pillars of
international peace and security, as the Security Council
itself decided in adopting resolution 687 (1991) of 3 April
1991, which punished the breach of international norms
protecting the integrity of State boundaries, when an
attempt was made, through the invasion of Kuwait, to make
force prevail over law.
We earnestly hope that compliance by the Government
of Iraq with Council resolutions, along with an awareness
of humanitarian issues, will put an end to the suffering of
the Iraqi people.

Finally, and above all, this is an agreement with full
legal validity signed on behalf of the entire United Nations
and bearing on the maintenance of international peace and
security. In other words, this event is also an
acknowledgment of the Organization as a whole.

