Mr. Munoz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to thank Panama and you, Sir, for inviting us to
debate this topic that involves acts of utmost gravity
against unprotected children in flagrant violation of
human rights and international humanitarian law.

As a State party to the Convention on the Rights
of the Child and to its Optional Protocol on the
Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and to
Convention No. 182 of the International Labour
Organization, on the prohibition of the worst forms of
child labour, Chile wishes to reiterate its commitment
to the initiatives designed to eliminate all forms of
violence against children. We therefore strongly
support multilateral actions to reduce and eradicate this
scourge, and we urge the Council to use its authority to
identify and punish those responsible for the atrocities
documented in the recent report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2007/757)
and its respective recommendations.

In this context, we acknowledge the work done
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy, and note with special
interest the recommendations contained in her report
on the subject (A/62/228), particularly those relating to
the application of the 2007 Paris Principles, which
represent significant progress regarding prevention and
reinsertion and the special needs of the girl child in
armed conflicts.

Although the international community recognizes
that children are precious subjects of law, their rights

are contrarily ignored, daily, in situations of armed
conflict between or within States, conflicts of low
intensity or armed violence in the civilian sphere. We
therefore support the work done by, among others, the
Working Group of the Security Council established
pursuant to resolution 1612 (2005), as well as the work
of UNICEF and civil society, which contribute to the
implementation of the monitoring and reporting
mechanism in the framework of this resolution.

However, the persistence of these grave acts and
the impunity noted by this Council impel us to make
greater efforts with respect to the implementation of
this mechanism. Chile therefore believes that the
Council should enhance the protection of children by
allowing the expansion of the monitoring mechanism
contemplated in resolution 1612 (2005), so that it can
be triggered in cases of rape and other grave sexual
violations, which do not constitute collateral damage
and which should be urgently eradicated, as has been
widely recognized by the international community.

Likewise, we call for the adoption of the
recommendations made to the Council and to Member
States in the Secretary-General's recent report,
particularly the recommendation that the mandates of
all future peacekeeping missions and relevant political
missions should, where appropriate, include the
presence of child protection advisers.

A decade after the publication of Graca Machel's
historic report on the impact of armed conflict on
children, Chile reaffirms its commitment to contribute
actively to the elimination of all forms of violence
affecting the world's children, from armed conflicts to
urban violence. Inspired by the aphorism coined by our
Nobel Prize winner Gabriela Mistral, "The future of
children is always today; tomorrow will be too late",
we strongly support all initiatives aimed at fulfilling
international commitments in this area.

