The Philippines thanks the Russian presidency of the Security Council this month for convening this important debate and the other members of the Council for their efforts aimed at advancing the women and peace and security agenda in the Council's work. We also thank the Secretary-General and the briefers for their briefings today. The Philippines views women's full, effective and meaningful participation in all stages of the peace process as critical, given women's indispensable role in the prevention and resolution of conflict and in peacebuilding and peacekeeping. These principles are embodied in resolution 1325 (2000) and in subsequent relevant resolutions. The Philippines was the first country in Asia to adopt a national action plan on women and peace and security. A product of constructive engagement between the Government and civil society, the Philippine plan maximized the gains of decades of gender-mainstreaming work in the country. It enabled national Government agencies and local Government units to identify interventions in the area of women and peace and security for integration in their regular plans, budgets and accomplishment reports, as required by the country's landmark law, the Magna Carta of Women. The Women, Peace and Security National Action Plan 2017-2022 currently provides a framework for promoting women's rights and leadership roles in peacebuilding, peacekeeping and peace negotiations. In 2014, the Philippine Government signed a peace accord with the rebel group Moro Islamic Liberation Front, ending decades-long conflict in Mindanao. The Government peace panel was headed by a woman, Miriam Coronel-Ferrer, the first female chief negotiator in the world to sign a peace accord with a rebel group. The Philippines supports the work of the United Nations system in integrating gender dimensions in all aspects of peacebuilding. The Department of National Defence has responded to the United Nations goal of increasing female participation in United Nations peace operations by pledging 30 female military observers/ peacekeeping staff to the United Nations Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. In our view, women bring unique perspectives to peacebuilding and peacekeeping, which results in improved situational awareness, enhanced access to critical services and deepened trust with local communities, among other outcomes. In the light of the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Philippine Defence Department seeks to increase financing of the women and peace and security agenda recognizing that the pandemic exacerbates gender inequality in conflict-affected, post-conflict and humanitarian crisis contexts. Women and girls face a higher incidence of gender-based violence, more difficulties in accessing basic goods and services, and greater numbers of human rights violations. The Philippine National Police (PNP) is mandated by law to prioritize the recruitment and training of women in this male-dominated organization. The PNP has to reserve 10 per cent of its annual recruitment, training and education quota for women. In recent years, however, the actual percentage of women in the police has gone up as much as 20 per cent. In promoting gender-sensitive investigations, the PNP was able to establish 2,167 Women and Children Protection Desks nationwide, manned by 5,774 trained women investigators. In our region, the Philippines supports the efforts of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) aimed at mainstreaming the women and peace and security agenda in its work. The ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, a compendium of women leaders in ASEAN with expertise in the various aspects of peace processes, including negotiation, mediation, facilitation and research, inter alia, is a good practice that may be shared with other organizations. The ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation, ASEAN's research arm, can also share best practices and lessons learned on conflict management and conflict resolution involving women peace negotiators and advocates. To promote the further participation of women in the peacekeeping work of the United Nations, the Philippines recommends the designation of female peacekeepers to key United Nations positions, an increase in training opportunities for female peacekeepers and the allocation of a certain percentage of posts to female peacekeepers in formed units or contingent deployments. The Philippines reiterates its commitment to resolution 1325 (2000) and is ready to cooperate with international partners to achieve these goals.
