Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): I only want to say that
violence has history. There is a genealogy of violence.
Injustice breeds violence and violence breeds violence.
I cannot but think about some of those children or
young people who lost their dear ones in Qana in the
massacre of 1996 and who may be tempted to take up
arms today. Violence is not an act in one moment of
history; violence participates in a cycle and a process,
and it is precisely that cycle that we would like to put
an end to.

My Government has offered a political
framework. I do not think we are ready to hear sermons
about what we need to do. We are a Government that
has spared no effort with regard to national dialogue
and a political process to arrive at a situation in which
the State - the central authority - can extend its
sovereignty over all its national territory. However, we
know that we need the support of the international
community, political and otherwise, to achieve that.

I would also like to mention that the conference
in Rome, which brought together many States that
support or would like to support Lebanon in every
respect, issued a presidential statement that referred to
Security Council resolution 425 (1978). Implicit in that
reference was the fact that resolution 425 (1978) is yet
to be implemented fully. We have stated that we need
to have the Sheba'a farms returned to us, the release of
Lebanese prisoners from Israeli prisons and maps of
the landmines in southern Lebanon, which to date we
have not received.

Breaking the cycle of violence requires political
courage. For our part, we are sparing no effort to open
our ears, minds and hearts to constructive proposals,
but the points that our Council of Ministers has
elaborated unanimously constitute the basis for any
political framework to put an end to the present tragic
situation. We have come here to reaffirm that a
political settlement will bring an end to the violence,
but what should precede a political settlement -
anywhere in the world, not just in Lebanon - is a
ceasefire. No political settlement can be reached while
our towns, villages, bridges, houses and shelters are
being severely bombarded. A ceasefire is a prelude and
a necessary condition for a discussion in the Council of
the terms of a political agreement that will put an end
to the violence that my country is suffering from and
paying the heaviest price for.
06-45042

