Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O'Brien
for their testimony, which is considerably more than
briefings, being testament to something that we cannot
even describe as deja vu, since deja vu implies a
static situation. The current situation is not static; it is
simply deteriorating.

We listened very carefully to Mr. O'Brien's most
recent testimony. There was a moment during it when
I was not sure whether I was listening to him talk
about Israel, Gaza and Palestine, or about Syria, the
Sudan, South Sudan or Yemen, because the obstacles
to development and the tasks being carried out by
United Nations entities in the field and to humanitarian
assistance are things that we have so many times
denounced in the Council with regard to the Sudan,
South Sudan and Yemen. They are the same. A
Government is blocking the work that the Council has
been trying to do through numerous missions and for
many years.

Therefore, in the same way, and with the same
passion with which my delegation has asked other
Governments to stop interrupting and interfering with
the provision of assistnance by the United Nations, we
urge the same thing of the Government of Israel and,
in appropriate cases, the Palestinian Authority. The
Security Council cannot treat people differently. We
have heard other impassioned statements denouncing
the desperate situations that result from the decreased
access for humanitarian aid, to various areas of Syria,
for example. Mr. Mladenov and Mr. O'Brien are using
the same narrative with regard to the Palestinian people.
We therefore appeal to the authorities in this particular
conflict that they stop such activities.

Uruguay is concerned about the total lack of
progress in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, with its
humanitarian, political and security implications for
both countries and the region as a whole. We once again
affirm our support for the right of Israel and Palestine
to live in peace, within secure and recognized borders,
in an atmosphere of renewed cooperation, free of any
threat or act that could threaten peace. We also support
a solution based on two independent States, convinced
that that is the only option that can enable Israel and
Palestine to peacefully coexist. It is up to the parties
to create the conditions necessary for a resumption of
negotiations and to take action and adopt policies that
demonstrate their commitment to a two-State solution.
They should also refrain from taking unilateral
decisions that hinder dialogue and that they comply
with their obligations under international law.

Uruguay remains concerned about the Israeli
authorities' continuing decisions to build settlements
in the occupied Palestinian territory in the West Bank,
as well as their policy of demolishing Palestinian
homes and buildings. We have to point out once again
that the settlements are illegal under international
law, and we urge Israel to stop this practice. We also
reiterate our firm condemnation of acts of terrorism
and their glorification, as well as the incidents in which
unarmed Palestinians have died at the hands of Israeli
security forces.

We reiterate that the only formula in the search
for peace is direct bilateral negotiations between the
Israelis and Palestinians, which would finallhy allow
an end to this conflict, still unresolved almost seven
decades after it began.

