The President (spoke in Spanish): I should once
again like to make a statement in my national capacity.

It seems to me that this has been a very interesting
meeting. I should first like to clarify that we have sent
out an invitation to an open Toledo format wrap-up
session, to be held on Monday at 4 p.m., in line with the
commitment we made at the first such meeting, held
under Spain's presidency. And we have continued to
insist on that ever since. As members know better than
I do - given that they have had much more time on the
Council, especially the permanent members, such as the
United Kingdom - this meeting is being held in order
for an official record to be prepared. Everything we are
saying here is recorded, and I can hear the reporters
preparing the records. There is thereby accountability
for the Council.

Whether or not the Security Council is losing
some of its prestige or legitimacy at the United
Nations - those are not matters that will be resolved
in a month. There are some issues, however, such as
the lack of resolutions adopted in the Security Council,
that make the General Assembly view the Council as
an entity that already taken its decisions in advance.
Regardless, the first thing I wanted to mention here is,
as I have just said, the meeting to be held at 4 pm.
next Monday. We have tried to honour all the requests
that have been made for the agenda of that meeting.
The German Foreign Minister will be with us on
Monday morning, while at the afternoon meeting on
Kosovo we will have with us the Foreign Minister of
Serbia and the representative of Kosovo. But we will
indeed end Monday with a meeting in which we hope
that all the members of the General Assembly can voice
their opinions on the subject of today's meeting. I am
inviting a number of Ambassadors to join us so that we
can address these matters.

On another matter, when we saw the Council's
original programme of work - established in
accordance with the periodic reports we consider - we
found it somewhat sad given all the problems in the
world. While the Secretariat does in fact do excellent
work in supporting the Council, there are nevertheless
other issues that are both timely and pending. The only
way to take up those issues has been under the item
"Any other business". We do not expect that a resolution
will be the outcome of every discussion under that
agenda item. As is well known, however, especially by
the permanent members, the Security Council often
serves as a sounding board and provides for a process
to later build consensus around a particular issue, such
as we have seen in the case of Syria. I do not know how
many resolutions have been adopted and meetings have
been held on Syria. We now hope that at last today we
can sign a ceasefire, which is just the beginning of a
process. The same goes for the issue of Ukraine over
the past year - we have already been on the Council
for a year. I am talking about recurring issues that elicit
a great deal of interest. When the issue of the nuclear
tests arose, we met on a Sunday. That is how it ought
to be, and I thank Elbio for what he said - as South
Americans, we understand each other well.

We cannot allow talking about Western Sahara to
be forbidden, for example. Nobody talks about Western
Sahara, and there is no way to talk about the last colony
in Africa in a public format. There is no way because
they block it. It is possible that at some point conflict
may once again erupt - the Polisario Front may break
the ceasefire or there may be a return to war - and
then we will see it as an emergency situation.

It is the same for the issue of Palestine. We really
do not expect anything, because the Security Council
is unable even to produce elements to the press with
regard to issue of Palestine. However, children continue
to die. The situation grows ever-more complicated, and
at some point we will find ourselves with a conflict in
Palestine. Then we will hold emergency meetings. We
will have humanitarian meetings.

In this way the Security Council is more reactive
than preventive. Therefore, the use of "Any other
business" seems to us the only way we can talk about
issues that we think should not continue to go ignored.
That is why we took this decision in our presidency.
By the way, I should clarify - Davey, Ambassador
Pressman, mentioned that our work this month was
not yet over, and he is concerned about our meeting
tomorrow - that we will meet tomorrow, as we will
on Monday, until we address all the issues before us.
Hopefully, we will be able to decide on all the pending
draft resolutions - on North Korea and Syria - and
take care of everything we have to do. This meeting is
not the end, but this time slot was the only available for
the wrap-up session.

As I was saying, it is difficult to measure the
effectiveness of a body by the number of resolutions
adopted. It is a political discussion. This is a political
discussion, and the purpose is to create awareness and
to reach consensus. However, in the end each country
must consult with its capital and see what to do. But
the Security Council is just that: a sounding board for
issues.

Returning to the point made by Matthew,
Ambassador Rycroft - and I regret that he has left; he
must be working on one of the draft resolutions - with
regard to transparency and the issue of interaction, it
seems to us very important that more than 70 countries
took the floor in the open debate (see S/PV.7621) on
respect for the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations as a key element for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Had no delegation
attended, then we would have reason to be worried; for
it would have meant that the purposes and principles no
longer held any importance for Member States. Again,
I do not expect the members of the General Assembly
to change their View of the Security Council, but I think
that meeting offered a way for the Assembly to say to
the Council that the subject was important, as in some
situations the purposes and principles are being, or are
on the verge of being, violated.

The other issue I wanted to highlight - and I
appreciate all the comments in this respect - is that this
month we were able for the first time here to hear from
countries subject to sanctions. That goes to the issue
of transparency. There is nothing worse, or as opaque,
as a sanctions committee. It is horrible. No one knows
what goes on. And far less transparent are the decisions
taken in the committees. Obviously, this is a political
organ. There are no technical experts here, and no one
sitting here is a technical expert in anything. We all
work in the political realm and hold political positions,
and we must be prepared to debate. In our country we
are used to democratic debate: there is no veto; there is
an open, democratic debate, and the majority decides.
That is what we would like to introduce.

I thank everyone present for their comments and
for their expressions of friendship and sympathy with
our country. We have tried to provide a small example
of the nature of Venezuela. We will continue to do so
and to build closer relationships with all the countries
of the international community, all the while showing
who we are: a people of peace with a clear position and
very clear principles, and always trying to strengthen
and help the rest ofthe international community.

The representative of Spain has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.

