Mr. Ulibarri (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):

My delegation appreciates the convening of this

debate, as well as the draft presidential statement that

was distributed. We also appreciate the Security-
General's report presented during this meeting.

Illicit cross-border trafficking is a subject of
concern for Costa Rica, which we are approaching in
an integrated and holistic manner while preserving
respect for human rights and the rule of law.

Human trafficking, illicit trafficking of weapons,
drug trafficking, illegal trafficking of minerals,
trafficking of organs and money-laundering all have
three common denominators: their relationship with
organized transnational crime, the use of local criminal
groups and their potential destabilizing effect for States.

Therefore, this debate should be based on a basic
principle: the defence of borders against illicit flows
does not start with nor end at those borders. The
success of that defence is related to institutional
capacity and the level of legislative, legal, technical,
police and financial capability achieved by States. But
it is also essential to develop effective strategies for
regional and global cooperation, as well as to promote
the contribution on the part of international
organizations to providing capacity-building and the
coordination of efforts among countries. And that
would include the United Nations with all of its
relevant bodies, which play a key role.

Organized crime, and drug trafficking specifically,
not only affects international peace and security, it also
undermines economic and social development and
distorts public investment in developing countries,
which have to use their scarce resources to combat such
crimes, resources that would be better used in health,
education and social well-being.

In their enthusiasm to control markets, traffickers
bring in weapons, recruit people to distribute them and
attempt to generate corruption. By paying their recruits
with drugs, they stimulate a domestic market that
undermines safety, security and public health.
Moreover, money-laundering can be a factor in
monetary and economic distortion. In other words, its
impact is not just limited to nor can it be approached
simply by means of stricter controls.
We need substantive improvement in those areas
of course, but, to do just that without looking at the
broader scope might end up being counterproductive.

And that is why we want to emphasize integrated
strategies that take into account aspects related to
development and promote opportunities for young
people, institutional strengthening, education and
prevention.

Such strategies are part of our country's national
approach to those issues, and they have led to some
success. Such an approach should also be taken in the
context of international cooperation to deal with the
problem. Costa Rica, like the rest of the Central
American region, is part of a transit route between the
supplying countries and the largest consumer countries.
That is a huge challenge for our region.

For a number of years, we have had an agreement
in place for joint patrolling with United States
authorities, as well as a cooperation agreement against
trafficking in drugs and psychotropic substances in the
Caribbean region, in which a number of countries
participate and of which we are a depository. Both of
these are examples of good international cooperation.

However, it is necessary to increase our patrolling
capacity in the maritime area, to improve detection
capacity in ports on a large scale and to provide
technical support for efforts to detect land-based
trafficking of weapons and drugs, which have an
enormous impact on transit countries.

Since July 2011, Costa Rica has been working to
combat activities on the part of criminal groups by
focusing on Central American security. On 16 May
2012, in the context of the General Assembly, there
will be an open general debate on the matter.

Central America needs decisive and coordinated
support from the various bodies of the United Nations
in order to develop the potential of what the United
Nations is already providing to the region.

We believe that one of the outcomes of today's
discussion and that of 16 May, as well as the various
presidential statements and resolutions of the Security
Council, will be more consistent and integrated action
on the part of the United Nations system, including the
Security Council, to combat those scourges.

