Prince Zeid Ra'ad Zeid Al-Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to extend to you, Sir, my
profound thanks for holding this emergency special
meeting at the request of the Group of Arab States. I
would like to extend my sincere congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I am fully confident that your
experience and skills will lead us to the desired
success.

Allow me also to extend my profound thanks to
your predecessor, Ambassador Koonjul, for the evident
efficiency with which he oversaw the work of the
Security Council during the previous month. I would
also like to express my thanks and appreciation to the

S/P\'.4478

 

Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, and his Special
Coordinator, Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, for their efforts to
find a solution to the tense and dangerous situation
confronting our region.

Israeli acts of aggression and attacks on the
Palestinian people and the Palestinian Authority and its
institutions and infrastructure continue, with serious
consequences. These acts of aggression continue to
cause further deterioration of the situation involving
the two parties and in the region as a whole. This
impacts on the security and stability of the region as a
whole. It has been proved that such acts of aggression,
combined with the policy of assassinations, the
demolition of homes, the military and economic siege
of Palestinian villages and towns and of the Palestinian
people and leaders, will not lead to safety and security
for the Israeli Government and the Israeli people.
Furthermore, such acts of aggression constitute a
flagrant violation of the agreements signed between the
two parties, of the principles of international and
humanitarian laws and of relevant international
instruments.

In this context, my delegation condemns such
unacceptable and totally unjustifiable acts. It also
condemns the targeting and killing of civilians on both
sides. At the same time, it affirms that the settlement of
this conflict should take into consideration the
principle of the peaceful coexistence of the
Palestinians and the Israelis. Therefore, more than ever
before, it is time that the Israeli Government realized
that bringing about peace and stability requires the two
parties to return to the negotiating table as two equal
parties that seek to bring about a settlement
safeguarding their rights and their future and to take
parallel, mutual steps based on the agreements and
obligations already reached between them, particularly
ending the use of the Israeli war machine against the
Palestinian people and ending the siege imposed on
President Arafat.

Taking such steps constitutes the start of the
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations for
creating the appropriate conditions for a return to the
negotiating table. Beginning the final status
negotiations is an urgent priority and will lead to the
main objectives of the peace process: fully ending
occupation, fulfilling the national rights of the
Palestinian people, establishing their Viable,
independent State on their soil, and providing Israel
with security.

My delegation welcomes the recent statement by
His Majesty, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia. It
repeats its invitation to the Security Council to
shoulder its responsibilities under the Charter by
inviting Israel to a full and immediate withdrawal from
the areas it has re-occupied and by providing the
necessary protection for the Palestinian people,
accorded to them by the Security Council resolutions
and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

Within this framework, Jordan has expressed its
satisfaction at the results of the Geneva conference
held on 5 December 2001. We call upon the Council to
compel Israel to implement its resolutions, in particular
resolution 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), on which the
peace process is based. We also call on the Council to
enforce the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates its
solidarity - King, Government and people - with
President Yasser Arafat and the fraternal people of
Palestine in their struggle to obtain their legitimate
rights, achieve their just national demands and
establish their independence over their entire national
soil with Al Quds Al-Sharif as their capital.

