Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, and welcome you to the hot seat.

I would also like to thank our briefer, Assistant
Secretary-General Zerihoun, for the updates on the
situation in Iran and to extend a very warm welcome
to all the new members of the Security Council. We
look forward to working closely with all six of them to
enhance international peace and security.

The United Kingdom is watching events in Iran
very closely. We regret the loss of life that has occurred
during the protests. We call for an end to the violence
and for the Government of Iran to comply with its
international human rights obligations in dealing with
the protests. There needs to be a meaningful debate about
the legitimate and important issues that the protesters
are raising. I note here that President Rouhani has said
that the protesters' concerns are legitimate and that
they have a right to peaceful protest. People should be
able to exercise their right to freedom of expression and
demonstrate peacefully and lawfully. We encourage the
Iranian authorities to permit such actions.

No one is forcing Iran onto our agenda. The Security
Council is perfectly empowered, through Article 34 of
the Charter of the United Nations to
"investigate any dispute, or any situation which
might lead to international friction or give rise
to a dispute, in order to determine whether the
continuance of the dispute or situation is likely to
endanger the maintenance of international peace
and security".

The United Kingdom's concerns about the human
rights situation in Iran extend beyond the recent
treatment of protesters. The continued use of the death
penalty, including for juveniles, the weak rule of law,
and restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom
of religion and belief are all deeply worrying. We
call on Iran to adhere to its international obligations
and to respect the rights of individuals to freedom of
expression, opinion and peaceful assembly. We also urge
Iran to permit full access to the Special Rapporteur so
that she can fully assess its actions on areas of concern.

At the same time,it is important to recognize that
Iran has legitimate security interests in the region. Iran
suffered hugely in the Iran-Iraq war. We worked with
Iran after 9/11. The Iranian people represent an ancient
and important civilization that has a rightful place in
the modern world, with a modern economy. But too
often, Iran's security interests are pursued in a way that
destabilizes and, at times, directly threatens others,
supports terrorism and distorts the Iranian economy.
These regional activities risk increasing international
conflict and threaten international peace and security.

We are deeply concerned by Iranian assistance
to groups in Yemen, Lebanon, Syria and Iraq. That
includes reported transfers of Iranian ballistic missile
parts and related technology to the Houthis in Yemen.
Such transfers violate resolution 2231 (2015), which
prohibits such transfers without the authorization of
the Security Council. They also violate resolution 2216
(2015), which prohibits the sale or transfer of arms and
related materiel to the Houthis. Houthi missile attacks
in November and December targeted civilian areas.
Had they landed as intended, they would have caused
suffering and chaos. And there are press reports even
today of a new launch. This is unacceptable. We call
on all Member States to implement Council resolutions
and prevent such attacks, which increase regional
tensions and threaten peace and security.

The transfer of weapons to the Houthis will also
prolong the conflict in Yemen and the suffering of the
Yemeni people. As I have said previously, it is essential
that the United Nations conduct a thorough investigation
and inform the Security Council of its conclusions as
soon as possible. We strongly support the Secretary-
General's call for a joint meeting of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014) and the
Council in the 2231 format. We look forward also to the
report of the Panel of Experts established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) this month.

The United Kingdom remains fully committed to
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action. It is one of
the international community's greatest successes in
recent memory. We welcome Iran's compliance with its
nuclear commitments. We encourage all Member States
to uphold their commitments so the Iranian people see
the tangible benefits of this deal.

We also encourage Iran to uphold its commitments,
especially with respect to the provisions of annex B,
as highlighted in the Secretary General's fourth report
(S/2017/1030) as stipulated by resolution 2231 (2015).
Iran continues to invest heavily in ballistic missile
development despite United Nations sanctions; we saw
launches ofballistic missiles in 2016 and 2017 that were
inconsistent with the resolution. We urge Iran to refrain
from such activity and ask all partners to report any
evidence that Iran is conducting activity inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015) to the Security Council.

In conclusion, let us not forget that a prosperous,
stable Iran is beneficial us all, in the region and beyond.
We will continue to encourage Iran to comply fully with
Security Council resolutions, to respect their citizens'
human rights, and to reduce regional tensions. That is
the only way to achieve the peace and stability we all
endeavour to achieve.

