Mr. Prosor (Israel): Let me begin by thanking
the Secretary-General for his briefing. I also want to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriate
Affairs of Jordan for being here today to preside over
this special meeting.

Earlier this month, Jews throughout the world
celebrated Passover, which commemorates the
liberation of the ancient Jews from enslavement and
the birth of the Jewish nation. The Seder begins with
the youngest child in the family asking four questions,
also known as Ma Nish'tana. The child asks "What
has changed and why is this night different from all
other nights?" We answer the questions by recounting
the story of how freedom triumphed over oppression.
Those lessons are as relevant today as they were 3,000
years ago. For centuries, the Jewish people longed for,
prayed for and fought for the right to be free. Israel is
the realization of those dreams, and Passover reminds
us that we can never take those freedoms for granted.

Since our last debate on this topic (see S/PV.7360),
the chaos in our region has only grown worse.
Another nation State has been overrun by radical
extremists - first Syria, then Iraq, then Libya and
now Yemen. The extreme elements in our region
have displayed a level of barbarism that is shocking,
even by Middle Eastern standards. The situation has
become so dire that, in a rare display of unity, the
Arab leaders have joined forces. It should come as no
surprise that they have lashed out with little regard for
the consequences. The Saudi-led air strikes in Yemen
have hit humanitarian aid convoys, hospitals, schools
and civilian neighbourhoods and left entire families
dead. Yet there have been zero Human Rights Council
condemnations and zero calls for commissions of
inquiry. If the novelist Jane Austen were writing about
the United Nations today, the book could be called
Pride and Prejudice, but a more fitting title would be
Hypocrisy and Double Standards. One would think that
some of the Arab nations would demand justice. After
all, the Saudi Ambassador was quick to stand at the side
of the Palestinian representative during last summer's
Gaza conflict and preach about the value of civilian
life. The truth of the matter is that when Israel is at the
heart ofa crisis, the Arabs do not miss a beat. But when
fingers cannot be pointed at Israel, some Arab nations
show themselves to be downright heartless.

On Passover we ask what has changed. Today, I am
here to tell the Council that unless it stops singling out
Israel, the only democracy in the Middle East, and starts
focusing on the real threats in our region, nothing will
change. Just as we ask four questions on Passover to tell
the sad story of freedom, today I offer four questions to
explain why freedom and peace remain a distant dream
in the Middle East.

The first question is: What has changed with regard
to Iran? The answer is that Iran is more dangerous today
than it has ever been before. Make no mistake f Iran
is not only a threat to Israel, and it is not only a threat
to the Middle East. It is a threat to the entire world.
Iran is the engine of aggression behind the chaos in our
region. It has supplied Hizbullah, which today has more
than 120,000 missiles hidden in and within civilian
neighbourhoods. Hizbullah is playing a dangerous game
of Russian roulette. Instead of betting on red or black,
they are now gambling everything on the Blue Line,
where Iranian-sponsored terrorist groups surround
Israel. There is Hizbullah in the Syrian Golan and
southern Lebanon, with Hamas in Gaza. The Iranian
doctrine is apparent from Baghdad to Beirut and from
Damascus to Sana'a. Terrorists are committing a double
war crime, hiding behind civilians, while targeting
civilians.

As Iranian influence spreads, so do tyranny,

subjugation and terrorism. In the past four years alone,
Iran has committed or ordered attacks in 25 countries on
five continents. I am sure the representative of Bahrain
has not forgotten the last time that Iran meddled in that
country's internal affairs, much as I suspect the Saudi
Ambassador in Washington, DC, still remembers the
bitter cup of coffee he had at Cafe Milano. Imagine
how much more dangerous the situation will become
in our region and around the world if Iran is allowed to
snap open a nuclear umbrella. Iran is cunning, and it is
fanatical. Yet the international community is willing to
allow the regime to keep its thousands of centrifuges,
continue developing its long-range ballistic missiles
and conceal the military dimensions of its nuclear
programme.

What message is the Council sending when it
rewards an outlaw regime for violating Security
Council resolutions and international law? Ayatollah
Khamenei lies, deceives and betrays even more than
does the character Frank Underwood of the television
show House of Cards. The two of them would get on
like a house of cards on fire. What about President
Rouhani? One of his first acts as President was to
appoint Mostafa Pourmohammadi - known in Iran as
the Minister of Murder - as the Minister of Justice.
He has lived up to his name. In the past year, Iran has
executed 753 people; that is the highest total recorded in
the past 12 years. Iran is one of the worst human-rights
offenders, the primary sponsor of global terrorism and
is behind much of the chaos ravaging the Middle East.
If the international community gives Iran its support by
signing a nuclear agreement, the regime will be more
dangerous than ever before.

The second question is: What has changed when
it comes to Hamas? The answer is nothing. Hamas
continues to abuse its people and wage war against
Israel. Last summer, Hamas proved its utter disregard
for the well-being of the Palestinian people. It hid its
rockets in schools, fired missiles from hospitals and
used civilians as human shields. Today, Hamas is once
again disregarding the needs of its people as it rearms
and rebuilds its terror infrastructure.

Earlier this month, Israeli authorities revealed
that Hamas is using the Kerem Shalom crossing, the
only humanitarian crossing to Gaza, to hide tons
of dual-use items inside shipments of humanitarian
goods. The smuggled materials are used to rebuild
tunnels, reconstruct training camps and manufacture
rockets. Since Operation Protective Edge, Hamas has
test-fired more than 150 rockets. With every test rocket
launched into the sea, Hamas propels itself towards
another conflict. Just in the past week, a senior Hamas
leader issued a new call for Palestinians to kidnap
Israelis. It may just be my hearing, but I have yet to
hear a single United Nations official report on any of
those inflammatory developments. Some Members of
the Organization refuse to name Hamas as the terrorist
group that ignites tensions in our region and ignites
United Nations offices. In January, Hamas members
looted and set fire to the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process
in Gaza.

The Council does no favours to the Palestinian
people by failing to hold Hamas to account. I have not
heard any criticisms of Hamas for denying its people
freedoms or for failing to hold free elections. The closest
Hamas has come to reaching out to the people in Gaza
is the social media campaign it ran earlier this year.
In an effort to improve its image, Hamas encouraged
people to ask questions on Twitter using the hashtag
#AskHamas. A number of important questions were
posed to the terrorist group. Those questions included:
How does Hamas prevent repetitive strain injury when
firing dozens of rockets into Israel on a single day?
Does Hamas think it is better to hide its weapons in
a hospital's pediatric or its geriatric unit? Is Hamas
leader Khaled Mashaal right- or left-handed? From the
safety of his luxury hotel in Doha, he seems equally
adept at ordering room service with one hand, while
ordering terrorist attacks with the other.

It is time for a change. The Council must see Hamas
for what it is and call it what it is - an internationally
recognized terrorist organization. Stop giving Hamas
a free pass and start giving Israelis and Palestinians a
chance for a better future.

The third question is: What has changed when it
comes to the Palestinian leadership? If nothing has
changed with Hamas, why should one expect anything
to have changed with President Abbas? President Abbas
claims to support the two-State solution, but apparently
that message gets lost in translation because one will
never hear him make that claim in Arabic. He insists
that Palestinian refugees be allowed to flood the Jewish
State. So in truth he is committed to the creation of
two Palestinian States. President Abbas also claims to
oppose terrorism, but his Government forged a pact
with a terrorist organization, pays salaries to convicted
terrorists and incites violent attacks against Israelis.

Last month, the Palestinian Authority dedicated
a monument in Ramallah to the terrorist responsible
for the murder of 37 Israeli civilians. As if that were
not bad enough, the monument is in the shape of
what the Palestinian Authority describes as Palestine,
and it includes all of the State of Israel from the
Mediterranean Sea to the Dead Sea. The Palestinians
want a State without making compromises, without
making concessions and without making peace. I want
to be clear. Israel is in favour of a Palestinian State,
and that would end the conflict. On three separate
occasions, Israel offered the Palestinians a State, and
on all three occasions the Palestinians refused the deal
or walked away from the table.

The very last thing Israel can afford is another
terrorist State in its backyard. Just imagine what that
State would look like. We got a preview when Israel
disengaged from Gaza in 2005. Hamas took over the
Gaza Strip and created a terror stronghold. Given the
chance, Hamas would gladly create a second terror
State in Judea and Samaria. Such a terror State might as
well be called ISIL, which would stand for Iran, Syria,
Iraq and Lebanon. It would be sponsored by Iran and
would be as volatile as Syria, Iraq, and Lebanon.

Hamas is terrorizing the people of Gaza, and the
Palestinian Authority is not doing anything about
it. It has ignored its oversight obligations, namely, to
ensure that construction materials are not channelled
into terror activities. It has not imposed sanctions
on merchants selling cement on the black market. In
contrast, Israel has fully cooperated with the trilateral
Gaza reconstruction mechanism and has overseen the
transfer of tens of thousands of tons of construction
supplies. If President Abbas is serious about making
peace, he must break his alliance with Hamas, put an
end to incitement and return to direct negotiations with
Israel.

The fourth question is: What has changed when
it comes to the international community? Winston
Churchill once said, "A lie gets halfway around the
world before the truth has a chance to get its pants
on". Month after month, individuals in this Chamber
have argued that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is a
territorial dispute that can be resolved by addressing
the so-called root causes. That lie has circled the world
countless times.

The fact of the matter is that our conflict is not
about the right place for Israel's borders. It is about
Israel's right to exist in the first place. Israel stands
for democracy, for human rights and for freedom. Last
month, the Jewish State held its twentieth national
election. That makes 20 more free and fair elections
than Qatar and Iran have ever held. Yet Members of the
Organization question Israel's democratic nature and
focus disproportionately on our conflict.

The agenda item of today's debate is "The situation
in the Middle East", but listening to the meeting briefing,
one could well think that the only thing taking place
in the Middle East is the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The world's disproportionate focus on our conflict is an
injustice to the tens ofmillions ofvictims oftyranny and
terrorism in the Middle East. One has to wonder why
the Palestinians deserve more time and attention than
the Yemenis, the Syrians or the Libyans put together.
The time has come to focus global attention where it
belongs, namely, on the terrorists and their sponsors.
The enemies of freedom are trying to drive us back to
the dark ages. They deny women their freedom, censor
the media, dictate how religion must be practiced and
impose their radical way of life through barbaric acts
of violence. Israel is on the frontline of that fight, but
it is not just Israel's fight. It is the fight of anyone
who believes in progress and pluralism, tolerance and
freedom.

The Jewish people have fought for those rights for
generations. Israel was one of the first countries in the
world to screen people at airports. For its efforts to protect
passengers, Israel was criticized for putting travellers
through an invasive ordeal. Three decades later, Israel's
once so-called insensitive policies have become the
standard procedure at every airport across the globe.
In its short history, Israel has repeatedly confronted the
moral dilemmas that go hand-in-hand with combating
terrorism, long before other democracies woke up to
the threat. Make no mistake - Israel's battle today will
determine how we all live tomorrow.

Tomorrow, Israel will commemorate Yom Hazikaron
and honour the 23,320 individuals who have lost their
lives to war and terror. We will remember the brave
soldiers who died so that we can have our freedom,
and we will mourn the thousands of men, women and
children who were robbed of their lives simply because
they were Israeli. War has never been the choice of the
State of Israel. Our choice is and always has been the
path of peace. But when war and terror are forced upon
us, we will not surrender, and we will not back down.
For nearly 2,000 years, the Jewish people were stateless
and powerless in the face of hatred and indifference.
Those days are no more.

On Thursday, Israel will celebrate Yom Ha'atzmaut,
our sixty-seventh anniversary as a free and independent
Jewish State. With great joy and with heads held high,
we will celebrate the realization of the words of our
national anthem, Hatikvah. Our hope will not be
lost - the hope of 2,000 years, the hope to be a free
people in our own land, the land of Zion and Jerusalem.

