Mr. Amendola (Italy): Allow me first, on the
occasion of his last briefing in his current capacity,
to join others in their unanimous expressions of
appreciation and gratitude to Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Nicholas Haysom for his
outstanding work and passionate commitment as Head
ofthe United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) during a delicate period in the history of
Afghanistan. Of course, we give our support the new
Special Representative Yamamoto. I would also like
to thank the Secretary-General for his comprehensive
report (S/2016/532).
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made by
the observer of the European Union and wishes to add
the following remarks in its national capacity.

As the Afghan Ambassador has already underlined,
Afghanistan's security and stability are still under
threat from the ongoing violent attacks of the Taliban
and other hostile insurgent groups. We condemn in
the firmest possible terms those barbaric acts, such
as yesterday's attacks in Kabul and in Badakhshan.
An unprecedented number of civilian casualties in
the conflict have been documented by UNAMA, with
nearly 2.000 civilian victims in the first quarter of 2016
alone. It is particularly worrying that children represent
almost one-third of all victims.

Internally displaced people and flows of Afghan
migrants have considerably increased, also as a result
of the precarious economic scenario. Against that
challenging backdrop, I wish to reiterate the full Italian
support for the efforts of the Afghan National Unity
Government towards peace and stability and to defend
the gains achieved in Afghanistan in the past 15 years
in terms of democracy, basic freedoms, human rights
and women and girls' education.

The purpose of Italy's participation, as a framework
nation for the Western region, in the Resolute Support
Mission is to provide training and assistance to the
Afghan National Defence and Security Forces together
with NATO members and other partners. The security
forces are carrying out their task to protect their country
and its people with great courage and sacrifice.

A long-lasting peace in Afghanistan will hardly
be sustainable without a political solution. To that
end, effective collaboration among all regional players
is pivotal. Terrorism is a global and destabilizing
threat. We therefore support all diplomatic efforts,
such as those undertaken by the Quadrilateral
Coordination Group, aimed at creating the conditions
for an Afghan-led and Afghan-owned peace process,
by engaging neighbouring countries and establishing
constructive dialogue.

That process cannot stop, because a failure in the
peace process could endanger the achievements gained
over the years in the sphere of human, civil and social
rights, particularly for women and girls - as has been
stated already - reflected in the Afghan Constitution.
That is one of the pillars of Afghanistan's democratic
growth and partnership with the international
community. We also encourage and support initiatives
for interconnectivity, trade and infrastructure projects
aimed at fostering economic integration and cooperation
in the region, which would significantly contribute to
the development and prosperity of the region as a whole.

Afghanistan is the first beneficiary of Italy's
development aid, and reducing the country's structural
connectivity gaps represents one of the main goals of
our cooperation. This is the first priority of our effort
in a Mission that is the second-largest in terms of
foreign contingents.

The Afghan Government has started a reform
process that we support. It is fundamental to
Afghanistan's democratic consolidation and self-
reliance. Progress in sectors such as the rule of law,
the fight against corruption, economic governance,
electoral reform and respect for human rights, women's
rights and women's empowerment is essential. We
therefore commend the Government's determination
and commitment to reform and the encouraging
results obtained, such as increased fiscal revenues, key
appointments and new measures to fight corruption. We
look forward to further tangible achievements based on
mutual accountability principles.

As we approach the Brussels conference on
Afghanistan in October, further progress in the
Afghan Government's reform and governance agenda,
combined with the sustained support of the international

community, will be key to ensuring sustainable growth
and prosperity for Afghanistan and its people. As
Nicholas Haysom said, peace is not a luxury, but a
necessity. I think, as we all think, that we must advance
on that path.

