The Secretary-General: Mr. President, let me
thank you for those very kind words. And I thank you
also for proposing the resolution that the Council has
just passed, by which, needless to say, I am deeply
honoured.

Barring unforeseen crises in the next nine days -
which in this Council, of all places, one should never
rule out - today's meeting will be my last meeting
with you as Secretary-General. I must thank the
Council, not only for using this meeting to pass such a
generous resolution, but also for making it coincide
with another decision that you are about to adopt,
namely the resolution to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Integrated Office in Sierra Leone
(UNIOSIL).

Sierra Leone is definitely one of the success
stories of our work together. But those of us who
remember the anxious days of May 2000 know well
that that was far from being a foregone conclusion. But
today Sierra Leone is an example of what can be
achieved by the United Nations and its Member States
working closely together. The country is stable but still
fragile. It needs our continued help in building
effective State institutions, especially those dealing
with security, human rights, justice, and the preparation
for next year's elections, which will be a critical
moment in the consolidation of peace. So, I thank the
Council for agreeing to prolong the United Nations
06-67910
role in Sierra Leone. And I thank the Council for all the
work it has done for peace and security around the
world.

In my 10 years as Secretary-General, I have quite
often allowed myself to make some critical remarks
about this Council, particularly about its composition. I
still hope that such composition will be modified, since
I am convinced that, with a more democratic and
representative character, the Council will gain even
greater legitimacy, and its authority will be more
widely respected.

I have also occasionally criticized the Council's
actions, or, more often, its failure to act. And I have
tried, following the excellent example of the Brahimi
Report, to tell the Council what it needs to know, not
what it wants to hear.

Yet I know that the "primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security",
with which the Charter endows the Council, is not an
easy one to bear. In fact, it is much easier to criticize
the Council from outside than to take decisions in it. In
spite of that, the Council's members have generally
listened to me with surprising good grace.

And I must also recognize that the work of the
Council has been greatly strengthened during the 10
years of my service. The mandates it has given us have
been more coherent, more robust when required, and
often matched with something like the necessary
resources required. And its members now follow up on
their decisions with greater vigilance, demanding full
reports from me and my colleagues on the missions
they have mandated, and sometimes going to see for
themselves on the spot how things are going.

The Council has also passed some very important
thematic resolutions - I think especially of resolution
1325 (2000) on the role of women in the prevention
and resolution of conflicts and in peacebuilding - and it
is generally much more cognizant of the need to prevent
conflict, rather than wait to react after it occurs.

We have all learned from some bitter experiences
that we cannot afford to uncritically accept a
Government's word when it assures us that all is well
in its country, or that it has the situation under control.
We have also learned that the Council needs to be fully
briefed on issues of human rights, since gross
violations of human rights not only occur during
conflict but are often the harbingers of conflict.
3
There is certainly no room for complacency. As I
said last week, it is painful for me to leave office with
the Middle East in such a fragile and dangerous
condition.

I do fervently hope that we are now at last close
to rescuing the people of Darfur from their agony. The
reports I have received from my envoy in Khartoum,
Mr. Ould Abdallah, encourage me to think we may
tomorrow receive a green light from President Bashir
for a full ceasefire, a renewed effort to bring all parties
into the political process, and deployment of the
proposed hybrid African Union-United Nations force to
protect the population. We will, however, need to see
the document that Mr. Ould Abdallah will bring.

But after so many disappointments, I must say
that I take nothing for granted. What I do know is that
the Council will continue to work, ably helped by my
successor, on these and many other crises. But there is
no cause for despair, either. While change for the worse
is often dramatic, change for the better is generally
incremental. Many conflicts have been peacefully
resolved. Many have been at least brought under
control, with hope for better times on the horizon. And
I believe - though this is much harder to prove - that
many have been prevented.

At all events, it remains the sacred and exalting
duty of this Organization to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. It has been my
privilege to share this effort with the Security Council,
both in success and in failure. I now relinquish that
task, with relief but not without regret. And I pray that
the Security Council will have ever greater success in
the future.

