Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Valentin Inzko for his report (5/2019/843, annex), and
both him and Ms. Selma Korjenie for their valuable
briefings. We would also like to take this opportunity
to welcome the renewal of the mandate of the European
Union-led Operation Althea.

Despite some positive developments, we must
express our concern about the lack of progress being
made in implementing the five objectives and two
conditions - the 5+2 agenda - with a View to ensuring
Bosnia and Herzegovina's full autonomy. As the High
Representative mentioned, it is particularly worrying
that the delays and setbacks are due to the lack of real
commitment on the part of the political class. The lack
of respect for State institutions and their decisions,
and the exacerbation of belligerent and secessionist
messages contribute to this stagnation. In that regard,
we reiterate how important it is for both the Federation
and the Republika Srpska to renew their willingness
to implement the 1995 General Framework Agreement
for Peace, recognize the authority of the Office of
the High Representative and reaffirm the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is also essential that they show full respect for the
Constitution and State institutions and competencies at
every level. The cantons of the Federation must adapt
their regulations, especially regarding elections, while
the Republika Srpska must comply with the provisions
of the Agreement regarding the registration of military
properties and the transfer of indirect taxes.

We welcome the adoption of a series of reforms
by both sides in their efforts to advance European
integration, but it is also crucial to overcome the
political impasse with a view to appointing a Council
of Ministers, which has been pending for a year, and
to resuming parliamentary work. The strengthening of
institutions and the rule of law, like the path to Europe,
should be an area of convergence based on common
interests. Making progress in that reform process, as
well as in addressing migration issues, organized crime
and corruption, must be a priority.

In that regard, we reiterate the importance of
creating a public prosecutor's office and a specialized
court to combat organized crime and corruption. That
would also contribute to the fight against impunity and
improve the legitimacy of institutions and the people's
trust in them. In that fight, and as we heard from
Ms. Korjenic', access to justice is key. It is particularly
regrettable that the judicial institutions have been unable
to complete their work on war-crimes cases as planned.
It is a legal and moral imperative for the victims of
those crimes and their families in order to contribute to
reconciliation, in which we also acknowledge the role
of civil society, especially women and young people.
In that regard, we deplore and reject speeches and
initiatives that foment division and hatred, particularly
when they are used to restrict freedom of speech and of
the press, as well as the right to association and peaceful
protest. Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms cannot be conditional.

In conclusion, in underlining the importance of
the full cooperation of the parties and the resources
necessary for High Representative Inzko and Operation
Althea to carry out their duties, we reiterate Peru's full
support for the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
their path towards sustainable peace and development.

