The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Canada, Denmark, Germany, Greece,
Norway, Somalia and Ukraine, in which they request to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, With the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item Without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Duale
(Somalia), took a seat at the Council table; the
representatives of the other aforementioned
countries took the seats reserved for them at the
side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
2

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/592, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Canada, China, Denmark, France,
Gabon, Germany, Greece, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico,
Nigeria, Norway, the Russian Federation, Somalia,
Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the United
States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2010/556, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolution 1897 (2009).

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Austria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, China,
France, Gabon, Japan, Lebanon, Mexico, Nigeria,
Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour.
The draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as
resolution 1950 (2010).

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda. The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 10.15 am.
10-64817

