Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Madam
President, let me begin by thanking you for scheduling
this public meeting on the situation in Angola. We also
thank Ambassador Gambari, Under-Secretary-General
and Special Adviser on Africa, for introducing the
latest report of the Secretary-General and for his very
useful and comprehensive additional remarks. We
welcome also the presence of Mr. Malungo, Minister
for Social Assistance of Angola, as well as his very
informative and, I must say, encouraging statement.

The Security Council has addressed the situation
in Angola at regular intervals since hostilities resumed
in December 1998. While addressing all aspects of the
situation, we nevertheless have devoted particular
attention to ways and means of promoting the peace
process.

We continue to support the validity of the Lusaka
Protocol, as does the Government of Angola. As we
have said earlier, it is the intransigence of UNITA and
its insistence on pursuing a military campaign that has
derailed the peace process and hindered the full
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol. UNITA needs
to be reminded that there is no military option for it.

We note with satisfaction that the sanctions
imposed on UNITA in the area of arms, oil and
diamonds have taken significant effect. We reiterate
our full support for the strengthened United Nations
sanctions regime, especially as concerns illegal
diamonds. The recent World Diamond Congress
expressed the support of the diamond industry for the
efforts of the Security Council through the adoption of
a resolution. Bangladesh strongly believes that UNITA
will soon find out the futility of the military campaign
that it is pursuing. We must not, however, relent.

At this point, I would like to pay tribute to the
role played by Ambassador Fowler in this regard in his
capacity as the Chairman of the Angola sanctions
Committee. His determination and thoroughness have
yielded results and need to be emulated in other areas
as well.

The Government of Angola's military initiative
continues to meet with success in its quest to extend its
authority over areas under UNITA control. The
conventional war capability of UNITA has been further
reduced. As mentioned in the report of the Secretary-
General of 12 July, the hostilities have had a negative
impact on the law and order situation throughout the
country. We learned in his last report that the military
developments have exacerbated the humanitarian
situation and affected the free movement of people in
the country. People have been forced to leave their
homes with almost no means of subsistence.
Furthermore, help and assistance from the international
community have not been able to reach the people in
need.

We believe that these issues should be addressed
in order to alleviate the suffering of the civilian
population. We also need to encourage the Government
of Angola to continue to cooperate with the United
Nations agencies already working in the field in
addressing the humanitarian situation and in improving
the situation of those people who are at risk. As was
indicated in the report of the rapid assessment mission
of the Emergency Relief Coordinator in March, urgent
steps need to be taken so that the situation does not
deteriorate to the point of crisis. We believe that we
share the same view in the Council.

We are happy to note that the Government of
Angola took the assessment seriously and, as
mentioned in the present report of the Secretary-
General, actively participated in drawing up an
emergency plan of action. We fully support this
approach of identifying the critical needs of the at-risk
population and devising a strategy with major
objectives. We support the focus of the plan on
nutrition, sustenance for internally displaced persons
before the planting season, water and sanitation
programmes, and mother and child health-care
programmes. We also support the ongoing response to
the outbreak of disease and the vaccination campaign.

The magnitude of the situation is reflected in the
statistic that the total number of internally displaced
persons represents approximately 20 per cent of the
population of Angola. However, we believe the
measures contemplated will be useful.

We commend the Government of Angola and the
United Nations agencies, as well as the non-
governmental organizations, for their efforts in drawing
up resettlement plans in accordance with certain
minimum operational standards. It is also gratifying to
note that some return movements of displaced persons
have been noticed. We need to put in place conditions
that will sustain and eventually increase these
movements.

It need not be repeated that access to the civilian
population in dire need of assistance is pivotal to any
measurable success in containing the situation. We
encourage the Government of Angola to do all it can to
help facilitate this access. It is heartening to note that
with new locations coming under its administration,
humanitarian access has increased.

Finally, Bangladesh believes that the
humanitarian efforts in Angola represent a part of the
whole. We need to set our sights on the ultimate
objective of achieving durable peace in Angola. As we
said on an earlier occasion, the process is political. To
our mind, there is a need to create a political space for
an open dialogue with all, including UNITA. The civil
society in Angola has started voicing its opinion in
favour of cessation of hostilities and for a broad-based
dialogue for peace and genuine national reconciliation.

