Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
too wish to welcome you, Mr. Minister, to today's
meeting; we are very appreciative of your having
devoted the time to be with us this week.

We have heard some truly interesting comments
and briefings from our guests this morning. Today's
discussion reflects the challenge that the international
community faces in balancing its role in Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the responsibility and commitment
required by the leaders and the citizens of Bosnia. The
streamlining plan approved last week at Brussels by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council is
timely and indeed necessary for the next phase of the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accords. We
welcome the success in producing what Ambassador
Petritsch described as a leaner and less bureaucratic
structure. We also welcome the decision of the Council
to accept the offer of the European Union to continue
the efforts of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) in strengthening the rule of
law.
We congratulate Mr. Klein on his success with the
International Police Task Force. We applaud his efforts
to attain the goal of completing UNMIBH's core
mandate by the end of this year; thanks in large part to
his efforts, the way ahead on police and justice is clear,
if not exactly easy, on the path provided and with the
envisaged cooperation between the European Union
and the United Nations.

But neither the streamlining exercise nor
international assistance alter the central role that
Bosnia's leaders and its people must play in
implementing the Dayton Peace Accords and in
building a prosperous and secure nation. We know the
priorities; they are the strengthening of State
institutions, refugee returns and economic reform. We
still see too little progress on the part of Bosnia's
Government towards making the hard choices and
towards reaching compromise on the most critical
issues. Simply put, more has to be done on the
Constitutional Court decision, the upcoming elections
and the current budget, as well as on defence and
judicial reform.

A key point has to be kept in mind for the future,
and that is that economic growth will not be
sustainable until investors are assured that the
Government can address these and other problems on
its own. We urge the Government to take the necessary
steps to implement the Constitutional Court's decision
and to agree on a budget that provides sufficient funds
for the upcoming elections, for the State Border
Service and for reform of the armed forces, among
other things.

In our view, the upcoming elections are not
premature, but they will require considerable effort and
commitment on the part of Bosnia's leaders and its
people.

My Government remains committed to Dayton's
implementation. We actively support the Peace
Implementation Council on the civilian side, as well as
SFOR's considerable role, including its efforts to
apprehend indicted war criminals still at large, as we
saw last week in the two SFOR operations. The United
States is committed to seeing those responsible for
violations of international humanitarian law, genocide
and war crimes, including Radovan Karadzic and
Ratko Mladic, brought to The Hague. We seek and
expect the cooperation of regional Governments in the
arrest of indicted war criminals and their transfer to
The Hague, and we urge Republika Srpska to fulfil its
obligations under the Dayton Accords to turn over
indicted war criminals.

I want to conclude by congratulating Ambassador
Petritsch, who is with us for the last time, on his effort
and commitment to peace over two and a half years.
Last week, the Peace Implementation Council said in
its statement that as a result of his efforts, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is substantially more stable, more
democratic and closer to Europe. That is testimony to
his efforts and an excellent record to leave to his
successor. As others have noted, there is still a lot to
do. We welcome the designation of Lord Ashdown and
look forward to working closely with him to carry on
the implementation of the Dayton Accords.

