Mr. Aman (Malaysia): First of all, I wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, as well as the entire
delegation of New Zealand, on so ably steering the
Security Council's proceedings and work this month.
I am pleased to participate in this very important and
timely meeting. We hope it will make a meaningful
contribution towards improving the state of global
aviation security. Accordingly, I thank Secretary
General of the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), Ms. Fang Liu, for her insightful briefing.

The global aviation industry depends on a vast
network that growing ever-more important everyday.
The International Air Transport Association estimates
that there are over 5,000 aircraft flying at any given
time, carrying over 8 million people, while transporting
140,000 tonnes of cargo daily. Moreover, the aviation
industry supports over 57 million jobs and generates
$2.2 trillion in economic activity. The global economic
benefits and significance to human activity today are
enormous. As such, the global aviation industry must
be protected with measures designed to provide safety
and security for its passengers.

Malaysia shares the view that the global aviation
network is an attractive target for international
terrorism. The sharp increase in attempts to disrupt
and threaten civil aviation over the past few years is
proof of this View. The cold and calculating logic
of terrorists was obvious in the attacks against the
Brussels International Airport and Istanbul Ataturk
Airport earlier this year. When such attacks are
successful, the consequences are devastating in terms
of both lives lost and undermined public confidence.
Taken together, both could bring about even broader
negative consequences. With two back-to-back aviation
tragedies, Malaysia is acutely aware of the challenges
associated with addressing negative public perceptions
and loss of public confidence.

Against such a background, my delegation concurs
that the threats posed to aviation security by terrorism
constitute threats to international peace and security.
It is therefore right for the Council to be seized of
this issue. In this regard, I wish to thank the United
Kingdom for leading the Council to adopt resolution
2309 (2016) this morning. Malaysia is pleased to
support and co-sponsor the resolution, as it seeks to
establish a better and stronger linkage between the
Council's ongoing counter-terrorism work with ICAO's
norms- and standards-setting work.

By enabling such linkages between ICAO and the
Security Council, especially in the Council's subsidiary
bodies, including the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1373 (2001) and the Counter-Terrorism
Executive Directorate, we are hopeful that such
cooperation and collaboration would over time result in
tangible improvements in global aviation security in all
its aspects. At the same time, my delegation believes that
resolution 2309 (2016) could also inform discussions
within the ICAO General Assembly, scheduled to begin
early next week, on possible updates to the Global
Aviation Safety Plan.

In the span ofjust four months, Malaysia suffered
not one but two civil-aviation disasters, namely, the
tragedies ofMalaysian Airlines Flight MH-370 and MH-
17. These tragedies continue to hang heavy on our hearts
as they do on the hearts of the families and loved ones of
the victims. These two civil aviation tragedies - while
not ostensibly linked to terrorism - do offer some
instructive lessons relevant to the aims and objectives
of resolution 2309 (2016). In that regard, with a view to
sharing Malaysia's experience, I wish to make two key
observations.

First, with respect to the civil-aviation authorities'
initial instinct or reflex in both cases to investigate
and determine whether the air disasters were caused
by terrorism or other factors, the immediate provision
of expertise and assistance from both States and
international organizations, including the ICAO, to
determine probable causes, were, in our view, crucial to
dispelling the notion that either MH-37O or MH-l7 was
brought down by acts of terrorism. Such quick action
helped maintain public perception and confidence.

Secondly, pursuant to the need for increased
preparedness and prevention-capacity, Malaysia
introduced new security measures, including the
deployment of hi-tech monitoring systems and
additional security personnel across all international
airports in Malaysia. We have taken steps to improve
information- and intelligence-sharing through
deployment of the Advance Passenger Information
System and the Advanced Passenger Screening System
to provide early warning and curb possible travel of
foreign terrorist fighters, in line with the provisions
of resolution 2178 (2014). We have also strengthened
our legal and operational framework by revamping the
Malaysian National Security Council, which has, among
its core functions, the assessment and monitoring of
terrorist threats and activities in the country.

I am also pleased to share that the South-East Asian
region through the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN) is also giving priority to aviation
security. The adoption of the ASEAN Transport
Strategic Plan 2016-2025, the key regional policy
document on aviation security, adopted in December
2015, is an example of increased coordination and
cooperation in my region on this issue.

I wish to also take this opportunity to reassure
all concerned that Malaysia, together with all our
partners, remains committed to bringing closure to all
outstanding questions on MH-370 and MH-17. We are
most grateful for the encouragement and assistance we
have received from all our partners and friends to this
end. With specific regard to MH-17, I wish to reaffirm
Malaysia's commitment to implementing the provisions
of resolution 2166 (2014) and count on the support and
cooperation of all concerned partners in this regard.

In conclusion, I wish to reaffirm Malaysia's
unwavering commitment to combating and eradicating
the scourge of terrorism as part of our shared collective
responsibility, including through joint, coordinated
and concerted efforts at all levels. These efforts must
be premised on the full respect for international law,
including human rights and humanitarian law, as well
as respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.

