Mr. Guillermet (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Mr. President, I would like to begin by thanking you
and your delegation for organizing this debate. We
believe that this is an extremely valuable opportunity
to exchange points of view on the current challenges to
peacekeeping operations, especially at a time when
several initiatives for discussion on this item are being
developed within and without the Security Council. We
are especially pleased to see the participation of
several troop- and police-contributing countries and we
hope that we can continue the practice of including
these countries in the Council's discussion on this item.

The concept paper that has been circulated by the
delegation of Turkey invites us to focus on the important
topic of the relationship between the Security Council
and troop- and police-contributing countries. This is a
topic that the Council has been discussing for more
than 15 years and that has been the subject of several
presidential statements and resolutions over the years,
which shows the importance of the topic.

However, we go on discussing this matter
because, unfortunately, we acknowledge that the level
of interaction between the main partners involved in
peacekeeping operations is still very limited. We have
all witnessed the wide gap that exists between the
Council, the contributing countries, the Secretariat and
even host countries. This situation is of enormous
concern to us because it is clear to our country that
communication and coordination among all of the
actors involved in peacekeeping operations are a
crucial factor for a mission's success, while the lack of
both could have serious implications on the ground.

In order to improve and strengthen this
partnership among the Council, the troop-contributing
countries, the Secretariat and the host country, we need
proactive and specific action on the part of all of
actors. It is clear to us, following our experience as an
elected member of the Security Council, that we have
to change the exclusive institutional culture that prevails
within the Council in order to make it more inclusive.

In this regard, over the next six months it will
continue to be a priority for our country to work with
other delegations in the Council to ensure full
compliance with existing standards, in particular, the
note by the President of the Security Council contained
in document S/2006/507, resolutions 1327 (2000) and
1353 (2001), and Article 44 of the Charter of the
United Nations, and to promote specific steps to
increase the frequency and, above all, quality of the
interaction between the Council and the troop-
contributing countries, the Secretariat and host
countries, especially at the expert level. Likewise, we
hope that one of the results of the France/United
Kingdom initiative to analyze the different aspects of
peacekeeping operations will be a renewed
commitment by the Council to deepen the interaction
among those actors. We hope that will be the case.

We also view very positively the efforts of the
delegation of Japan - whom we thank for their
leadership - as Chair of the Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations and in organizing meetings of
the Working Group with the TCCs and the Secretariat.
We hope that practice will continue, and we believe
that it would be valuable to consider holding similar
meetings on individual missions before the next
renewal of their mandates.

In the past, Costa Rica has also argued for closer
involvement of the Secretariat during the Council's
decision-making process on peacekeeping operations.
When the Council's experts meet to negotiate a
resolution, they should take the advice of the
Secretariat into account, as we have seen in many
negotiations in the General Assembly and as in fact we
have heard that the Council has done in past years. In
that manner it could inform the Council in a timely
manner of the practical, operational and financial
implications of the Council's proposals.
An important step was taken with the recent
establishment of the group of experts on the protection
of civilians, through which the members of the Council
can interact with officials from the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs prior to
negotiating the mandate. However, similar interaction
is lacking with other entities of the Secretariat, in
particular with the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations and the Department of Field Support.

As we said earlier, strengthening relations
between the main players involved in peacekeeping is
everyone's responsibility, not only that of the Council.
The Secretariat must ensure provision of timely and
detailed information to the Council and to the TCCs,
especially in crisis situations. Furthermore, we believe
that there could be a greater effort on the part of the
Secretariat to share information with all Council
members - not only, as we sometimes see, with some
members, mainly the permanent members.

On the other hand, although it is true that we
need greater opportunities for dialogue with the TCCs,
we are concerned that the opportunities that already
exist are underused, especially the private meetings of
the Council with the TCCs, where on many occasions
the level of participation and interaction is minimal, if
not to say non-existent. We would like to hear the
views of the TCCs on how those meetings could be
more interactive, or if they believe that another form of
dialogue would be more conducive to greater interaction.

My delegation would also like to call upon the
host countries to take greater advantage of the
Council's public meetings to refer to specific aspects of
operations. It is also crucial that we all work together
to improve the Council's interaction with the General
Assembly, especially with the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee.

Costa Rica is aware that some of our
recommendations could prolong the Council's
negotiations or increase its level of work. But we are
also convinced that greater and more substantive
interaction among all the actors would make it possible
for the Council to take better decisions, to design
clearer and more viable mandates and to guarantee
more effective implementation of those decisions on
the ground. Even more importantly, we believe that
those proposals would help to strengthen trust between
the different participants within a peacekeeping
operation and would thus contribute to strengthening
the partnerships that support and legitimize that
emblematic activity of the United Nations.

I would like to thank Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra for their valuable statements and also for
having circulated the executive summary of the New
Horizon document and for having presented some of its
main points in this debate. My delegation will await
the final publication of the document to make
constructive contributions to its recommendations. But
we take this opportunity to briefly look at three points
that were made in the document.

First, we agree with the important point that
peacekeeping should be part of a political solution and,
as we have argued on many occasions, on the need to
be more creative in using the broad range of
instruments that are available to the Council for the
prevention and resolution of conflicts. For that reason,
we look forward with interest to the recommendations
along those lines. It would seem valuable to us if those
could include specific proposals on current operations
where those additional political tools could be deployed.

Secondly, we also hope to receive recommendations
and proposals on strategies that could be used to
mobilize coalitions of Member States and other
partners to support peacekeeping operations, especially
as we have seen the success of that approach in Haiti.
It would be interesting if the document could provide
specific cases of current operations where that type of
strategy could be followed.

Thirdly, we agree with the urgency of building a
consensus on policies to define the implementation of
key mandates in peacekeeping operations, such as the
protection of civilians. My country has in recent
months been advocating in different forums the need to
begin a process to define clear, realistic and
appropriate guidelines and operational requirements for
resources and training that make up the additional tasks
related to the protection of civilians. For that reason,
we await with interest the recommendations on this
topic.

Lastly, Costa Rica will continue to work in a
committed manner to promote close consultations
among all partners involved in peacekeeping, bearing
in mind at all times that our efforts will have a direct
effect on the situations and lives of millions of
civilians in armed conflict - the very raison d'etre of
peacekeeping operations.
