Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like to
associate the United Kingdom with the statement to be
made later by the Ambassador of Ireland on behalf of
the European Union.

We very much welcome today's public meeting
and the Chairman's oral briefing on the progress that
the Committee has made since January. We are
particularly encouraged to hear about the Chairman's
most recent visit to Africa and Europe. His findings
once again demonstrate the usefulness of such visits,
not only in engaging States on implementation of the
Committee's measures, but also on issues relating to
the fight against terrorism more generally.

The United Kingdom would like to express its
appreciation for the efforts made by Ambassador
Mufioz as Chairman and for the efforts of all the others
involved in conducting such visits. We agree with the
recommendations that stemmed from the visit, and we
stand ready to assist in taking them forward.

The United Kingdom would also like to take this
opportunity to extend a very warm welcome to the new
Monitoring Team. We fully endorse the work
programme that the Team has submitted. In particular,
we welcome the focus that it gives to the need for close
cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee.
We welcome the proposals to explore how the
consolidated list might be improved and the intention
to look more closely at the reasons behind non-
reporting, as well as to assess Member States'
implementation of the measures, the impact that they
have and how they might be improved.

The Team's intention to develop a better
understanding of the nature of the threat posed by Al
Qaeda, the Taliban and their associates will be
important in taking forward these initiatives. We very
much look forward, therefore, to working with the
Monitoring Team and to seeing in due course the
reports outlined in the work programme.

I would like to make just four further points.
First, we should not underestimate the importance of
ensuring that human rights are respected in the fight
against terrorism. Addressing human rights is
fundamental to addressing some of the root causes of
terrorism. Moreover, ensuring that international human
rights and refugee and humanitarian law are respected
adds to the legitimacy of the sanctions regime and how
it is perceived. The measures are wide-ranging, and we
must do all that we can to ensure that innocent people
are not affected as a result of their implementation.

That brings me to my second point, which is the
important issue of the potential for humanitarian
consequences arising from the freezing of the assets of
mixed entities that provide assistance to the needy as
well as to terrorists. The Committee should be aware of
this issue and should perhaps consider whether there is
anything it can do in such situations. Perhaps it might
be possible, for example, to alert relief agencies about
a listing which may have humanitarian consequences,
so that some provision can be made for those affected.
Care would, of course, need to be taken to ensure that
any such actions did not weaken the measures or
forewarn the target.

Thirdly, on previous occasions we have stressed
the need to help and encourage States to implement the
measures effectively and thus limit the potential for Al
Qaeda and the Taliban to conduct their operations.
Technical assistance remains an important part of this.

We fully support the Monitoring Team's plans to
collaborate with the Counter-Terrorism Committee in
assessing the needs of States. The Committee might
also seek to develop best practice for effective
implementation, drawing on the successful experiences
of other States. Earlier this morning the Chairman gave
us the example of the system that one State has
developed for non-governmental organizations,
charities and other organizations to keep records of
financial transactions in order to help with tracing
terrorist financing.

We applaud the Monitoring Team's plan to visit
Member States that have developed expertise in
introducing measures foreseen or unforeseen by the
relevant resolutions.

Fourthly, and last but by no means least, I should
like to echo the Chairman's earlier remark that
terrorism is a global threat and that no State should
therefore feel immune from terrorist acts. All States
need to be encouraged and assisted in implementing
the measures and fighting terrorism. Those States slow
to increase their counter-terrorism capacity will
become more vulnerable to a terrorist presence as other
States make progress on their counter-terrorism
measures and force Al Qaeda and the Taliban to find
sanctuary elsewhere.

The Chairman's remarks remind us that, although
much has been achieved by the Committee, there is
much still to do. I should like to close by reiterating
that the United Kingdom continues to stand ready to
help with the fight against terrorism in whatever way it
can.

