Mr. Grauls (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
is grateful to you, Mr. President, for your initiative to
convene this debate on a question that has to do with
the very raison d'etre of the United Nations. Being a
civilian, whether a journalist, doctor, nurse, woman,
girl or child, can today be truly nightmarish in conflict
situations. The international community must therefore
deal with that issue.

We associate ourselves fully with the statement
to be made by the observer of the European Union. I
would like to make a statement in my national capacity
on three specific issues, namely, humanitarian access,
accountability and the future arms trade treaty.

First of all, as the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic reaches unprecedented levels of horror,
Belgium would like to recall the clear terms ofresolution
1894 (2009), whereby the Security Council expressed

"its willingness to respond to situations of
armed conflict where civilians are being targeted
or humanitarian assistance to civilians is being
deliberately obstructed, including through the
consideration of appropriate measures at the
Security Council's disposal in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations" (resolution 1894 (2009), para. 4).

Belgium calls on the Council to undertake its
responsibilities in order to find a solution to the Syrian
crisis and thus effectively support the efforts of the Joint
Special Representative, Mr. Brahimi. Furthermore,
we regret the fact that the Council was unable, at the
beginning of February, to issue a press statement
in support of the pressing calls by the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for greater
access by the United Nations to all of Syria.

Over the past few months, Belgium has been
shocked, as has been the rest of the international
community, by the unimaginable violations of
international humanitarian law in Syria and has taken
action to encourage all parties to the conflict to respect
and fully protect access to medical care and medical
centres. With other partners who share that concern,
Belgium is currently working in Geneva to draw up
a joint statement for the Syrian Humanitarian Forum,
which will meet on 19 February. The statement, which
we hope will be supported by as many States as possible,
will recall, on the one hand, that the principles of
international humanitarian law must be respected by all
parties, with particular focus on access to medical care
for all persons in need, and, on the other hand, that all
ofus, as States, must ensure respect for those principles
by using our influence with the parties involved.

My second point has to do with a major component
of the protection of civilians, namely, the principle of
accountability for perpetrators of grave violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights. Here
again, I must, unfortunately, mention the Syrian Arab
Republic. We are counting on the Security Council to
ensure that, one day, justice is done in Syria. That is
why Belgium is among those calling for the situation to
be referred to the International Criminal Court. In Syria
as elsewhere, the Security Council is also called upon
to encourage and assist the authorities in establishing
national mechanisms for justice.

Moreover, Belgium calls on all parties involved in
other conflicts - I am thinking in particular ofMali and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo - to respect the
fundamental principles of international humanitarian
law and human rights. It is our view that national
prosecutions of those who have violated international
law require effective and more sustained international
legal cooperation. That is why our country, together with
the Netherlands and Slovenia, is pursuing an initiative to
conclude a multilateral instrument strengthening legal
international cooperation to prosecute such crimes.

I would also like to emphasize the importance
of recording civilian casualties, which is an essential
aspect of accountability. Belgium shares the view that
that tool should be further developed and implemented
on the ground. On the basis of my personal experience,
I would like to add that the Peacebuilding Commission
can also make a useful contribution to efforts to promote
accountability, and should be further encouraged in
that respect.

Finally, with respect to the protection of civilians,
I would also like to mention the arms trade treaty, in
as much as the relevant final negotiations will take
place next month. The overwhelming majority Member
States have expressed their determination to conclude
such a treaty. The campaign is not about making the
arms trade illegal. The right to legitimate individual
and collective self-defence is a fundamental principle,
and it requires that States have the means to implement
it. However, we also have a responsibility to ensure that
the arms trade is carried out with the greatest possible
degree of transparency and will not serve to oppress
populations, unleash wars of aggression or perpetuate
violence directed against defenceless populations.
With respect to the elements covered by such a treaty,
Belgium attaches particular importance to the question
of child soldiers, as their recruitment is, in fact, a war
crime.

To conclude my statement in this debate on the
protection of civilians, I would like to pay special
tribute to Dr. Denis Mukwege, director of the Panzi
hospital in Goma. His work to assist victims of sexual
violence in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo makes him a great protector of civilians.
Dr. Mukwege is a tireless advocate for the protection of
civilians in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
calls on political leaders to ensure better protection for
women and children in the region.

