Mr. Kastrup (Germany): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated country Cyprus align themselves with this
statement.

The European Union is very concerned about the crisis
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which has
escalated into a large-scale regional war. Due to a complex
set of strategic alliances, a series of previously unconnected
conflicts in the Great Lakes region has blended into one
huge crisis which has turned the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and parts of the territories of neighbouring
countries into a battleground. This crisis has created
immense human suffering, it has dramatically increased
the already high number of refugees and displaced people
in this region and it is gradually destroying the social and
economic base of the countries of the Congo basin and
the Great Lakes region.
The European Union recognizes that the root causes
of the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
are very complex. However, we sincerely hope that
today's debate will not dwell on mutual accusations
between interested parties, but will instead contribute to
generating a forward-looking approach focused on
solutions and results.

The European Union reiterates its support for the
principles of the territorial integrity and respect for the
sovereignty and security of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and its neighbouring countries. In this context,
the European Union agrees with the statement of the
President of the Security Council of 11 December 1998
and affirms the obligation to respect the territorial
integrity, political independence and national sovereignty
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and of other
States in the region, including the obligation to refrain
from the threat or use of force against the territorial
integrity or political independence of any State or in any
other manner inconsistent with the purposes of the United
Nations. It also reaffirms the need for all States to refrain
from any interference in each other's internal affairs in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations. The
European Union strongly calls on all States to comply
with these principles. It continues to be concerned about
the involvement of several countries of the region, an
involvement which has not led to the intended
stabilization, but has led to a dangerous escalation which
now threatens the stability of the region as a whole.

The European Union reiterates that the current
conflict can be solved only through a negotiated
settlement between all the parties concerned with a view
to an urgent political solution to the conflict, leading to
the withdrawal of foreign troops from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and allowing the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and other countries in the region
to find peace, stability and democracy.

The European Union would like to emphasize that it
is most important that all warring parties in the conflict
show their unconditional willingness, through concrete
steps, to speed up this peace process. In this context, the
EU welcomes President Kabila's preparedness to enter
into negotiations with all parties to the conflict, including

 

the rebel movement, and encourages him to conclude a
ceasefire agreement as soon as possible. The EU also urges
all other parties involved in the conflict, both the rebel
movement and external actors, to participate in a
constructive manner in ongoing peace efforts.
The EU calls for the conclusion as soon as possible of
a ceasefire among the various parties to the conflict and for
its prompt implementation. It emphasizes the need for a
political process which must rest on two elements -
addressing, first, regional security problems by finding a
mechanism that meets the legitimate security concerns of
neighbouring countries, and, secondly, the internal situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by initiating an
all-inclusive political dialogue with the aim of establishing
a democratic society in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.

In this context, the EU emphasizes the need for a
continuous and inclusive negotiating process with a format
that allows the active participation of all major
stakeholders. The EU reiterates its support for an
international conference on peace, security and development
in the Great Lakes region, which would help to consolidate
a peace agreement in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and to ensure the stability of countries in the region.
The EU emphasizes the need also to address the question
of the proliferation of arms and the illicit trafficking of
commodities in the region, which fuels this proliferation.
The need to reintegrate disaffected soldiers and other
combatants into civil society must also be addressed.

The European Union strongly supports the regional
peace initiatives undertaken by, among others, the Southern
African Development Community troika led by the
President of Zambia and supported by the Presidents of
Mozambique and of Tanzania, and the Organization of
African Unity (OAU). The EU would welcome more active
involvement by the United Nations and by the OAU to
coordinate and streamline the various peace efforts. The EU
is supporting regional peace efforts, inter alia through the
assistance of the EU Special Envoy for the Great Lakes
Region, Mr. Aldo Ajello. It would be prepared to consider
a rehabilitation programme for the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in the event of an effective cessation of
hostilities and internal progress on peace, democracy and
respect for human rights. It reiterates that it might find it
increasingly difficult to continue its present level of
budgetary assistance to countries involved in this conflict
should they persist with the military option. Considerations
in this regard would not, of course, affect purely
humanitarian assistance.

We welcome the statement by the President of the
Security Council of 11 December 1998, expressing the
preparedness of the Council to consider, in the light of
efforts to achieve peaceful resolution of the conflict, the
active involvement of the United Nations to assist in the
implementation of an effective ceasefire agreement and in
an agreed process for a political settlement of the conflict.
The EU also stands ready to support efforts that might be
undertaken by the United Nations to assist in the
implementation of a ceasefire agreement.

The European Union strongly condemns acts of
violence perpetrated against the civilian population since
the beginning of the crisis, and calls for an independent
investigation of allegations of major human rights
violations reportedly committed by all parties to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In this
context, the EU expresses its deep concern about recent
reports of new mass killings in the Kivu region.

The EU is deeply concerned at the recent kidnapping
and brutal murder of eight tourists and one park warden
in Uganda, killings that were apparently politically
motivated. The EU expects the authorities of all countries
concerned to do their utmost to arrest the perpetrators and
bring them to justice, and to prevent similar incidents.

The European Union welcomes the visit of the
United Nations Special Rapporteur, Mr. Garreton, and
hopes that this will help to foster progress in the
development of the human rights situation in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It also welcomes the
work of the United Nations human rights field office in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and supports its
strengthening.

The EU firmly calls on the parties to the conflict to
respect human rights and humanitarian law and to abstain
from inciting ethnic hatred. It calls on all parties to
guarantee the safety and security of humanitarian
personnel and their unhindered access to the affected
civilian population in need. The EU strongly condemns
the recruitment and use of child soldiers and other
combatants, and urges all parties to abstain from this
practice. The EU further urges all parties to refrain from
laying landmines.

The EU welcomes the assurances by the parties to
allow a respite in fighting, called "days of tranquillity",
later this year, which will be needed to allow the World
Health Organization and the United Nations Children's
Fund to carry out an urgently needed polio immunization

 

campaign for some 10 million Congolese children. We are
encouraged by this development and strongly hope that the
parties will stand by their commitments. I would like to
conclude my statement on this more positive note by
appealing once more to the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. the rebel movement
and the external actors to urgently enter into serious

and constructive negotiations on a political settlement of
the conflict. Finally. the EU emphasises on this occasion
the need for a continuing process of genuine national
reconciliation and democratization in all States of the
region.

