Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to express our appreciation to you,
Sir, for convening this meeting. Allow me also to
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for this month. I should like to express
our thanks to Ambassador Tafrov for his efforts during
his presidency of the Security Council last month. I
should also like to thank Secretary-General Kofi Annan
for the important statement that he delivered at the start
of this meeting.

We meet one year after the adoption of resolution
1373 (2001) and the establishment of the Counter-
Terrorism Committee (CTC), which were the
international response to the terrorist acts perpetrated
against the United States of America on 11 September
2001. My delegation must express its utmost
appreciation to the Chairman of the CTC, Ambassador
Sir Jeremy Greenstock, to his Vice-Chairmen and to
the other members of the Committee, as well as to the
experts who reviewed and discussed the reports
submitted by States - which now number in the
hundreds. I must also express our thanks to the
Secretariat, which contributed effectively to the work
of the CTC.

The success of the CTC was due to its open
dialogue with Governments, conducted in a climate of
transparency. The response of the international
community to the CTC also contributed greatly to its
success, the principal objective of the Committee being
to promote and to enhance mechanisms in Member
States for combating terrorism and for enhancing their
abilities to review legislation against terrorism and to
fill any gaps in such legislation in accordance with the
requirements of resolution 1373 (2001). The objective
also included filling gaps in national legislations in
order to bring proceedings against terrorists, to deny
them the ability to perpetrate their acts, to prosecute
them and to deny impunity to anyone in this regard.

As a member of the Security Council, Syria
welcomes the continuation of the work of the
Committee, the appointment of its officers and the
continuation of Ambassador Greenstock as the
Committee's Chairman. Syria also welcomes the plan
for the next 90-day period.

The Syrian delegation is particularly appreciative
of Ambassador Greenstock's position of not allowing
anyone to use resolution 1373 (2001) or the CTC for
narrow interests. He has repeatedly stated, including
today, that the CTC is not a tribunal, although it does
expect all States to cooperate with it in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001). Our delegation welcomes the
efforts made by the CTC to assist States which
expressed a need for particular assistance in the areas
covered by resolution 1373 (2001), whether directly or
through States that have expressed their readiness to
provide such assistance.

The success of the Committee's endeavours was
also enhanced by the cooperation at the regional,
subregional and international levels in order to address
terrorist crimes in all their manifestations, especially
transnational crimes. Here, we should like to point to
the efforts within the League of Arab States and the
Arab Convention for the Suppression of Terrorism. The
Syrian Arab Republic was among the first States to
submit their initial report to the CTC. We have also
recently submitted our second report, including
responses to the various questions posed by the
Committee. A solid legislative foundation for
combating terrorism is essential to ensuring progress in
dealing with this threat within the framework of
international law, as are full respect for human and
civil and political rights and preventing their abuse
under the pretext of combating terrorism.

In the general debate of the fifty-seventh session
of the General Assembly, the Deputy Prime Minister
and Foreign Minister of the Syrian Arab Republic
reiterated the condemnation of the Arab States of the
terrorist attacks on the United States of America and
their solidarity with the families of the victims. A year
after the attacks, the world is puzzled to see that,
despite all this; despite the efforts of the CTC; and
despite the fact that the events have been officially
linked to Al-Qaeda and the Taliban regime, the blame
has now been shifted to Arab States, some of which are
being threatened though none played a role in the
attacks.

The Syrian Arab Republic reaffirms its call for
further effective international cooperation, within the
framework of the United Nations and international
legitimacy, to eradicate terrorism and to defeat that
dangerous scourge.

