Mr. Sen (India): Let me begin by formally
congratulating you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
also wish to express appreciation for the scheduling of
today's debate on the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the situation in
that country, which is a topic of immediate interest to
our delegation. We also welcome the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2008/617) and thank Ambassador
Eide for his comprehensive briefing.

The latest report of the Secretary-General makes
it clear that we stand at a very difficult juncture in
Afghanistan. The escalation in asymmetric attacks to
include areas that were cleared of the Taliban and
Al-Qaida is a deeply worrying sign. The fact that
civilians, humanitarian workers, United Nations
convoys and diplomatic representations - including
our mission in Kabul - have been attacked clearly
underlines the barbarity of the foe that we face.

The escalating civilian death toll is truly
distressing, but the ultimate responsibility for those
casualties must be laid squarely at the door of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and those who support and empower
them. Such callous violence underlines the need to
ensure that care be taken in our collective actions and
messages. We must avoid giving them a sense of
comfort or a hint of desperation; most of all, we must
not dignify them by according terrorists parity with the
forces of order. It is in that context that we feel a sense
of some discomfort at the references in the report to
casualties caused by anti-Government forces and
pro-Government forces.

The course ahead may be difficult, but it is clear.
We have no other option but to collectively work on a
three-pronged strategy in Afghanistan. One element in
that must be security, for without security neither the
Afghan people nor those of our own countries will see
the long-awaited peace dividend after decades of
privation in Afghanistan. A second element must be to
raise governance capacities in Afghanistan, otherwise
we run the risk of placing responsibility upon our
Afghan partners without ensuring that they have the
wherewithal to live up to it. The third element is the
regional aspect, because unless Afghanistan is at peace
within its region and vice versa, we cannot hope to
stabilize Afghanistan solely from within. I should like
to briefly elaborate on those three interrelated aspects.

First, on security, now is not the moment for
doubts or hesitation in implementing robust measures
within Afghanistan, while expanding coordinated
politico-military efforts beyond Afghanistan's borders.
We need to go much further in realizing the well-
established objective of degrading the ability of the
Taliban to fight, while simultaneously denying them
safe havens, finances and armaments. There must be a
much closer alignment between the consistent
application of force wherever terrorist groups are
present and the political objectives of our efforts in
Afghanistan, in which UNAMA must play an important
role.

That brings me to my second point, which relates
to development and international assistance. With the
adoption of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy at the Paris Conference in June, we now have
a clear road map. In the new mandate of UNAMA, we
have a designated guide to help us align our assistance
in accordance with the Strategy. The onus is upon us to
take forward our efforts in a manner that coheres with
the objectives set out in the Strategy. In that, UNAMA
and the Afghan Government must play a leading role.

We share the sense reflected in the Secretary-
General's report of the need for the international
community to provide not just the resources but also
the political momentum to "reverse negative trends and
accelerate progress in those areas where we have
achieved successes" (5/2008/617, para. 6). In the
particular context of the United Nations, it is now
essential that we back our stated commitment to that
new role for UNAMA by ensuring that it actually has
the resources to do so.

We also echo the call made by several speakers
for greater efforts to address the worsening
humanitarian situation, in particular the food crisis.

In the specific context of resources, India also
supports the increasing streamlining of assistance
through the Afghan national budget. Sustainable
progress depends on our ability to mentor capacity-
building in all sectors of governance, including the
budgetary process as much as other mechanisms of
Government. At the same time, we must also ensure
that adequate resources are made available for such
newly trained Government agencies. It is for that
reason that capacity-building is a priority element in
each of India's assistance programmes in Afghanistan.
I should in that context like to add that India has
recently announced an increase in its commitment to
Afghanistan, which will now amount to $1.2 billion.
We are also pleased to have completed the Zaranj-
Delaram highway, which is one of the three major
infrastructure projects India is undertaking in
Afghanistan.

Regional cooperation is the third leg of the triad
of elements that must be implemented in parallel to
stabilize Afghanistan. That includes but is not limited
to regional economic cooperation. Afghanistan's entry
into the South Asian Association for Regional

Cooperation and its membership in other regional
groups, such as the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, are aimed at revitalizing Afghanistan's
historic linkages with the countries of its region.

The central challenge that remains, however, is to
ensure that programmes evolved in such regional
processes are actually implemented. Those include
resolving impediments that hinder the expansion of
commercial and economic linkages, including barriers
to effective overland trade and transit and to the
operation of mechanisms to deal with the challenge
posed by trafficking in drugs, cross-border terrorism
and so on. Eventually, every challenge is an
opportunity, but we need to make greater efforts to
implement measures before we can benefit from the
opportunities.

In conclusion, I must reiterate the need to avoid
excessive expectations. While it is tempting to attempt
to replicate our own socio-economic models in a
country that needs every form of assistance after
decades of conflict, we cannot realistically resolve all
of Afghanistan's problems at once. We must therefore
accept that progress will continue to take place sector
by sector, partially and sometimes even episodically.
Unless we display patience and perseverance, however,
we cannot ensure that we will truly follow a demand-
driven approach on the ground, and, without such an
approach, our best efforts will not have the necessary
legitimacy. It is for that reason that we reiterate the
importance of an Afghan-led process of prioritization
of tasks.

