Ms. Wensley (Australia): Australia welcomes the
latest valuable report of the Secretary-General on this
issue of the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
and I should like to thank you personally, Sir, for
arranging this open debate and for the opportunity to
speak on this topic.

Looking back on the first recommendation of the
Secretary-General's earlier report on this subject in
September 1999, many of the issues raised in that first
recommendation have been addressed in the report of
the Panel on United Nations Peace Operations, the
Brahimi report, of August 2000. By implementing the
Brahimi report, the United Nations membership will
also help address this issue as well. For my
Government, therefore, this only underlines the
importance of moving forward as expeditiously as
possible with the debate on and, more importantly,
the implementation of the Brahimi report's
recommendations.

It is late. I want to offer some very brief
comments on some of the specific recommendations in
the Secretary-General's report.

First, as to recommendations 1 to 3, we note the
importance that Australia places on supporting the
existing United Nations International Criminal
Tribunals and on working for the establishment of an
International Criminal Court. Adequate funding for
these institutions must be a priority for the United
Nations.

Another institution that is available to assist in
addressing alleged violations of international
humanitarian law, but one which has so far not been
utilized and to which we would like to draw attention,
is the International Fact-Finding Commission which
was established under Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions.

On recommendation 4, we think that measures
taken in order to sustain safe access for humanitarian
operations are equally important, but our own
experience in peacekeeping operations is that there is
no single approach. The measures that are necessary
will differ depending on, for example, whether
humanitarian operations commence in an insecure
atmosphere or are already well established. Within a
high-threat environment, we found that the most
successful approaches involve the ability to build trust
with different groups. In this regard, a peacekeeping
force may have a critical role in developing close
rapport, respect and trust between the various
stakeholders, including through frequent meetings.
Such measures will help develop a secure environment
in which humanitarian assistance can reach its target.
In an insecure environment, it has been our
experience - including most recently in East Timor -
that such engagement is most effectively facilitated and
coordinated by the peacekeeping force. We also
support the Secretary-General's encouragement of the
Security Council to make more frequent use of fact-
finding missions to conflict areas to identify the
specific requirements for humanitarian assistance and
protective arrangements.

On recommendation 6, we, too, are a very strong
supporter of regional countries' taking responsibility
for seeking to find solutions to conflict in their own
regions and for consultation with the United Nations on
relevant security issues. We have taken a lead in
pursuing such approaches in our own region. Like my
colleague from New Zealand, who spoke a moment
ago, we consider the recommendation that the Council
establish more regular cooperation with regional
organizations and arrangements to be particularly
valuable and deserving of strong support.

Recommendation 7 is more complicated. We
believe that there needs to be further study, perhaps in
the first instance by the Secretariat in consultation with
Member Governments, for establishing clear criteria
and procedures for the identification and separation of
armed elements.

For the remaining recommendations, I wish to
highlight our particular concerns for the protection of
journalists and women and children, because the report
makes it very clear that these particular groups have
suffered dreadfully. Our efforts must give their
protection priority. In this respect, we strongly endorse
recommendations 9 and 10 on the dissemination of
information on international humanitarian law and
human rights law to all armed groups, with a clear
expectation that they are required to respect such
standards.

The Secretary-General's report has reminded us
of the obvious - that much remains to be done to
create a culture of protection in the world. I think my
Canadian colleague said earlier today that we are really
only at the beginning of this process. We find the
Secretary-General's recommendations in the latest
report as a whole to be sound and practical and we are
committed to their implementation.

