Mrs. Morgan (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Climate change is one of the major challenges facing
the international community. It requires that specific
action be taken by all countries, without exception and
in accordance with their common but differentiated
responsibilities and respective capacities. For these
reasons and based on its effects so far, climate change
is far from being a threat to international peace and
security in the traditional sense. The available
scientific information is solid and clearly shows the
risks associated with not giving serious attention to this
challenge. Mexico therefore appreciates the efforts of

 

the German presidency to draw attention to the risks
associated with climate change. This debate will help
to strengthen our conviction that we must make greater
and more efficient efforts in order to achieve the
ultimate goal of the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) as soon as
possible.

We must ensure that the commitments undertaken
in Cancun eight months ago are implemented and work
tirelessly to strengthen effective action in that context.
The international legal framework must be
strengthened and adapted to the magnitude of the task.
The United Nations system remains the ideal forum to
design solutions to the challenges facing the
international community. But in order to make use of it
we must get to work immediately and in good faith.

If we do not reduce our greenhouse gas
emissions, we will begin to see the larger effects of
climate change, such as limited agricultural production,
irregular rainfall patterns, soil erosion, changes in
disease transmission vectors and sea-level rise. These
effects will be felt most strongly in developing
countries, in particular the poorest and most vulnerable
among them, who are also the ones that emit the least.
Because of its nature, the effects of global climate
warming will in the long term affect the governability
and political, economic and social stability of
countries, as well as their opportunities for
development.

The challenge of climate change cannot be
resolved in one fell swoop or with a single solution. It
requires ongoing actions by all actors and sectors of
society. It requires a portfolio of technological,
political and economic options, as well as individual
action. At the international level, it requires a
strengthened framework where the situations of all
countries could converge and be addressed. This is no
easy task. Time has shown us that the climate change
framework must develop gradually.

In Cancun, we achieved concrete results that
represent an important step forward in our work.
Mexico is implementing its commitments and adopting
measures that will enable us to reduce emissions as
much as possible based on our capacities in the short
and medium term.

In Durban, we will need to breathe life into the
institutions created in Cancun, and operationalize them
to increase our collective ambition. We must also

 

create certainty as to the future of the Kyoto Protocol,
which is fundamental instrument to maintain a rules-
based system to achieve our objectives. But it should
also be complemented by another protocol that
includes countries that currently do not have reduction
commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.

My country hopes that this debate will help to
strengthen actions within the competent forums and
that it will maintain our attention on the relevant issue
of the fight against climate change. We are aware of
the fact that if our efforts do not succeed, it is probable,
and it would be unfortunate, that in the future the
adverse effects of climate change will have
consequences for the maintenance of international
peace and security and thus require action by the
Security Council.

