Mr. Moustafa (Egypt): On behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council, we wish to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your presidency
and for a job well done during a very busy month with
many achievements. We also look forward to the New
Zealand presidency and to cooperating and supporting
it in ensuring a successful outcome.

On behalf of the African members of the Council, I
wish to highlight the following conclusions, with a focus
on key messages emanating from the two open debates
organized under the Malaysian presidency - namely,
on children and armed conflict (see S/PV.7753) and on
non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (see S/PV.7758). Towards the end of the statement, I will
share a few thoughts on working methods, as requested
by you, Sir, in your very helpful concept paper.

The convening of the open debate on children
and armed conflict was both timely and important, at
a time when we are witnessing the plight of children
as they suffer the scourge of war and armed conflict.
We believe that the international community still lacks
appropriate tools for effective preventive action. There
are a number of messages we can draw from the debate
that we would like to highlight, and on which we call
for further action by the Council and its Working Group
chaired by Malaysia.

First, children are the most vulnerable and the
most affected by indiscriminate attacks during armed
conflict, in particular attacks on densely populated
areas - including schools, hospitals and medical
facilities * by military forces and armed and terrorist
groups. Such attacks represent criminal acts, and
therefore call for measures to hold the perpetrators to
account. We underscore the importance of resolution
2286 (2016), on medical care in armed conflict, as a
policy framework for the prevention of such attacks in
the future.

Secondly, concerning measures to protect children
in post-conflict situations, there is a need to reach
agreement on specific commitments related to child
protection throughout peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes. Those should include requirements for
the rapid release of children from armed forces and
non-State armed groups.

Thirdly, the international community is called
upon to review the recommendations of the Graca
Machel report (see A/51/306), in particular those
relating to displaced and refugee children, given the
shortage of financial resources available to carry
out the recommendations relating to host States in
particular. Moreover, much work remains to be done
with regard to sexual exploitation and gender-based
violence, as well as the effects of sanctions regimes on
the health, nutrition, psychological rehabilitation and
education of children in armed conflict. In addition,
greater emphasis is required on social reintegration of
children through psychological support, educational
programmes and professional training.

Fourthly, the mandates of the mechanisms
established to address the plight of children in armed
conflict continue to focus on information gathering
with regard to violations committed in hotbeds of
tension and conflict. Their reports are only a means of
monitoring, and fall short of providing the necessary
practical and realistic means of protecting children - a
task that falls under their mandate.

Fifthly, and finally, there is a need for a three-fold
action plan: guaranteeing the protection of children,
strengthening preventive measures, and ensuring
accountability for perpetrators of war crimes.

The convening of the debate on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction highlighted that the
world has become more complicated and dangerous in
the light of the evolving security challenges, including
the expansion of terrorist organizations worldwide.
The fact that such organizations have had access and
have been able to use chemical weapons in areas of
the Middle East is alarming and calls for determined
action. We can draw several conclusions from that
debate, as well as further points of potential progress to
be explored by the Council.

First, the international community currently faces
emerging security threats arising from newly developed
technologies, especially those with dual-use features,
such as 3-D printing, the Dark Web, cyberwarfare,
genetic editing, synthetic biology and unmanned
aerial vehicles.

Secondly, within the framework of the
comprehensive review of the status of implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004), we have to focus on the
further enhancement of cooperation and coordination
with relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations by prioritizing technical support and
assistance, as well as the exchange of information,
knowledge and expertise in that domain. Accordingly,
technical assistance and capacity-building are vital for
developing countries.

Thirdly, African States spare no effort, regionally
and internationally, to contribute to the promotion of
the implementation process of resolution 1540 (2004)
and the subsequent resolution 1977 (2011). There is a
need to strengthen the mechanism under the former in
order to keep pace with the rapid developments at the
political, technical, scientific and technological levels.

Fourthly, the three African members of the
Security Council would like to reiterate that the sole,
most effective path to prevent terrorism and to prevent
terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction
is the total elimination of those weapons in all regions
of the world.

With regard to the working methods, the three
African members of the Council stress the need for more
action-oriented discussions and more transparency
in the work of the Council. In that regard, they first
invite Council members to continue strengthening their
interaction with countries that are on the Council's
agenda, as well as with countries of the region, by
holding more frequent informal interactive dialogues,
particularly before renewing the mandate of peace
missions deployed by the Council, in order to allow
more discussion on the political and operational aspects
of the conflicts. The interactive dialogue held on Mali
last month was a case in point and was very helpful.

Secondly, the three African members of the Council
welcome the field visits made this year to several African
countries, which provided the Council opportunities to
interact with the main political stakeholders, such as
national authorities, and with regional and international
partners with respect to issues pertaining to efforts
aimed at fostering peace processes in those countries.

Finally, the three African members of the Council
would like to stress the importance of strengthening the
Council's cooperation with the African Union Peace
and Security Council. The annual consultations in that
regard, as well as country-specific informal dialogues,
such as the one about to happen later this week in
Addis Ababa, on South Sudan and the question of
financing peace operations authorized by the Security
Council and launched by the African Union or regional
organizations, are of vital importance.

Once again, I would like to thank you and
congratulate you, Mr. President. We look forward to
working with the next President, the Ambassador of
New Zealand.

