Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): We would
like to thank Jordan for having taken the initiative
to prepare and coordinate negotiations on the draft
resolution on the situation in Yemen. France voted
in favour of resolution 2216 (2015), of which it
was a sponsor, as it deals with the root cause of the
current situation, which is a political one: the ongoing
destabilization of the country by the Houthi rebels.

At issue is the militia's refusal to abide by the
Security Council's requests, in particular those
contained in resolution 2201 (2015), adopted on
15 February, and presidential statement S/PRST/2015/8,
adopted on 22 March, as well as by the various
agreements negotiated in recent months under the
auspices of the United Nations, which have not been
upheld. The threat posed by the Houthis to the unity,
integrity, stability and sovereignty of Yemen can
benefit only the terrorists, beginning with Al-Qaida but
also, more recently, Daesh.

We have tirelessly for many months now indicated
to spoilers of the political transition that we were
determined to bring growing pressure to bear upon
them in order that they cease their unilateral actions
and return to the negotiating table. It was important
for us to confirm our determination to translate that
message into action, and this is what we have just done
by imposing sanctions on Mr. Abdulmalik al-Houthi
and Mr. Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh as well as a targeted
arms embargo. Our collective credibility was at stake.

However, these necessary sanctions are not a means
in and of themselves, but, rather, an instrument aimed
at promoting the achievement of a political goal: an end
to the crisis, the resumption of an inclusive political
dialogue, agreement on the formation of a national
unity Government and a phased relaunching of the
Yemeni transition. That is the political goal that we are
seeking. Here the United Nations has a key role to play,
as its expertise and its neutrality makes it irreplaceable.
That is why we support the role of the Organization in
Yemen and call for the relaunching of the inter-Yemeni
dialogue under its auspices as soon as possible.
Given the worsening humanitarian situation on
the ground, France also calls for compliance with
international humanitarian law and the protection of
civilians. Free and unimpeded access to those in need
of assistance must be guaranteed, as set out in the
resolution.

France supports the Council's steadfast approach to
Yemen: the backing of Yemen's legitimate President,
Mr. Abdrabuh Mansour Hadi Mansour; its firm stance
on spoilers; its support for the achievements of the
transition and the country's institutions; its call for a
politically inclusive settlement that alone will allow the
challenges in the country to be met; and the combat
against terrorist groups. We express the hope that
this approach will produce speedy results and are
certain that we can count on the determination of the
United Nations in that respect. We call upon all actors
concerned - Yemeni parties, regional actors and
influential countries - to work along those lines.

