Mr. Mangaral (Chad) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing today's debate on
sanctions. I also thank the Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, and the
Secretary General of INTERPOL, Mr. Jiirgen Stock,
for their briefings.

Measures targeting individuals or entities that
the Security Council has taken over 25 years are a
recent development in the area of sanctions. They are
designed to protect civilian populations and to punish
those who are alleged to have committed acts that
violate international humanitarian law or human rights
law. They also now used to fight terrorism, limit the
flow of arms and protect children. Therefore, these
sanctions are a valuable tool for maintaining peace and
international security.

Generally speaking, however, the practice of
sanctions still has many shortcomings, particularly
in terms of respect for due process and human rights
guarantees during the process of listing and delisting.
The creation of the Office of the Ombudsperson and
the procedures established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) have helped to improve the situation, but
corrective measures are still needed. For that reason,
the practice of sanctions is constantly being challenged.
Recently, in the last debate on the Council's working
methods, on 23 October 2014 (S/PV.7285), the members
expressed the need to continue in that direction.

prroblems involving respect for human rights arise
with regard to listing and delisting procedures during the
adoption of sanctions, the question of their effectiveness
comes up more strongly, as effectiveness depends on
their implementation. You opened the debate on that
aspect of the question today, Mr. President. The high-
level review of sanctions that your Mission sponsored,
with the participation of several other Missions and
organizations, highlighted the various issues related to
implementing sanctions at different levels. It showed
the weakness in the coordination and monitoring both
among the 15 sanctions committees and between them
and other bodies in charge of sanctions. Considerable
difficulties are also evident in the implementation of
sanctions at the national level.

The issue of capacity-building and strengthening
technical expertise at this level and the lack of funding
are also obstacles to the successful implementation of
sanctions. The Council should take measures to solve
these problems, including by improving dialogue and
information-sharing in the United Nations system,
regional organizations and countries affected by
sanctions. Those countries should receive more
technical assistance and assistance in building the
capacity needed to implement sanctions.

United Nations missions on the ground should
be more deeply involved in information exchange
with the sanctions committees and expert groups.
Coordination with United Nations agencies and
regional and intergovernmental organizations could
also be strengthened.

However, we believe that given the overlapping
technical and political aspects of sanctions
implementation, those measures will not really achieve
their objectives unless they are implemented with good
collaboration with regional organizations and in strict
respect for national laws and the sovereignty of the
countries concerned. It also seems wise to us to use
other methods provided for under the Charter, such as
dialogue and mediation.

We welcome the effective and efficient cooperation
between the United Nations and INTERPOL in the
implementation of sanctions. The discussions we
are having today will definitely contribute to deeper
thinking on the necessity of adopting measures to
improve the effectiveness of sanctions through better
implementation.

