Mr. Vassilakis (Greece): Thank you for
organizing this debate on protection of civilians in
armed conflicts. It is an issue of great importance to
the world community and has been at the centre of the
United Nations' attention in recent years.

I also thank Mr. Egeland for the comprehensive,
informative presentation. It was very good that he
mentioned particular cases.

We associate ourselves with the statement that the
Permanent Representative of Luxembourg will make at
a later stage on behalf of the European Union.

The protection of civilians in armed conflict has
been identified as a high priority in the United Nations
Millennium Declaration. Rightly, special attention has
also been given to this issue in the recent report of the
Secretary-General entitled "In Larger Freedom".

The report raises various important aspects of
civilian protection. It emphasizes the need to prevent
atrocities against the civilian population and to ensure
that the international community acts promptly when
faced with massive violations.

In the same context, the report makes reference to
the Security-General's five-point action plan to prevent
genocide. We support this action plan and call for the
ratification and the implementation of all treaties
relating to the protection of civilians.

We believe that the protection of civilian
populations in armed conflicts is a matter which falls
under the responsibilities of the Security Council in
maintaining international peace and security.

In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), and in
referring the situation in Darfur to the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, the Security Council took
a proactive attitude toward putting an end to impunity
for the war crimes committed in Sudan. That is a first
step in combating a culture of impunity, which will
help the consolidation of peace, security and justice in
our societies.

The question of humanitarian access to those in
need, and the removal of obstacles that prevent
humanitarian workers from delivering humanitarian
assistance and protection to the civilian population are
of high importance.

The security of the humanitarian workers is
another issue that raises serious concerns.

The protection of women and children during
armed conflict is a major concern for the international
community.

Forcible recruitment of children into armed
forces and child abduction are gross violations of
international humanitarian law and continue to be
major problems.

Displaced persons and refugees is another major
humanitarian concern.

The Secretary-General has, in his report,
underlined the need to address these issues together
with his Emergency Relief Coordinator.

Mr. Egeland earlier made an interesting
presentation on most of the aforementioned issues and
gave us a bleak picture of the serious problems that
humanitarian workers and other vulnerable groups are
facing today in conflict situations. It is also clear that
the suffering inflicted on the civilian population is
aggravated by restrictions on humanitarian access.

All of the foregoing indicates the urgent need for
effective measures of protection. In that respect, we
support the measures proposed by Mr. Egeland as well
as the 10-point platform for the protection of civilians
that he presented to the Security Council in 2003, and
we call for its early implementation.

We also believe that regional organizations can
play a very important role in that respect. This is
particularly true for the African Union and its role in
the Darfur crisis. We fully subscribe to the call for an
urgent increase in the capacity of the African Union on
the ground in the latter case.

In conclusion, we would like to stress the need
for the Security Council to take a more proactive
stance in this field and to adopt in the near future a
new resolution that would focus on the major
challenges related to civilian protection in conflict-torn
societies, with a View to enhancing such protection and
revitalizing the role of the Security Council in this
crucial area.

