Mr. Errazuriz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
congratulate your country, Sir, on having assumed this
month's presidency of the Security Council and for
your timely initiative to convene today's open debate
on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Unfortunately, that issue has been very much in the
news and requires the attention of the United Nations.

My delegation wishes to express its appreciation
for the briefings given today by the Under-Secretary-
General for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations and the Assistant Secretary-
General for Human Rights and Head of the New York
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights. Chile associates itself with the
statement delivered by the representative of
Switzerland on behalf of the Human Security Network,
of which Chile is a member.

In recent years, the United Nations has made
significant progress in the protection of civilians in
armed conflict. The Council has adopted a number of
important resolutions, including resolution 1325 (2000)
on the protection of women in armed conflict, the
significance of which marked a milestone in efforts to
address that issue. My country has developed its own
national plan in that regard. The Council also adopted
resolution 1960 (2011) establishing monitoring,
analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict-related
sexual violence.

The Secretary-General has expressed particular
concern regarding the protection of civilians and,
within the Department of Political Affairs, has
consolidated a conflict-prevention system that
includes, among other measures, a mediation unit and
provisions for collaboration between the Offices of the
Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide and of
the Special Adviser on the Responsibility to Protect.
Those initiatives have better positioned the
Organization, the Council and the Secretary-General to
identify potential conflicts and, if necessary, take
appropriate measures to potentially prevent them.

However, States themselves hold the primary
responsibility for protecting their populations. They
must create early warning and conflict detection
mechanisms and adopt corresponding preventive
measures. As that has not always been possible,
however, the Council has had to take the measures
necessary to adequately protect civilians in conflict
situations. The adoption of resolutions 1970 (2011) and
1973 (2011) on Libya responds to that need. The
measures contemplated in those resolutions are
adequate for the protection of civilians, and their
implementation must also be so. When States cannot
protect their civilians, the international community,
through the United Nations, cannot remain indifferent
to the fate of those whose rights are being seriously,
systematically and repeatedly violated.

Chile categorically recognizes the important work
carried out by peacekeeping forces in the protection of
civilians. My country appreciates the measures adopted
by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations to
endow these forces with instruments, resources and
codes of conduct suitable for effective action in this
area. Today, almost all peacekeeping operations carry
out tasks involving the protection of civilians, and
eight of them have a specific mandate to provide
physical protection.

At the same time, peacekeeping operations today
are multidimensional, with important components
having to do with the protection of civilians such as
human rights monitoring, humanitarian assistance,
capacity-building, restoration of infrastructure and
services, and security sector reform, among others.
Chile believes that a comprehensive approach is the
most effective way to address and respond to threats to

the safety of civilian populations in situations of armed
conflict. We welcome not only the normative measures
adopted but also those practices on the ground aimed at
preventing and mitigating the effects of violence on
civilians in armed conflict.

It is important to enhance interaction between the
host Government, the Security Council, troop-
contributing countries and the Secretariat in order to
reduce the gap between the decision-making process
and the concrete implementation of those decisions on
the ground. It is therefore also of great importance to
overcome the major obstacles affecting peacekeeping
operations, such as access to resources, teams and
capacity-building, prior to deployment.

Respect for and implementation of international
law and international humanitarian law are inextricably
linked to combating impunity. Putting an end to
impunity must be seen as part of a comprehensive
approach in the search for a sustainable peace, justice,
truth and national reconciliation. Concerted efforts are
required to cooperate with national judicial
mechanisms in order to develop their capacities and
ensure that perpetrators are brought to justice and tried
in accordance with international standards.

Restoring the rule of law, security sector reform
and the mechanisms for transitional justice are key
areas in which national systems must be strengthened
and receive support through effective international
cooperation. The International Criminal Court, as well
as other tribunals and mixed courts, play an important
complementary role. Chile supports all those measures
aimed at combating impunity, whether at the national
or international levels.

Civilians affected by violence in armed conflict
have a right to reparations and compensation. In this
regard, we must not neglect the value of symbolic
reparations as a way of healing the wounds of societies
in post-conflict countries.

The situation of the civilian population in
countries in crisis is of concern to us. Their physical
and emotional well-being must be respected and the
relevant channels for dialogue must be kept open,
allowing for a political solution to be found, while
ensuring respect for fundamental freedoms and human
rights.

