Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for presiding over this very
meaningful open debate on peacekeeping operations
and their relations with regional organizations. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, the
Deputy Secretary General of the European External
Action Service, Mr. Maciej Popowski, speaking on
behalf of High Representative Catherine Ashton, and
Ambassador Tete Antonio, Permanent Observer of the
African Union to the United Nations, speaking on behalf
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission.

In a world order forged collectively by our own
actions, Brazil supports the creation of a multipolar
system based on cooperation, devoid of unilateralism
and exceptionalism; an order founded on the primacy of
multilateralism and aimed at seeking peaceful solutions
to the challenges faced by the Security Council.
Diplomacy and dialogue are essential to that View. As
the useful concept note (S/2014/478, annex) circulated
by the Rwandan delegation makes clear, the history
of the relationship between the United Nations and
regional organizations in conflict situations is not new.
In the recent past, examples of their cooperation have
taken place around the world, in varying forms and
levels ofintensity. Brazil is convinced that harmonizing
the purposes and actions of regional and international
actors strengthens multilateral efforts towards peace.

In my own region, the Union of South American
Nations has in the past few years sought to build an
institutional architecture that can help to promote
peace, cooperation and stability. The South American
Defence Council has established an innovative
coordination and cooperation mechanism for South
American countries in matters of peace and security.
Greater regional integration has been instrumental in
encouraging many countries of the region to support
the efforts of the United Nations to stabilize Haiti, the
only country in the Americas where a United Nations
peacekeeping mission is currently deployed.

Today, Africa is the main locus of cooperation
between the United Nations and regional and
subregional organizations. Brazil is a strong believer
in the benefits of fostering African solutions to African
problems. The same logic applies when we deal
with peacekeeping operations on that continent. We
commend the stabilization efforts that have recently
been made by the African Union, with the support
of subregional organizations, in Somalia, the Central
African Republic and West Africa.

Developing such cooperation, in Africa or
elsewhere, requires that some principles be followed.
First, United Nations collaboration with regional and
subregional organizations should enable the Security
Council to better exercise its primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security across the
globe. In that process, the Council should always
respect and take into consideration the mandates and
purposes of the various regional organizations. In no
way should cooperation in peacekeeping be understood
as an outsourcing of the Council's authority or an
endorsement of doctrines of military alliances that
define their sphere of action beyond their members'
territory.

Secondly, policy decisions should not be driven
by financial constraints. The arguments at the two
extremes - that transferring responsibilities to regional
organizations can help reduce the peacekeeping budget,
or, conversely, that their efforts should be integrally
backed by United Nations financial resources - tend
to put financial considerations before the political
and humanitarian foundations of any peacekeeping
operation. Furthermore, it is essential to support and
preserve a certain degree of diversity in terms of the
countries that contribute to those operations in order to
safeguard their legitimacy, which is why reimbursing
African Union operations at an adequate and sustainable
level is fundamental. On the other hand, regional
arrangements among developed countries should not
unnecessarily drain resources from United Nations
peacekeeping missions, which already cost less than
1 per cent of the world's annual military budget.

Thirdly, we should be conscious that coordination
and unity of purpose are not easy to achieve when we
put two or more international entities together. While
the goal of peace and security, founded on respect for
human rights and solidarity, must be our compass,
pragmatic considerations are also important. The
interests and priorities may vary from the subregional
to the global level. The closer one is to the conflict, the
greater are the effects of its actions - unfortunately,
not always in ways conducive to ensuring lasting peace.

Lastly, maintaining international peace and
security in Africa, as anywhere in the world, is not and
cannot be limited to peacekeeping. Conflict-prevention,
post-conflict peacebuilding and strong economic
development, with social justice and the eradication
of poverty, are key to maintaining and consolidating
political stability.

Contemporary peacekeeping operations involve
multidimensional mandates and the deployment of
advanced technological assets. They face greater risks
derived from the presence on the ground of insurgent
groups not willing to recognize the United Nations
legitimacy as an impartial broker. All these tendencies
occur against the backdrop of the increased reluctance
of some Members to spend more on peacekeeping, not
to mention on post-conflict peacebuilding, even when
many of those same States are increasing their domestic
military budgets.

Peacekeeping mandates must be accompanied by
the necessary resources, and by the same token regional
actors must spare no effort to progressively bring their
troops up to United Nations standards of performance.
We encourage the African Union efforts to have its
African Standby Force ready by 2015. If we do not
invest simultaneously in better operational capabilities
for troop-contributing countries, on the one hand, and
in adequate financial means for peacekeeping, on the
other, the end result of this double dilemma could be
the erosion of peacekeeping's credibility.

As stressed by the Fortaleza Declaration, adopted
at the sixth Summit of the Brazil, Russia, India, China
and South Africa (BRICS) association few weeks ago in
Brazil, the leaders of the BRICS countries welcomed the
decision taken at the African Union Summit in Malabo,
Equatorial Guinea, to establish an interim African
Capacity for Immediate Response to Crises (ACIRC)
by October to respond quickly to crisis situations as
they arise. They underscore the importance of adequate
support to ensure the timely operationalization of
ACIRC, pending the final establishment of the African
Standby Force.

Brazil wishes to stress that no administrative
arrangement between global and local institutions can
replace political consensus-building. It is precisely
the necessary convergence of views and interests, at
times very elusive and difficult to obtain, that is the
missing link in most cases of failure. The very nature of
peacekeeping - the willingness to compromise in order
to save lives and relieve suffering - is an indispensable
first step towards mustering the consensus needed
to promote stability and, in the longer term, prevent
relapse. The United Nations and regional organizations
should be partners in this endeavour, sharing the burden
according to their own capabilities in the fairest way
possible. No amount of peacekeeping resources will be
enough if diplomacy is not deployed with even greater
emphasis.

As always, Brazil is ready to contribute its fair
share, not only in peacekeeping, but also in promoting
diplomacy, conflict -prevention and peaceful settlement
of disputes as the essential basis for the cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations.

