Mr. Dangue Rewaka (Gabon) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, I welcome you here today, and thank you
and your delegation for having taken the welcome
initiative to organize this debate on children and armed
conflict.

The informative statement of Ambassador Olara
Otunnu, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, amply described the
nature and the magnitude of the further efforts that the
United Nations and particularly the Security Council must
make to better guarantee the defence and protection of
children in times of armed conflict. I shall not enumerate
the abuses and other mistreatment of children in armed
conflict, because previous speakers, in particular
Ambassador Otunnu, have spoken eloquently of those
problems. For our part, we wish to stress what the United
Nations must continue to do to put a lasting end to all the
diverse abuses to which children fall victim during
conflicts.

In June 1998 the Council stated its firm
determination, in full harmony with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and with the
relevant United Nations programmes, funds and bodies, to
support efforts to secure a commitment that there will be
an end to the recruitment and use of children in armed
conflicts; to give particular attention to the disarmament
and demobilization of child soldiers and to the
reintegration into society of children maimed or
traumatized as a result of armed conflict; and to support
and promote programmes, focused on children, for mine-
clearance and for teaching the dangers of mines, and
programmes for the re-education and rehabilitation of
children. That commitment by the Council will be
reflected today in the adoption of a draft resolution on
this item.

States, especially those involved in armed conflicts,
must give high priority to the effective implementation of
existing international instruments, including the Geneva
Conventions of 12 August 1949 and their Additional
Protocols of 1977, and the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of the Child, of 1989. In that context, we thank
Ambassador Olara Otunnu for drawing the Council's
attention to violations of those international norms on the
protection of children, and for making the necessary
recommendations. We are gratified by his commitment,
and we assure him of our complete support.

In our view, a lasting solution to the problems of
children in armed conflict must include both the

 

prevention and settlement of armed conflicts and the
improvement of economic and social conditions in the
countries in which those children live.

