Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Mexico on its
productive presidency of the Security Council for the
month of April and to express our satisfaction in seeing
Mexico follow France as Chair of the Security Council
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict.
Morocco, along with the rest of the international
community, expresses its thanks for the laudable efforts
of the Mexican authorities in responding to the current
influenza challenge from its onset. Morocco expresses
its solidarity with the people and Government of
Mexico in confronting this pandemic challenge.

(spoke in French)

Let me also thank you, Sir, for organizing the
debate, the importance of which was marvellously
illustrated by the poignant and moving testimony of
Ms. Grace Akallo.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for the
quality of his report (S/2009/ 158) and the strength of
his commitment. Our thanks go as well to Ms. Radhika
Coomaraswamy, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Ms. Ann Veneman, Executive
Director of UNICEF, for their efforts to protect
children.

Statistics are implacable: more than 2 million
children dead, 6 million disabled and 22 million
displaced. When they are not reduced to the status of
sex slaves or indoctrinated refugees, young boys and
girls whose fundamental rights are being violated for
the sake of war are living through atrocities and are
completely deprived of the real meaning of childhood.
We all vividly recall the suffering endured by the
children of Gaza, who are confronted by the logic of
war, with all its consequences on their psychological
state and their daily lives.

The experiences of terror and deprivation to
which children are subjected in conflict situations -
where children are systematically recruited by armed
groups and where they are killed, maimed, abducted
and subjected to violence - are shocking. That is why
the Council's increasing attention to children's issues is
entirely justified. The specific resolutions on the
subject adopted by the Council in the past 10 years,
which have given rise to the establishment of important
mechanisms, have certainly made significant progress
possible. That progress includes the creation of
monitoring and reporting mechanisms, the
implementation of specific action plans and the total or
partial release of children associated with armed
groups in specific situations.

Still, it must be recognized that progress remains
limited. Thus, the United Nations, and the Security
Council in particular, have a necessary role to play in
promoting national measures aimed at strengthening
the protection of children and effective implementation
of demobilization and reintegration programmes and
the establishment of socio-economic conditions that
discourage recruitment.

There is no disagreement that the responsibility
for putting an end to child recruitment lies first and
foremost with States. However, specialized institutions
such as the United Nations Development Programme,
the World Health Organization and UNICEF must
strengthen their initiatives and coordinate their actions
with the Working Group, so as to define a strategy to
help those countries resolve their problems. The
approach must be preventive as well as responsive in
addressing the tragic consequences of conflicts.
Attacking the root causes of armed conflict is vital in
order to prevent all involvement of children.

Morocco is a party to the Optional Protocols to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict and on the
sale of children, child prostitution and child
pornography and is prepared to associate itself with all
international efforts to curb the terrible tragedy of the
involvement of children in armed conflict.

In that spirit, my country reiterates its support for
the Paris Principles, which are aimed at protecting
children against illegal recruitment in armed conflict
and affording them appropriate reintegration in a
protective environment. We hope that the Paris
commitments will enable us to advance towards a more
inclusive approach, agreed upon by the international
community, on the importance of education
programmes for the prevention of recruitment, so that
all child soldiers can benefit from suitable reintegration
and rehabilitation programmes. The commitment of
Governments is essential to implement the Paris
Principles for the protection of children in armed
conflict situations and to achieve the final and
unconditional release of child soldiers before the
conclusion of peace agreements.
