Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): I would like to start
by agreeing with my colleague from the United States
that it is a shame that our Israeli colleagues are unable to
participate owing to the start of Passover this evening.

The United Kingdom is appalled by the deaths
and injuries suffered during today's events on Gaza's
borders. There must be an immediate end to the violence.
We call for calm, restraint and respect for international
law. All the parties must engage constructively in order
to bring an end to the Violence.

We have long been concerned about the situation in
Gaza and have been warning of the risks of an upsurge
in violence. That is not an issue that can simply be
managed over the long term. We need an urgent and
durable agreement that addresses the underlying causes
of the conflict and transforms the situation in Gaza.
An agreement should ensure that Hamas and other
terrorist groups permanently end rocket fire and attacks
against Israel, that the Palestinian Authority resumes
control of Gaza and restores effective and accountable
governance, and that Israel lifts its restrictions in order
to ease the suffering of ordinary Palestinians.

We remain committed to supporting vulnerable
Gazans, including through the United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East, and we urge all parties to prioritize progress
towards reaching a durable solution that alleviates the
suffering of the Gazan people, in line with resolution
1860 (2009).

Every Israeli and Palestinian has the right to live
in peace and security. We acknowledge both the right
of Palestinians to freedom of assembly and protest,
as well as the right of Israelis to security. What is
needed now is a renewed commitment for negotiations
towards a two-State solution. To have the best chance
of success, peace must take place in an atmosphere free
from violence. It is time for all parties to work together
in the spirit of compromise and understanding to make
progress towards that two-State solution. The ongoing
violence today simply underlines that ajust and lasting
resolution that ends the occupation and delivers peace
for Palestinians and Israelis is long overdue.

