Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the Under-
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Mr. Mark Lowcock,
for his briefing and commend him on his Visit to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo last week.
We also thank the Coordinator of the Encadrement
des Femmes Indigenes et des Menages Vulnerables,
Ms. Jeanine Bandu Bahati, and the Secretary-General
of the Conference Episcopale Nationale du Congo,
Abbe Donatien Nshole, for their briefings.

The most recent report of the Secretary-General
paints a bleak picture of the security and humanitarian
situations in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and provides a comprehensive overview of ceaseless
violence, including disputes over natural resources,
clashes among armed groups and between communities,
and inter-ethnic violence. Bolivia firmly condemns all
violence, including that during the protests in December
and January. But above all, we are concerned about the
threat of armed groups in various parts of the country,
as they are primarily responsible for the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation.

We also condemn all acts to exacerbate tensions
and incite violence and all acts of sexual exploitation
and sexual violence. We believe that all such allegations
must be investigated, including those reported to involve
possible participation of the national police or the
armed forces. In that regard, we laud the culmination,
on 13 December, of the trial concerning the rape of 38
girls, in which 12 of the accused were sentenced to life
in prison. It is an important step in the fight against
impunity, which should continue. The perpetrators of
that type of crime must be investigated, brought to
justice and sentenced by the relevant courts.

Regrettably, the consequences of violent acts
committed chiefly by armed groups in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo have reached catastrophic
levels. Nearly 4.5 million people have been internally
displaced, including about 900,000 women and more
than 2 million boys and girls last year. Similarly, in
recent years, more than 680,000 Congolese have sought
refuge in neighbouring countries, including 100,000 in
2017. Approximately 8 million people face severe food
insecurity, which is an increase of 30 per cent relative
to the same period the previous year. It is estimated
that 13 million people are in need of protection and
humanitarian assistance this year - an increase of
50 per cent relative to last year. Special attention must
be paid to this situation, particularly in the Kasai region,
Tanganyika and South Kivu, which has been classified
as a level 3 emergency, the highest level, according to
the Emergency Relief Coordinator.

As a result of this deplorable humanitarian crisis,
the budget for the humanitarian response plan has
doubled to more than $1.6 billion for this year, only
4.3 per cent of which has been raised so far. In that
regard, we commend the joint work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the United Arab Emirates
and the European Union Commission in organizing
a high-level humanitarian conference, to be held on
13 April, in order to mobilize funds and respond to
the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We urge the international community to
continue cooperating in order to ensure that the plan
can rely on sustainable financing.

We call on all the parties to the conflict in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to ensure unrestricted
access for humanitarian assistance. We commend
the work of the military and civilian personnel of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the personnel of the humanitarian agencies, who,
despite a climate of insecurity and violence, risk their
lives on a daily basis in order to relieve the suffering
of the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

We would like to call on the parties to work to ease
tensions and comply with the agreement of31 December
2016 by implementing its confidence-building measures
in order to hold credible and inclusive elections in an
effective and timely manner, bearing in mind that the
equal participation of women is fundamental to all
phases of the process.

Lastly, we believe it is important to think about
the current needs of the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. MONUSCO and its regional
and subregional partners must work together and in
coordination in order to address the root causes of the
conflict, particularly the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. The principles of preventive diplomacy and
good offices should not be forgotten in the efforts to
achieve a negotiated political solution, since it is the
Congolese people and their institutions who should
take the decisions on the future of their country. We
support their decisions with regard to their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity, with a view
to achieving peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

