The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultations among the members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the decision of the Government of
Eritrea to restrict all types of United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
helicopter flights within Eritrean airspace or
coming to Eritrea, effective as of 5 October 2005,
which will have serious implications for
UNMEE's ability to carry out its mandate and for
the safety of its staff.

"Recalling all previous resolutions and
statements of its President regarding the situation
between Ethiopia and Eritrea, the Security
Council emphasizes that the aforementioned
decision of the Government of Eritrea gravely
contravenes the Council's call in resolution 1312
(2000) on the parties to provide UNMEE with the
access, assistance, support and protection as the
Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities signed in
Algiers on 18 June 2000 between the Government
of the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
and the Government of the State of Eritrea
(S/2000/601).

"The Security Council further underlines
the need for implementation of the decision of the
Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary Commission without
further delay, which will enable UNMEE to fulfil
its mandate.

"The Security Council reaffirms that both
parties bear the primary responsibility for the
implementation of the Algiers Agreements and
the decision of the Eritrea-Ethiopia Boundary
Commission.

"The Security Council calls upon the
Government of Eritrea to immediately reverse its
decision and to provide UNMEE with the access,
the

assistance, support and protection required for the
performance of its duties. It also calls on both
parties to cooperate fully and expeditiously with
UNMEE in the implementation of its mandate.

"The Security Council also calls on both
parties to show maximum restraint and to refrain
from any threat of use of force against each other.

"The Security Council reiterates its call
upon both parties to achieve a full normalization
of their relationship including through political
dialogue between them for the adoption of further
confidence-building measures and to consolidate
progress achieved so far."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/47.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.25 p.m.
