Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Let me begin
by extending our thanks to the Swedish presidency of
the Security Council for holding this open debate and
to Mr. Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing today and
his persistent efforts to settle the Palestinian question.

Regrettably, we meet again today to discuss the
focal question that goes back over 70 years, remaining
without settlement not because of a lack of ideas, the
rules of international law or the resolutions of the
Council, but because of the lack of ability or will
to engage in serious negotiations to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan, and reach international consensus to
restore the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
through the establishment of an independent Palestinian
State based on the 4 June 1967 borders, with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital.

There are multiple symptoms of the continued
occupation and the absence of a clear political horizon.
The region and the world have seen the injustice that
has befallen successive generations ofPalestinians, who
still await their independence, the return of their land
and the enjoyment of a dignified life like that enjoyed
by other peoples of the planet, and like the Israeli
people whose State was established by a resolution
of this Organization, living side by side with the
Palestinian people. Instead of seeing an end to such an
unjust situation through the implementation of relevant
Security Council resolutions, the two-State solution
is regressing in an unprecedented way because illegal
settlements and the demolition of Palestinian homes

are eating away at Palestinian land, while imposing an
artificial division between the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip. Consequently, there have been more unilateral
measures and decisions made with regard to the holy
city of Jerusalem that contravene Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions.

The human tragedy witnessed in Gaza today is one
of the grave symptoms that I have mentioned. Let me
again caution on the situation of the people of Gaza,
the huge pressures on them and the potential explosion
of the situation there, due to the energy crisis, the
crisis of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA),
confrontations with the Israeli security forces that have
claimed the lives of scores of Palestinian victims, and
the obstruction of movement to and from the Strip.

In that context, Egypt, voluntarily and in solidarity
with the people of the Strip, worked to mitigate that
humanitarian crisis during the past period, despite
the fact that we do not have a legal responsibility to
do so. We have opened the Rafah crossing, which is
for individuals, and worked to alleviate that crisis. But
those exceptional measures will not be enough until
Israel lives live up to its responsibilities in accordance
with international law and until the control of the
Palestinian Authority over the Strip has been restored.

Egypt welcomes the interest of the Council in the
humanitarian situation in the Strip. Let me recall that
this situation has not arisen out of a vacuum and that any
attempt to turn a blind eye to the root causes underlying
the situation will only prolong the tragedy and lead to
the potential collapse of the Strip. Therefore, I caution
once again that the deteriorating situation is only one
of the symptoms of the current stalemate in the peace
process. It must not be addressed in isolation from
the broader context of the Palestinian question and
an end to the occupation. Gaza is part of the occupied
Palestinian territory, as is the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem.

I call on the members of the Council, when they
debate that question, to be guided by international
law, international humanitarian law and specific,
unambiguous responsibilities therein. Furthermore,
I urge them to take into consideration previous
experience and other accords that have regulated the
movement to and from Gaza. I also implore them to
refrain from consecrating fake accounts about the
means to alleviate humanitarian suffering that focus
on ways to excuse the occupying Power from its
responsibilities or make other parties pay the price of
that occupation, including by touching on the opening
of crossings without clarifying the facts or specifying
responsibilities.
In the same context, I call on the Palestinian parties
as well to respond quickly to the Egyptian efforts in
order to achieve reconciliation, and I appeal to the
international community and members of the Security
Council, notably the influential parties, to support
these efforts and build upon them gradually, especially
through steps that started effectively with the return of
the Palestinian Authority to control the Gaza crossings.

I am not here today to talk once again about the
violations or the injustices afflicting the Palestinian
people. The Council and the international community
are well aware of that. But let me reiterate the Egyptian
call for a resumption of direct negotiations between the
Palestinian and Israeli sides on the basis of the clear and
defined international guidelines contained in Council
resolutions, most recently resolution 2334 (2016), and
let me recall that these principles will remain valid
as time goes on because the rights they reflect are
inalienable. I recall once again that these rights are
not the reason why we have not reached a political
settlement; on the contrary, it is because they have been
neglected, circumvented and not realized. This is why
the international community has failed over the years
to achieve peace. It has been shown that an economic
approach alone will not work unless it is combined with
a political vision or is the natural outcome of peace.

In conclusion, we look forward to any new serious
initiatives for a comprehensive political settlement
in the upcoming period. We are ready to support any
such initiative politically and practically as long as it
is based on restoring the Palestinians' legal rights. We
reiterate that the Palestinian question remains the focal
point of the Middle East, and dealing with the crises in
that area must take this fact into consideration and not
conflate it with other challenges.

