Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation supported the ideas presented by France
here in the Council regarding the establishment of an

S/PV.4248

 

observer force in the West Bank and Gaza that would
have three objectives. First, that force would monitor
in the field the development of the tragic events that
have been taking place without interruption since Ariel
Sharon's visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif on the fateful date
of 28 September 2000. Secondly, the force would
inform the Secretary-General and the Security Council
about those developments. Thirdly, it would employ
good offices between the parties to avoid an escalation
of the conflict and, more importantly, to contribute to
de-escalating it and ending the violence. At that time
we said that, for practical reasons and because of the
particular situation in the occupied territories, a
mission of this type would have to have the consent of
the parties. Unfortunately, consensus has not been
achieved to make it possible for the Council to draw up
and adopt a resolution in keeping with those
guidelines.

My delegation also has reservations about the
timeliness of the draft resolution under consideration at
a time when it appears that negotiations towards a
peace settlement may resume, and that is the only way
to resolve this tragic conflict. We are also concerned
about the effectiveness of the draft resolution. We
wonder whether the draft resolution before us will be
effective in promoting the peace process through
negotiations between the parties. It is for these reasons
that Argentina will abstain in the voting on this draft
resolution.

Nevertheless, we cannot fail to express our
solidarity with the suffering of the Palestinian people.
As this may be the last meeting of the Council in which
we will participate during our current term of
membership, we must also take this opportunity to
appeal to the parties to be committed, flexible and
generous - qualities that should be demonstrated by
the stronger party in particular. We believe that acting
with greatness, magnanimity and a sense of history at
the peace table, instead of with meanness and pettiness,
is the way to achieve peace, for which there is no
alternative. There can be no winners in this conflict
through the use of force; there will be only losers.

Given the possibility of a resumption of direct
dialogue between Israel and the Palestinian Authority,
which we welcome, we nevertheless believe that many
things have occurred since the parties last met. We
cannot continue to go round in circles while being
reticent and making pusillanimous calculations. We
call on the parties to reach an agreement in which they
each recognize the inalienable right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and to organize itself as an
independent State, as well as Israel's right to live
within internationally recognized and secure borders.
In order to ensure the agreement we all call for, the
United Nations must be involved. The Organization
can count on Argentina's support.

