The President (interpretation from Arabic): The
Security Council will now resume its consideration of the
item on the agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council recalls the open debate
held at its 3954th meeting on 16 December 1998 and
on 23 December 1998 on 'The maintenance of peace
and security and post-conflict peace-building'. It
recalls also the report of the Secretary-General of 13
April 1998 on 'The causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa', which was submitted to the
Security Council (S/l998/318) and to the General
Assembly (A/52/871), as well as the report of the
Secretary-General of 27 August 1998 on the work of
the Organization submitted to the fifty-third session of
the General Assembly (A/53/1). In this context, it
welcomes the recommendations of the Secretary-
General concerning the role of the Security Council in
the aftermath of conflict, in particular in ensuring a
smooth transition from peacekeeping to post-conflict
peace-building. The Council recalls further the
statement of its President (8/25696) of 30 April 1993
on the Secretary-General's report entitled 'An
Agenda for Peace', including the subject of post-
conflict peace-building.

"The Security Council reaffirms its primary
responsibility under the Charter of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and
security. It stresses the need to prevent the resurgence
or escalation of conflict. The Council recognizes the
importance of the post-conflict peace-building efforts
of the United Nations to this end in all regions of the
world and with due involvement of all United Nations
bodies. In particular, it welcomes the role played by
the Secretary-General in this field. It recognizes the

timeliness of exploring further means to prevent and
settle conflicts based on the Charter of the United
Nations and generally recognized principles of
peacekeeping, and which would incorporate post-
conflict peace-building as an important component.

"The Security Council recalls the statement of
its President (S/PRST/1998/29) of 24 September
1998, which affirmed that the quest for peace in
Africa requires a comprehensive, concerted and
determined approach, encompassing the eradication
of poverty, the promotion of democracy, sustainable
development and respect for human rights, as well
as conflict prevention and resolution, including
peacekeeping, and humanitarian assistance. The
Council underlines that efforts to ensure lasting
solutions to conflicts require sustained political will
and a long-term approach in the decision-making of
the United Nations, including by the Council itself.
It affirms its commitment to the principles of the
political independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of all States in conducting peace-building
activities, and the need for States to comply with
their obligations under the Charter of the United
Nations and the principles of international law.

"The Security Council underlines that economic
rehabilitation and reconstruction often constitute the
major tasks facing societies emerging from conflict
and that significant international assistance becomes
indispensable to promote sustainable development in
such cases. In that context, it recalls that Article 65
of the Charter of the United Nations provides that
the Economic and Social Council may furnish
information to the Security Council and shall assist
the Security Council upon its request.

"The Security Council, conscious of the
emphasis placed by the Secretary-General on the
issue of post-conflict peace-building, in particular in
the context of the reform of the United Nations,
encourages him to explore the possibility of
establishing post-conflict peace-building structures as
part of efforts by the United Nations system to
achieve a lasting peaceful solution to conflicts,
including in order to ensure a smooth transition from
peacekeeping to peace-building and lasting peace.

"The Security Council recognizes the value of
including, as appropriate, peace-building elements in
the mandates of peacekeeping operations. It agrees
with the Secretary-General that relevant post-conflict

 

peace-building elements should be explicitly and
clearly identified and could be integrated into the
mandates of peacekeeping operations. It notes that
peacekeeping operations may include military, police,
humanitarian and other civilian components. It
requests the Secretary-General to make
recommendations to the Council to this effect
whenever appropriate.

"The Security Council also requests the
Secretary-General to make recommendations to the
appropriate United Nations bodies concerning the
transitional period to the post-conflict peace-building
phase when recommending the final drawdown of a
peacekeeping operation.

"The Security Council recognizes the need for
close cooperation and dialogue between the bodies of
the United Nations system, in particular those directly
concerned in the field of post-conflict peace-building,
in accordance with their respective responsibilities and
expresses its willingness to consider ways to improve
such cooperation. It also emphasizes the need to
improve the exchange of information between all
relevant actors in the field of post-conflict peace-
building, including United Nations agencies and
bodies, international financial institutions, regional
and subregional organizations, troop contributors and
the donor community. In this context, it notes with
appreciation the Secretary-General's plans for
strategic frameworks to ensure increased coherence
and effectiveness in the entire range of United
Nations activities in States in and recovering from
crrsrs.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/38.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.05 p.m.
