Mr. Gonzalez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Iwish
to congratulate the delegation of the People's Republic
of China on assuming the leadership of the Security
Council during the month of November. I would also
like to thank them for convening this open debate
and for the substantive concep paper they provided us
(S/2018/982, annex.)

My delegation believes the holding of this open
debate to be most timely. The global challenges we
face require the international community to enhance
its working methods so that we can become more
efficient. In the face of such challenges, we must also
consider how to promote all the fundamental principles
of the Charter of the United Nations together, without
detriment to any of them. I would like to refer to three
topics during my statement.

First, I reiterate the importance that Colombia
attaches to the purposes and principles of the
Organization's Charter. They are not a pointless
enumeration of general values and goals; rather, they
are the very foundation upon which our Organization
is built, enabling States to constantly and collectively
strive for a more peaceful, prosperous and just world.
The purposes and principles uphold international law
and relations and are as valid today as they have been
for seven decades.

The Government of President Duque Marquez
firmly believes that, given the increasing number of
actors involved in international relations, today's world
requires a system of governance that, while giving order
to and facilitating the management of international
affairs, also helps to consolidate the capacities of
States to meet the demands of society and guarantee
our common good. The strengthening of multilateral
forums promotes a greater degree of symmetry in
international relations, contributing to transparency
and the development of equitable rules of the game
that can be accepted by all. The broad and democratic
participation of States in multilateral forums enables us
to forge joint commitments and fulfil the obligations
that arise from them, thereby strengthening the
principle of collective responsibility as a criterion to
confront global challenges.

Strengthening multilateralism therefore fosters
cooperation and consolidates fairer and more balanced
rules of the game. There is nothing more beneficial for
the efforts of the international community in its fight
against the scourges that burden us than the existence
of commitments entered into democratically by States.
These must be developed as a result of dialogue and
political consultations and established on balanced
criteria that consolidate institutions and strengthen the
international order.

The second issue I would like to address is the need
for flexibility and adaptation in our Organization. The
effective implementation of the three reforms of the
United Nations system spearheaded by the Secretary-
General will ensure that its management is more
modern, transparent and efficient. That also includes
achieving gender equality and the promotion of a
results-based system so that the Organization can fulfil
its mandates expeditiously.

Likewise, protecting and strengthening the Security
Council means that it is essential to democratize this
collective mechanism. When we speak of a more
democratic Council, we refer to a body that is more
representative, more transparent and more effective.
My delegation, together with the countries of Uniting
for Consensus, has presented solid proposals calling
for a reform of the Security Council that will attend to
those principles by means of an increase in the number
of non-permanent seats and establishing a new category
for longer-term seats or introducing the possibility of
seats that qualify for re-election.

Finally, there is an urgent need to place prevention
at the heart of the Organization's activities. Prevention
has been identified by the Secretary-General as a
priority for making the Organization more effective
and for saving succeeding generations from the scourge
of war. Such an approach should lead the Organization
to react quickly and in a coordinated manner to produce
results on the ground. We believe that, at the current
time, strengthening the role of the United Nations
Resident Coordinator, as a result of the repositioning
of the development system, can and must play a
fundamental role in that regard.

Preventing conflict means strengthening
institutions and building resilient societies. It means
placing respect for human rights at the heart of
national and international policy. It means protecting
and empowering women and girls, one of the most
important steps in sustainable development. And it
means achieving the Sustainable Development Goals.

I conclude my statement by reiterating my
delegation's commitment to an international rules-
based order in which the United Nations is at the centre.

