Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to start by welcoming the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of South Africa, Her
Excellency Ms. Maite Nkoana-Mashabane, and by
expressing appreciation for her having agreed to
preside over our meetings this morning and this
afternoon. Secondly, I would like to thank the
representative of the African Union Commission,
Mr. Ramtane Lamamra, for his briefing to us, as well
as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kenya and the
Minister of Defence of Uganda for their statements. I
also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe for providing a briefing to
inform our discussion.

This meeting is related to the debate to be held
tomorrow on the cooperation between the African
Union and United Nations, given that the United
Nations has established an important strategic
partnership with the African Union in Somalia. The
excellent work done by the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM) and the recent collaboration
between the United Nations and the African Union in
planning the next phase of AMISOM. operations are
both illustrations and the product of that close
cooperation.

The historic visit of the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly to Somalia took
place barely a month ago. The momentum generated by
that visit certainly contributed to the outcome of the
national constitutional conference, held in Garowe
from 21 to 23 December 2011. The principles agreed at
the conference, with the established deadlines, show
the commitment of the national institutions to complete
the transition period before 20 August.

We agree with representatives who have
underscored the importance of implementing the road
map and the Kampala Accord. It is essential for the
Transitional Federal Government to show leadership
and resolve the parliamentary crisis. It must also
improve accountability and transparency. Achieving
such goals would bolster the trust of the international
community. In this last phase of the transition period,
the political process must be inclusive and
representative of the Somali people.

We also agree with the need to make a
coordinated and consistent effort against Al-Shabaab.
We are aware that AMISOM. continues to face a serious
lack of resources and, for that second phase of
operations, it needs adequate, guaranteed and
predictable funding. We appreciate the inputs provided
today, as well as the communique of the Peace and
Security Council of the African Union of 5 January, in
which it requests the Security Council to strengthen
AMISOM. (see S/2012/19, annex). We will consider
that request together with the recommendations of the
Secretary-General.

We also believe that it is important to maintain a
comprehensive approach in Somalia. The security
strategy must go hand in hand with implementing the
road map. The long-term consequences of the
humanitarian disaster and the economic development
agenda must continue to be priorities. Humanitarian
aid must continue for the time being.

In that regard, we very much hope that the
upcoming meetings - both the conference in London
in February and, later, the United Nations conference
in Istanbul - will help to bring the transitional period
in Somalia to an end and lead to a more stable and
solid system of governance. Lastly, we support the
statement to the press to be made following this
meeting and we welcome the efforts of the United
Kingdom in preparing it.

