Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. I believe that, under your leadership, the
work of the Council will make new progress. I would
like to thank Poland for its important contribution to
the Council in its capacity as President of the Council
last month.

At present, the world's attention is focused on the
tense situation in Palestine. China expresses its serious
concern over the violent conflict in the border area of
Gaza, which has caused heavy casualties. We oppose
any acts of violence against civilians and call on Israel
and Palestine, particularly Israel, to exercise restraint
and to help defuse tensions in order to avoid casualties.

The issue of Palestine is at the heart of the Middle East
question. Seven decades have passed but the legitimate
rights and interests of the Palestinian people are still
subject to unfair treatment. Such historical injustices
must be redressed. The Council and the international
community should uphold justice by taking swift action
to respond to the legitimate aspirations of the people
of Palestine and the Arab people, intensifying efforts
to promote peace and negotiation and facilitating the
early resumption of talks between the two sides in order
to achieve the two-State solution that will bring about
peaceful coexistence between the two countries.

The draft resolution submitted by Kuwait objectively
reflects the current situation. It helps protect Palestinian
civilians from harm and de-escalates tensions between
the two sides. China appreciates Kuwait's efforts to
seek the widest possible consensus in an open and
constructive manner. China voted in favour of the draft
resolution submitted by Kuwait.

I would like to reiterate here that China welcomes
and supports all efforts to help ease the situation between
the two sides and facilitate the early achievement of the
two-State solution and peaceful coexistence between
the two countries. China will continue to follow the
four-point proposal by Chinese President Xi Jinping for
the political settlement of the Palestinian issue, and we
will work with the international community and play
an active and constructive role in promoting peace in
the Middle East.

