Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Russian delegation voted in favour of
the adoption of resolution 2228 (2015) on the extension
of the mandate of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID), based on the
important stabilizing role of that hybrid mission in
Darfur. For us, it is also of principal importance that
the resolution reaffirms the role of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur of 2011 as a sound basis for a
settlement in Darfur. That is no coincidence. After
all, the Doha Document is not only being successfully
implemented in practice, but it has also become an
integral component of the Constitution of the Sudan.
It is with satisfaction that we know that the Security
Council again clearly spoke in favour of the mediation
role of the head of UNAMID between the Government
of the Sudan and the Darfur rebels on the basis of that
document.

At the same time, the Security Council has
spoken out against attempts to devalue the Doha peace
process and to replace it with a type of comprehensive
settlement formula for the conflict in the Sudan based
on a position, which is supported abroad, that assumes
a regime change in Khartoum. The parties with an
influence on the Darfur insurgents should urge them
to become rapidly involved in the Doha peace process,
just as, for example, groups in Mali were urged to
join the peace and reconciliation agreement. The
time is now right to think about the Doha Document's
implementation by the irreconcilable insurgents,
otherwise Council sanctions should be targeted at
them. We note with satisfaction that the Council has
stressed the key role of the Joint Working Group and
the representatives of the Sudan, the United Nations
and the African Union in elaborating a strategy for
winding down the mission in Darfur. That would be
in keeping with the basic principles of peacekeeping,
which includes the agreement and consent of the host
country, as well as the deployment and operation of
peacekeeping operations.

The Security Council and the United Nations
Secretariat must very carefully consider the Working
Group's recommendations for the future. Those
recommendations will, inter alia, determine the
relationship between the Government of the Sudan and
UNAMID.

