The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Sweden.

First, I would like to thank Special Coordinator
Mr. Mladenov for his tireless work and that of the entire
United Nations staff on the ground.

The international community is committed to a
two-State solution with an independent, democratic,
contiguous and viable Palestinian State, living side by
side with Israel in peace and security, and with Jerusalem
as the future capital of both States. However, the two-
State solution is becoming more distant each day. The
constant deterioration in the situation on the ground,
with continued settlement expansion, demolitions and
violence, is destroying the hopes for peace. We must
avoid a move towards a one-State reality and perpetual
occupation.

Sweden's long-standing engagement on the
Middle East peace process is based on international
law, including human rights law and international
humanitarian law. It was our support for the two-State
solution and our desire to make the parties less unequal
that led us to recognize the State of Palestine in 2014.
The international community has an important role
to play in moving from words to action by helping to
break the current deadlock and by finally ending the
occupation that started 50 years ago. We welcome
the adoption of resolution 2334 (2016), which is a
milestone towards resumed efforts to save the two-
State solution. We must now encourage the parties to
swiftly implement its provisions, as has been stated by
everyone in the Chamber today. More than 70 countries
met in Paris last Sunday in order to save and promote
the two-State solution. We commend France for its
initiative - a much-needed recommitment to the peace
process. We welcome the adoption of the joint statement
of the Paris Middle East Conference, especially the
recommendation to refrain from unilateral steps that
prejudge the outcome of negotiations on final status
issues, including the future status of Jerusalem, and the
stated readiness of the interested parties to meet again
before the end of the year to review progress.

As part of the French initiative, Sweden convened
a working group on civil society, which heard the
voices of 150 civil-society organizations in Israel and
Palestine. We thank all the countries and international
organizations that have supported those efforts, and
we welcome the fact that other countries now want
to join. In those consultations, it was made clear that
many in the post-Oslo generation, on both sides, had
lost hope that the two-State solution is attainable. We
need to engage civil society to revive a public debate
on the prospects for peace and the two-State solution.
We need to show young women and men that there is
an alternative to the current violence, the depressing
status quo and the continuously negative developments
on the ground. Sweden will therefore host a civil-
society forum this spring.

We fully support the efforts of the United Nations,
the Quartet and the League of Arab States. The United
Nations and its presence, through various United
Nations bodies on the ground, play an important role
in supporting the Palestinian people. We support
a reinvigorated Quartet that moves forward to
seek to facilitate the swift implementation of the
recommendations contained in its report of7 July 2016
(S/2016/595, annex). We highlight the importance of
implementing the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002. Finally,
I would like to recognize the outgoing United States
Administration for its efforts, including Secretary
Kerry's remarks on 28 December. We look forward to
continued United States engagement in support of the
two-State solution.

On Lebanon, Sweden welcomes the election of
Michel Aoun as President on 31 October 2016 and the
formation of a Government of national accord, led by
Prime Minister Saad Hariri, in December. We hope
that these positive developments will now pave the way
for parliamentary elections. We commend Lebanon for
hosting more than 1.1 million Syrian refugees and call
for the implementation of the shared commitments on
refugees made at the London Conference on 4 February
2016. We support United Nations-led efforts on the
ground.

Finally, the situation in Syria is the crisis of our
time, with a devastating toll in human suffering. We
welcome the unity in the Council in December that led
to the adoption of resolution 2336 (2016).

Despite the reduced levels of violence resulting from
the ceasefire, humanitarian access remains dismal. All
parties to the conflict, not least the Syrian Government,
must ensure full, timely, safe and unhindered access for
humanitarian workers countrywide.

Sweden looks forward to a resumption of the
United Nations-led intra-Syrian talks in Geneva on
8 February, in line with resolution 2254 (2015), and
hopes that the Astana meeting can help create the
right conditions for this. Syrian women must be fully
involved in the process. We must also work together
to ensure accountability for the atrocities committed
during the conflict, some of which may amount to war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now wish to remind all speakers to limit their
statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
The blinking lamp on the microphone signals that
the time is up; it is not an encouragement to keep
talking. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.

I wish also to inform the Council that we will be
carrying on this open debate right through the lunch
hour, as we have a large number of speakers.

I now give the floor to the representative of
Lebanon.

