Mr. Andjaba (Namibia): At the outset, Sir, I
wish to extend my warm congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of April. We also express our
appreciation to your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of Norway, for the able manner in
which he conducted the work of the Council in March.

I wish to associate myself with the statement
made by the Permanent Representative of South Africa
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Sir, you deserve our further appreciation for
scheduling this important meeting so early in your
presidency, in particular at a time when it appears to
the outside world that the Security Council is either
unable or unwilling to carry out its Charter
responsibilities and ensure that its resolutions and
decisions on the Middle East are implemented fully.
The perceived inaction of the Council and the
selectivity with which it enforces its resolutions are
damaging its credibility and need to be addressed. The
list of decisions and resolutions of the Council
regarding the situation in the Middle East and the
occupied Palestinian territory is growing longer.
However, what is important is not their number but
their implementation. In particular, we urge the
Security Council to ensure the immediate and
unconditional implementation of resolution 1402
(2002).

I wish to recall that the latest aggravation of the
crisis in the Middle East was caused on 28 September
2000, with the provocative Visit of the present Prime
Minister of Israel to Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Today it is
clear that he has succeeded in eroding most
achievements towards peace and preventing further
progress in the peace process.

It is of great concern that Israel is expanding its
illegal occupation with the reoccupation of Palestinian
land. In this process, massive violations of human
rights and international humanitarian law are being
committed, including grave breaches of the Fourth
Geneva Convention. Furthermore, extrajudicial killings
by the Israeli occupying forces are continuing, as well
as the large-scale destruction of Palestinian homes and
other properties. The international community, in
particular the Security Council, should not turn a blind
eye to this and should exert all pressure on Israel to
ensure that these illegal acts are stopped. A11 acts of
violence, including suicide bombings and the use of
military forces against innocent civilians, must be
condemned.

The Palestinian people have the inalienable right
to self-determination. They have the right to establish
their own viable State, just as Israel claims the right to
its existence and wishes to live in peace with its
neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders. The Palestinian people also have
the right to choose their own leaders, and the present
attempts by Israel to force President Arafat, who is the
legitimate leader of the Palestinian people, to leave
Palestine should be rejected with the contempt they
deserve.

My delegation calls on both parties to comply
with Security Council resolution 1402 (2002) and to
implement it without further delay. The longer the
current violence continues, the more difficult it will be
to build the confidence necessary for negotiations. We
also call on Israel to embrace the initiative of Crown
Prince Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, which was adopted
by the Arab League. It provides the light at the end of
the tunnel in the current circumstances.

My delegation strongly believes that international
observers in the region would be a valuable mechanism
to monitor the situation and ease tension between the
parties. The Council should therefore continue to
explore that option.

In conclusion, my delegation wishes to reiterate
that the only way to solve the crisis in the Middle East
is through a negotiated peace settlement on the basis of
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). The international community, and in particular
the Security Council, should take all concrete actions
necessary to achieve this goal. The continued
humiliation of a people under occupation and the
relegation of its legitimate fight against foreign
occupation to the status of mere terrorism, are not in
the interest of any Viable peace in the Middle East.
Instead, the occupation of Palestine, which is at the
core of the current crisis, should be ended.

