Allow me at the outset to congratulate you, Madam President, on your country's accession to the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December and to thank you for having made the issue of security-sector reform a priority. I would like to assure you of the Niger's full support and of our appreciation for the efforts made in connection with your country's proposal for a draft resolution (S/2020/1158) on the subject. I wish also to thank the various speakers for their valuable and diverse contributions to our debate today. The transformation of the security sector remains more necessary than ever given global developments and the fresh challenges facing our States. My country, the Niger, believes that such reforms are of crucial importance given the difficulties caused by the insecurity that has prevailed in the Sahel for almost a decade now, with the aim of maintaining the security and stability of the country and in order to establish and strengthen the foundations for sustainable socioeconomic development. That is why part 3 of the Renaissance programme, entitled "Ensuring the safety of people and property", has the following objectives: the redefinition and implementation of a national security policy that takes into account the political, economic and military dimensions; the consolidation of State authority at all levels; and the pursuit and strengthening of security cooperation with neighbouring countries. It is important to stress that all those initiatives take account of the importance of youth employment. Offering young people an opportunity to be active reduces their vulnerability in a regional environment that exposes some of them, especially those in rural areas, to the temptation of recruitment by the forces of evil. That is how, by virtue of its geographical location, the Niger, which is surrounded by three hotbeds of tension - Boko Haram in the south, the Libyan crisis in the north and that in Mali in the west - has prioritized building the capacity of the security sector, specifically in the areas of defence, the police, justice, the penal system, the judicial system, border management and customs, so as to better adapt those security instruments to current threats, of which the greatest is the expansion of terrorism into the Sahel. In that context, it is important to underline all the ongoing efforts made by my country in terms of training the various actors in the security sector and in the modernization of their equipment. Through subregional mechanisms, the Niger has focused on strengthening and increasing cross-border cooperation with neighbouring countries and Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) member States so as to better promote security-sector reform in an increasingly globalized context. It is in the context of pooling our efforts that we are committed, within the political framework of ECOWAS, to the reform and governance of the security sector, as adopted in 2016, consistent with the policies of the African Union and the United Nations in that area. In that regard, my delegation welcomes the involvement of the Security Council and various other United Nations bodies, in particular the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel, and of regional and subregional organizations, which, by means of strategic partnerships, work together to strengthen good governance in the security sector. It is also important to underline that no transformation of the security sector can be complete without the contribution and involvement of independent monitoring actors such as civil-society organizations, which are an essential component of the consolidation of any viable democratic process. In addition, the promotion of youth, gender and the principle of gender equality should be supported, in accordance with article 63 of the revised Treaty of ECOWAS (1993), the organization's Gender Policy (2004) and article 81 of the ECOWAS Conflict Prevention Framework, as well as its regional Plan of Action for the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1820 (2010). This inclusive approach should also properly take into account and address emerging threats to peace and security, including terrorism, climate change and pandemics. While welcoming recent developments in the area of security-sector governance, my delegation reiterates the need for national ownership of the process. It is indeed vital that security-sector reform policies and programmes be developed, managed and implemented by national rather than external actors, as stated by experts and confirmed by examples of successful processes. I cannot conclude without mentioning the important role played by United Nations peacekeeping missions and the Peacebuilding Commission in the process of transforming the security sector through their vital support for disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programmes.
