Mr. Rock (Canada): Some five years have now
passed since the Council adopted resolutions 1265
(1999) and 1296 (2000). That anniversary provides a
timely opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the
Council's use of the tools that those resolutions put at
its disposal in addressing violence against civilians.
This is also an opportune moment to discuss further
steps that can be taken to build upon those two
milestone resolutions and to render the Council's
actions to protect civilians timelier and more effective.
Canada is grateful for the opportunity to take part in
this discussion. I hope, Mr. President, that you know
the depth and sincerity of our commitment to these
fundamental issues.

Today, we would like to make observations and
suggestions in two directions: looking back and gazing
forward. I shall first look back to an assessment of the
last five years that shows that significant progress has
been made. The Security Council now has in its
repertoire a wide range of remedies and a
comprehensive framework of resolutions dealing with
the protection of civilians and the related issues of
children and armed conflict; women and peace and
security; and conflict prevention. As a result, there is
now increasing acceptance of the need, for example, to
structure peace-support operations so that they can
respond to a range of protection matters. There is now
a preparedness to anticipate the humanitarian impact of
sanctions, and there is now a willingness to implement
comprehensive field-based protection training
initiatives.

Yet, despite that important recent progress, a
backward glance also reveals significant shortcomings.
We need look no further than Darfur, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Uganda to see that there is
a significant gap between the principles expressed in
the thematic resolutions and the practical steps taken
by the Council to respond to protection challenges.
While the milestone resolutions contemplate early,
systematic and bold action, the Council's resolutions
are too often ad hoc, seldom timely and rarely
proactive. Of course, all the tools and instruments at
the Council's disposal are of no value unless the
Council can summon the political will to employ them.
Effective and timely recourse to the full range of
measures available to the Council is essential to ensure
the protection of vulnerable populations. Where the
complex challenges require the Council's sustained
attention over the long term, that attention should be
given.

Furthermore, in our respectful view, the Council
must be steadfast and consistent in the messages it
sends in response to war crimes and crimes against
humanity. There must be follow-through when it
threatens to impose measures unless conditions are
met. In those cases in which measures are imposed,
those measures must be monitored. The Council must
not tolerate a failure by parties to conflict to comply
with its resolutions.

In the case of Darfur, for example, the Secretary-
General has provided four reports to the Council. The
last three have noted the absence of compliance with
its previous resolutions. Most recently, the Secretary-
General expressed concern about an upsurge in
violence - that despite the fact that all parties to the
conflict in Darfur had recently signed on to both
humanitarian and security protocols. In the case of
Darfur the time is past due for the Council to create a
monitoring mechanism for the arms embargo put in
place against all non-Government entities and
individuals. The time is past due for the Council to
consider other targeted measures, including the
imposition of asset freezes and travel sanctions against
all offending parties to the conflict in Darfur. For it is
only by taking steps, monitoring compliance and
demonstrating a willingness to take further effective
action that the Council will foster the authority and
credibility that set it apart as a body of unique stature.

Let me turn briefly to our observations about the
future, because occasions such as this provide an
opportunity to draw from the experience of the past to
plan for more effective responses in the years to come.
Canada wishes briefly to highlight six specific areas
where we believe the Council's actions on protection
issues can be improved.

First, if the Council is to adopt credible and
timely preventative measures it must be more proactive
in identifying countries at risk of crisis and potential
threats to peace that are not yet on the Council's
agenda. For that reason, we support the
recommendation contained in the report of the
Secretary-General's High-Level Panel on Threats,
Challenges and Change (A/59/565) to create a
peacebuilding commission to identify countries at risk
of conflict and instability. We also endorse the need for
the United Nations to develop a strong, clear normative
framework for dealing with armed non-State actors.

Secondly, we believe that, in order to strengthen
the future implementation of the civilian-protection
agenda, the Council needs a more systematic
assessment of the lessons learned from recent
protection mandates in peace-support operations.
Canada intends both to work actively with the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)
and to invite Council members in the course of coming
months to participate in a series of workshops to
support the development of such assessments.

Thirdly, we suggest putting in place better
defined trigger mechanisms for Council action to
ensure it responds immediately when civilians are
directly targeted, when humanitarian aid is deliberately
obstructed and where gross violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law occur with
impunity. That is, after all, what the Council committed
itself to do in resolution 1265 (1999). We therefore
welcome the High-Level Panel's endorsement of the
collective international responsibility to protect, as
well as its conclusion that the proper authority to
approve action in such cases is the Council. The report
outlines basic criteria for the authorization of the use of
force, providing elements of a critical framework for
Council action. Canada believes that the Council
should review those criteria with a view to adopting
them.

Fourthly, in cases where sanctions are imposed,
we believe that the Council must continue to
strengthen its enforcement and monitoring mechanisms
for arms embargoes and other targeted sanctions. It
should also endorse the guidelines developed by
OCHA on the humanitarian impact of sanctions. We
have learned valuable lessons in Iraq, Liberia and
Afghanistan about how to effectively implement
targeted sanctions. We believe that the guidelines
reflect those lessons and that they will ensure a rapid
and appropriate needs assessment by humanitarian staff
to assist Security Council actions.

Fifthly, the Council has taken important steps
with respect to the illicit exploitation of natural
resources, including commissioning panels of experts
and imposing targeted sanctions. The link between the
illicit exploitation of natural resources and the intensity
and persistence of armed conflicts is clear, as are the
horrific implications for the safety of civilians. Here
again, Canada believes that effective responses require
the Security Council to be more proactive - for
example, by adopting a systematic approach to
addressing the range of natural resources known to be
linked to armed conflict. We urge the Council to
formalize the expert panel mechanism and to press for
the genuine enforcement of targeted sanctions regimes
through national enforcement mechanisms.

Sixthly and finally, we suggest that the capacity
of United Nations country teams to lead and coordinate
on protection issues must be strengthened. That is a
key core weakness that must be urgently addressed if
we are to be successful in respecting the rights and
enhancing the safety of civilians whose lives are
affected daily by conflict. When required, the Council
must also be ready to provide effective political
backing for United Nations teams in their dealings with
Governments and non-State actors. In that regard, the
work being done by the working group on protection in
northern Darfur is a good model of collaboration, and
it should be replicated in other similar contexts.

(spoke in French)

We have come a long way in the last few years.
Five years ago, Security Council resolutions still
focused on protecting convoys rather than people. That
has changed. Now we must take this initiative to the
next level, building on the progress that has been made.
Our success is best measured by the number of lives
saved, the number of displacements averted, and in the
mitigation or reduction of conflicts. Canada intends to
actively seek to fill the gaps that have been identified.

(spoke in English)

We look forward to the next report of the
Secretary-General, which, we hope, will report further
progress and which can once again be used as the basis
from which to take stock and for measuring progress
towards improving our collective ability to protect the
world's most vulnerable, so that we might live up to
the inspiring words of the very resolutions whose
anniversary we observe today.

