Mr. Amorim (Brazil): May I first of all congratulate
you, Ambassador Fulci, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
December. Under your able and wise guidance the
particularly complex agenda of the Security Council in the
last month of the year will be dealt with with competence
and effectiveness. I wish you success.

I should also like to take this opportunity to express
sincere appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador
Wisnumurti of Indonesia, for his very skilful conduct of the
Council's business during November.

We would like, once more, to pay tribute to the role
played by the Secretary-General, Mr.Boutros Boutros-Ghali,
and by his Special Representative, Mr. Blondin Beye. We
commend the continued endeavours by the troika of
observer States.

We are now approaching the end of the two-year
period foreseen in resolution 976 (1995) for the completion
of the mandate of the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III). Though substantial progress has
been made in the peace progress since the beginning of this
operation, a lot remains to be done.

In the quartering process, many UNITA troops have
deserted. The quantity and quality of weapons handed over
to UNAVEM. III was unsatisfactory. Some of the tasks
enumerated in resolution 1075 (1996) and in the
consolidated timetable approved by the Joint Commission
were not fulfilled by the 15 November deadline.

However, we very much welcome today's news to the
effect that UNITA has declared that it has completed the
quartering of its troops and that the Government has
proceeded to the integration of nine UNITA generals into
the Angola armed forces. This is a breakthrough that should
lead to progress on all fronts.

In a demonstration of Brazil's firm commitment to the
peace process, President Fernando Henrique Cardoso visited
Angola last November, having travelled to Cuito to meet
with the Brazilian troops serving in UNAVEM. III.
President Cardozo went to Luanda to confirm that Brazil is
ready to cooperate with Angolans and their Government in
the reconstruction of the country and in the consolidation of
a fair and free society where reconciliation and integration
are the cornerstones of prosperity.

The situation in Angola is at a crucial stage. Unless
serious progress continues to be made in key areas, in the
short term UNAVEM. III will not be able to fulfil all the
tasks assigned to it.

In his report, the Secretary-General outlines a plan
for the withdrawal of UNAVEM's contingent with which
we agree in principle. However, we should bear in mind
the responsibility of the international community towards
Angola. We believe that the complete withdrawal of the
force should take place only after it becomes clear that
the peace process is irreversible.

The extension of UNAVEM's mandate until 28
February 1997 will provide the Angolans with an
additional chance to accomplish the remaining military
and political tasks foreseen in the Lusaka Protocol and to
establish the basis for a peaceful, united and prosperous
Angola.

