Mr. Richardson (United States of America): Today
the Security Council is taking a clear stand for peace and
security in the Balkans. The United States strongly supports
this resolution imposing an arms embargo on the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. In so doing, the Council sends an
unambiguous message that the international community will
not tolerate Violence and "ethnic cleansing" in the region of
the former Yugoslavia. We must avoid the mistakes of the
past, when the international community waited too long
before taking decisive action. We fully recognize that the
security of the region directly affects broader international
interests and that deterioration of the situation in Kosovo
constitutes a threat to international peace and security.

Over the last few years, this Council and the
international community have worked hard to promote
ethnic reconciliation in Bosnia and Croatia. The United
States and our partners in the peace effort must not now
watch years of peace-building in the Balkans destroyed by
repressive violence or by terrorist activity in Kosovo.

The Foreign Ministers of the Contact Group, meeting
in London on March 9 and in Bonn on March 25, agreed
that the situation in Kosovo is not simply an internal
matter, but also has a direct impact on the stability of
neighbouring countries and jeopardizes peace in the
Balkans. As Secretary Albright said in Bonn, the
international community has not faced a problem in the
former Yugoslavia as dangerous as the situation in Kosovo
since the last war in the region began.

President Milosevic knows what he must do to have
the arms embargo and other sanctions lifted and to avoid
further measures. As a necessary and crucial step, President
Milosevic must begin an unconditional dialogue on political
status issues with the Kosovar Albanian leadership. The
United States joins the Council in expressing support for an
enhanced status for Kosovo, including greater autonomy
and meaningful self-administration. The United States
believes this is the only way to achieve long-term peace
and a satisfactory resolution to the conflict in the region.

The United States strongly welcomes the clear
commitment of Mr. Rugova and other senior
representatives of the Kosovar Albanian leadership to
non-violence and a negotiated solution to the crisis in
Kosovo. We will not countenance terrorist activity or
external support for terrorist activity. The Kosovar
Albanian community should pursue their goals through
peaceful means.

This resolution also underlines the important role of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Tribunal
in gathering evidence about the violence in Kosovo which
may fall within its jurisdiction. We remind the authorities
of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia of their obligation
to extend full cooperation in this effort, as well as of their
commitments under the Bosnia peace agreement to
cooperate fully with the International Tribunal.

Of key importance is urgent action by the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia to stop the violence and other
provocative action by its police and paramilitary security
forces. In spite of assurances by the authorities to the
contrary, these special police remain in Kosovo in force.
They must be withdrawn immediately, in keeping with the
London Contact Group statement. Civilians and members
of the international community, including international
humanitarian workers in the region, have been harassed,
threatened, arrested and even beaten by these police.

We believe that only sustained international pressure
will ensure continued progress towards the goal of a
peacefully negotiated solution in Kosovo. This resolution
confirms that the international community will hold
President Milosevic firmly to meeting in full the
benchmarks of the London Contact Group. Otherwise, as
the Bonn Contact Group recognized, additional measures
may be needed.

