Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing today's open debate on piracy. I also welcome
the the presidential statement (S/PRST/2012/24), which
appropriately emphasizes a holistic and comprehensive
approach in addressing piracy.

My delegation is deeply concerned about piracy
threatening the maritime security of the world's major
trade routes, in particular around the Gulf of Aden
and the Gulf of Guinea. My delegation is of the view
that piracy can be effectively tackled by addressing its
underlying causes on land. Piracy can be rooted out
when domestic Governments regain full control over
their territories and provide their people with sufficient
economic opportunity.

In that sense, my delegation welcomes the recent
launch of the new Somali Government. Progress on
Somalia's political situation should pave the way for a
successful solution to piracy. In overcoming instability
and the lack of governance in Somalia, my delegation
believes that capacity-building for Somalia's judicial
system based on a mid- and long-term perspective
is critical to prosecuting and imprisoning persons
responsible for acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea
off the coast of Somalia.

Various concerted efforts by the international
community are required in combating piracy, which
is, by its nature, a transnational issue. My delegation
highly commends the tireless efforts of the international
community in combating piracy and thereby ensuring
the safety of shipping lanes.

The Republic of Korea has actively joined the
coordinated international efforts to combat Somali
piracy. The Republic of Korea took over the command
of Combined Task Force 151 for the period of June to
September. By participating in the Combined Maritime
Forces operations, we have strengthened ties with
other counter-piracy naval forces and operations in the
Gulf of Aden and Somali basin, as well as developed
communication and collaboration within the merchant
shipping community. We are currently in the last stage
of the National Assembly's approval process for a
one-year extension of the deployment.

The Republic of Korea has also actively participated
in the work of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia. Since March, Korea has chaired
Working Group 3, which deals with self-protection
measures against piracy. Korea, as chair, intends to
assist participants in their efforts to improve seafarers'
welfare and prevent piracy by facilitating the use of
privately contracted armed security personnel on board
and implementing best management practices, which
will be discussed at the Working Group 3 meeting to be
held in Seoul in February.

The Republic of Korea established the official
website of the Contact Group in October 2011, and has
operated it jointly since then with the sponsorship of
the United Kingdom and the United States. The website
provides a forum for intersessional discussions among
Contact Group participants and for enhancing public
awareness.

With regard to capacity-building, the Republic
of Korea has financially supported Somalia and
its neighbouring countries, especially through
International Maritime Organization and other United
Nations programmes. In addition, at the Contact
Group's tenth plenary session, held in November 2011,
the Republic of Korea was chosen to serve during
2013 as a board member of the Trust Fund to Support
Initiatives of States Countering Piracy off the Coast of
Somalia, in order to ensure effective use of the Fund.

With the Republic of Korea being one of the
world's largest flag states, my delegation would like
to take this opportunity to renew its commitment to
maritime security and full engagement in international
anti-piracy activities. I firmly believe we can together
address the issue by rallying the firm and resolute
commitment of the international community.

