At the outset, allow me to extend my warmest congratulations to you, Sir, on the assumption by South Africa of the Security Council presidency for the month of December. I hope that your presidency will be a successful one and serve as the culmination of two years of Council membership and valuable efforts in the service of African and international causes. We thank you as well for devoting this meeting to the issue of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, a sound choice that reflects the critical importance we attach to strengthening the strategic partnership between the two organizations in dealing with questions of peace and security in Africa, which account for about 60 per cent of the work and time of the Security Council. I must also reiterate to His Excellency Secretary-General Antonio Guterres that Tunisia appreciates his valuable efforts to promote international peace and security and strengthen the role of the United Nations and multilateral action. In addition, I wish to convey to His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African Union Commission, our appreciation for his efforts to advance African causes and promote peace and security on the continent. In spite of United Nations and regional efforts, many regions of Africa have been mired for decades in tensions, violence, conflicts and instability and beset by fragility. This reality has exacerbated and complicated the situation, in particular given that the nature of conflict has changed and many developing threats to peace and security have emerged that not only have consequences at the local and regional level but can also affect international security and peace. Accordingly, developing cooperation, promoting integration and strengthening the partnership between the United Nations and the African Union have become increasingly important in confronting challenges related to peace and security throughout the continent, coordinating efforts to manage and resolve crises and conflicts, advancing political solutions and developing strategies for security, peacebuilding and sustainable peace in the post-conflict stages through joint mechanisms and regular consultations between the two organizations. We are satisfied with the gradual development of cooperation between the United Nations and the African Union, particularly in the past decade. The Security Council and the African Union Peace and Security Council have been holding annual consultative meetings since 2007 and conducting joint operations in African conflict zones. However, in view of the magnitude of the challenges and the increasingly dire repercussions of instability, we emphasize the need to further develop ties between the United Nations and the African Union and to promote and bring about a qualitative shift in cooperation between the organizations, from conflict management to partnership in areas in which pre-emptive action may be taken to prevent violence and conflict from recurring by addressing the drivers and root causes thereof. In the same vein, we call for greater collaboration between the Security Council and the Peace and Security Council of the African Union on joint assessments of conflict situations, formulating early and joint response plans, strengthening coordination and integration in mediation efforts to ensure that the parties to the conflict attain the results they seek, further developing the partnership in peacekeeping operations and managing the transitions between United Nations missions and African Union missions. Greater coordination and cooperation with African subregional organizations and groups will help address the challenges associated with achieving peace and security, given the important role those entities play in helping to address crises and resolve conflicts. There must be greater coordination when it comes to taking decisions with regard to African issues being considered by the Security Council. When responding to crises, intervention by the African Union and subregional groups must be given priority, because African countries have the capacity to grasp and address the various pertinent issues and in keeping with the slogan of the African Union, "African solutions to African problems". The recent intervention by the Economic Community of West African States to resolve the crisis in Mali is a perfect example of the effectiveness of such efforts. We believe that the Secretary-General, acting in coordination with the African Union, should appoint more Africans to serve as Special Envoys to conflict zones in Africa. Doing so would make the post of Special Envoy a more effective tool in mediating conflicts and settling them peacefully, because Africans envoys have extensive knowledge of the local cultural terms of reference in which the relations between the various parties to conflicts are rooted. In that connection, we once again call for additional support to be provided to African Union-led peace support operations through United Nations-assessed contributions. We believe that it is not possible to address issues of security and peace in Africa without addressing their root causes, particularly the drivers of fragility. Those causes are complex and multidimensional, but each of them provides a breeding ground for tensions, violence and instability; contributes directly or indirectly to disrupting settlement processes and efforts to restore security and stability; and prolongs, complicates or reignites conflicts. Addressing conflict-related challenges and instability in our continent requires continued cooperation, coordination and integration among the various United Nations, regional and international organizations as part of a comprehensive approach to peace that addresses not only the security aspect, but also the developmental, social and environmental dimensions, in line with the implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063 of the African Union: The Africa We Want.
