Argentina thanks Estonia for organizing this open debate in the Security Council and welcomes the briefings made by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Peter Maurer, President of the International Committee of the Red Cross, and Ms. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate. In our view, it is critical that the Council continue to be committed to the protection of civilians in armed conflict through the promotion of full respect for international law - particularly humanitarian, human rights and refugee law - and the fight against impunity. As expressed by the Secretary-General in his most recent report (S/2020/366) on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) crisis has put the most vulnerable members of society at even greater risk. Argentina therefore reiterates its full support for the Secretary-General's call, on 23 March, for an immediate global ceasefire in order to help create the necessary conditions for the provision of humanitarian assistance, facilitate diplomacy and bring hope to those most vulnerable to the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, all parties to conflicts must make every effort to ensure effective and timely access to humanitarian assistance, including cargo and materials. Such assistance enjoys special protection under international humanitarian law. It is therefore of concern that in many situations access to humanitarian assistance is impeded or even denied. Furthermore, we must collaborate and combine efforts to protect and promote the access of civilians, especially the most vulnerable, to all health services, including medical care and maternal and reproductive health services. This population is now more vulnerable than ever due to the pandemic, which is overburdening systems and facilities already devastated by conflict. We must continue to include and promote the protection of civilians in the mandates of United Nations field missions, and ensure that such provisions are clearly developed and that said operations are effectively and efficiently resourced. At the same time, we note that all peacekeeping operations must comply with international humanitarian law. Argentina echoes the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in stressing the importance of ensuring that the protection of civilians during peacekeeping operations is carried out in accordance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and the guiding principles of peacekeeping operations. Similarly, any use of force in response to threats of physical violence against civilians must be in keeping with applicable legal obligations, the mandate established by the Council and each mission's specific rules of engagement and intervention. We believe that non-military strategies to protect civilians in peacekeeping operations are very valuable political tools that can help to end violent conflicts while building trust among the parties in their search for peaceful solutions and in their efforts to advance the peace process. Host Governments also bear the primary responsibility for protecting civilians. That is why it is essential to maintain close cooperation and open dialogue with national authorities. The Argentine Republic supports the vision of prevention and early warning for civilian protection mandates, as promoted by the Secretary-General, as well as its connection with the second pillar - the responsibility to protect. That vision also enjoys the support of the Independent High-level Panel on Peace Operations. We believe that it is necessary to elaborate a robust strategy for the prevention of atrocity crimes that includes an impartial analysis of the facts. Such a strategy must include the necessary financial resources and political support to ensure that the international community's response reaction is never again late or weak. Our country is a member of the Group of Friends on the Protection of Civilians in Armed Conflict and, since the 2005 World Summit, has supported the progressive development on this issue and participated actively in the various areas in which it was discussed, particularly in the framework of the General Assembly. We believe that the protection of civilians should be understood within the framework of a political and humanitarian perspective that focuses on creating a safe environment. That is why the protection of civilians in a peace mission requires the cooperation of its military, police and civilian components. States need to have a clear and common understanding of the characteristics, modalities and implications of the protection of civilians. That is especially important in cases where the use of force is necessary to protect civilians from physical violence, in accordance with each mission's mandate and rules of engagement. In addition, we consider it essential to advance the mainstreaming of the women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping operations. As the Secretary-General's report indicates, the scourge of conflict-related sexual violence persists in many armed conflicts, especially among women and girls. Despite special measures to protect people from sexual exploitation and abuse, including more robust measures and victim-centred efforts within the Organization to ensure accountability amid allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by United Nations personnel, many major challenges remain. These require constant vigilance to ensure that systems are in place to identify and mitigate risk, select and train personnel and deliver on a timely and robust victim-centred response when allegations are made. It is worrisome that some counter-terrorism measures continue to adversely affect humanitarian activities. In that regard, we reiterate the call made in General Assembly resolution 72/284 for States to ensure, in accordance with their obligations under international humanitarian law, that anti-terrorist legislation and measures do not impede humanitarian activities. Under international humanitarian law and the resolutions of the Council, attacks of any kind against civilians, especially women and children, or other protected persons, schools, cultural property and places of worship, as well as child recruitment and the impeding of humanitarian access, are all violations of international law. Argentina shares the international community's concern that armed conflict promotes the proliferation of organizations engaged in various forms of international crime, such as the smuggling of migrants and human and arms trafficking, all of which directly affect the civilian population. In recognition of the fact that young people constitute a large part of civilians harmed by armed conflict and that disrupting the access of children and young people to education and economic opportunities has a decisive impact on the potential for lasting peace and reconciliation, Argentina once again urges those States that have not done so to adhere to the Safe Schools Declaration, which has already been endorsed by 105 countries. Together with Norway, Argentina led the intergovernmental process to draw up the Safe Schools Declaration, and we had the honour of hosting the second International Conference on Safe Schools in 2017 in Buenos Aires. The Security Council must remain committed to the protection of civilians in armed conflict, including through additional consideration of certain elements such as children, women, journalists or medical personnel, as well as to promoting respect for international law and ending impunity for serious violations committed against civilians. In that context, we stress the system's role with regard to children and armed conflict. Fulfilling that role requires adequate support. In addition, we support the Vancouver Principles on Peacekeeping and the Prevention of the Recruitment and Use of Child Soldiers, which aim to prevent the recruitment and use of child soldiers. Argentina reaffirms the preventive role of accountability mechanisms. Impartial mechanisms are essential for the investigation of violations of international humanitarian law and human rights. In that regard, I would like to highlight the work of the Independent International Commission of Inquiry on the Syrian Arab Republic, pursuant to Protocol I Additional to the Geneva Conventions, as well as the central role played by the International Criminal Court. We note that, pursuant to the Rome Statute, the Court has jurisdiction over many attacks on civilians. Argentina considers it a priority to continue the debate on the creation of new mechanisms to strengthen compliance with international humanitarian law and to generate constructive, transparent and inclusive dialogue among States and other interested parties. We also agree with the Secretary-General on the need to reduce the implementation gap between the normative framework and realities on the ground. With regard to the challenges new technologies pose for the protection of civilians in armed conflict, as identified in the Secretary-General's report and in the concept note (S/2020/402, annex) for this open debate, Argentina stresses that international law, including human rights law and international humanitarian law, applies to cyberspace. The increase in cyberattacks on the health sector in the context of the pandemic has highlighted the potential human cost of cyberoperations, as well as their impact on the civilian population. As societies go digital, the need to protect critical infrastructure and maintain a safe, stable, open and peaceful cyberspace increases significantly. In that regard, Argentina supports all efforts being made to advance the implementation and consolidation of the framework for responsible State behaviour in cyberspace. Argentina expresses its deep concern about the threat posed by the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. Such use results in death, injury and trauma to civilians, damage and destruction to essential infrastructure and critical services and unintentional displacement. In addition, it leaves behind explosive remnants of war, which pose a long-term threat to social coexistence and economic activity, as they potentially compromise the safety of inhabitants. Argentina welcomes the Secretary-General's approach to addressing that threat, as set out in his Agenda for Disarmament. In December 2018, Argentina, along with more than 20 countries of the region, signed the Santiago Communique, which supports the process culminating in the negotiation and adoption of an international political declaration on the use of explosive weapons in populated areas. With regard to the section of the Secretary-General's report on the effects of conflict and climate change on the environment, Argentina agrees that this issue must be addressed on a case-by-case basis when a specific threat to peace and security arises, in accordance with the Council's mandate under the Charter of the United Nations. However, we reiterate that we must not undermine the role of the Security Council by considering issues that exceed its mandate, nor, as a general rule, should environmental issues be linked to security issues. In the light of the foregoing, it is up to the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations Environment Programme, the United Nations Human Settlements Programme, United Nations Water, the High-level Political Forum on Sustainable Development, the Regional Economic Commissions, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the specialized agencies to address environmental issues. Likewise, Argentina would like to clarify that there is no consensus in the international community about the concept of water security. States must work towards food security and access to water for their populations. In this unprecedented global crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we stress the importance of compliance with the ceasefire and international humanitarian law and human rights law in order to ensure and support an effective response to the crisis and the protection of the most vulnerable. Argentina joins with the Secretary-General's in his vision to reaffirm, today more than ever, how critical it is for the international community, including the Security Council, to launch a joint response in support of all States Members of the United Nations and affected communities.
