Mr. Sinirlioglu (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today's important
and timely debate, and the Secretary-General and the
briefers for their insightful statements.

Next year will mark 20 years since the protection of
civilians was placed on the Security Council's agenda.
In an increasingly disaster-prone and volatile security
environment, civilians are confronted with the most
severe effects of conflicts. More than 26,000 civilian
casualties were recorded in 2017 in just six emergency
situations worldwide. Currently, 65.6 million people
around the world have been forced to flee, which is
an unprecedented number. Among them are nearly
22.5 million refugees, over half of whom are under the
age of 18. Millions ofpeople have been denied access to
such basic rights as education, health care, employment
and freedom of movement. In our world, 20 people a
minute are forcibly displaced as a result of conflict or
persecution. Against that backdrop, as pointed out by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report on the
protection of civilians in armed conflict (S/2018/462),
the most effective way to protect civilians is to prevent
the outbreak, escalation, continuation and recurrence
of armed conflict.

First, focusing on prevention or addressing the root
causes of conflicts should be at the top of our agenda.
We possess the adequate tools to address challenges
to international peace and security. We should act
accordingly and translate our legal commitments into
practical actions. A case in point relates to the fight
against terrorism. Terrorist organizations, whose
primary aim is to inflict violence on civilian targets, do
not feel bound by any international legal framework.
Unfortunately, certain members of the international
community fail to implement their commitments in
the face of terrorist threats. We must look into ways to
further improve and coordinate our joint fight against
this scourge in all its forms and manifestations.

That effort should also include refraining from
signing documents with non-State armed groups that
will encourage them to use such documents as means
of propaganda to claim legitimacy. We therefore
believe that all international organizations and
non-governmental organizations should refrain from
drawing up any kind of documents, including so-called
Deeds of Commitment, with terrorist organizations.
Instead, reinforcing the legal framework for preventing
and punishing recruitment activities by terrorist
organizations should be the priority.

As indicated by the Secretary-General in his report,
children continue to be disproportionately affected by
armed conflict. It goes without saying that poverty and
the lack of education are among the main drivers of
radicalization. Our prevention efforts should also focus
on those root causes by channelling a sound combination
of humanitarian and development assistance.

Secondly, undoubtedly, the primary obligation
for protecting civilians lies with States. However, the
international community has a shared responsibility
to also help protect civilians in situations where States
fail to do so. We should step up our humanitarian
assistance in order to address the acute needs of people
in emergency situations.

In Syria, where we are witnessing one of the most
dramatic and protracted humanitarian crises, Turkey
will continue to give a hand to those in need. We
will also continue our assistance to, and cooperation
with, the United Nations in the cross-border delivery
of humanitarian aid, which is indispensable for the
survival of hundreds of thousands of affected people.
Through the United Nations, we should spare no effort
to enable safe, unimpeded and sustained delivery of
humanitarian aid and services.

Medical evacuation constitutes another component
of efficient humanitarian action. In 2017, the World
Health Organization recorded 322 attacks in conflict-
affected countries across the world. This month will
mark two years since the Security Council adopted
its landmark resolution 2286 (2016), which is solely
dedicated to the protection of medical personnel in
armed conflict. As one ofthe sponsors ofthe resolution,
we call for its effective implementation, which has
become increasingly important in view ofthe continuing
disrespect for international humanitarian law.

Thirdly, hospitality towards those fleeing conflicts
should be a moral and political principle that we should
all uphold. In the face ofthe surge in forced displacement
around us, we are all confronted with difficult choices
in terms of helping those in need of protection. As a
neighbouring country of Syria, Turkey deeply feels the
multiple effects of the tragedy in that country. As the
largest refugee-hosting country in the world, with more
than 3.5 million Syrian refugees within our borders, we
will continue to mobilize our resources for the well-
being of these people. We call on the international
community to take responsibility and provide shelter
for, and ameliorate the living conditions of, millions of
displaced people around the globe.

Upholding international humanitarian law and
the protection of civilians are among the primary
responsibilities of the Security Council in the
maintenance of peace and security. Unfortunately,
the Council's response far from meets expectations,
in particular with respect to the most critical issues,
such as Syria and Palestine. What we have witnessed in
those two parts of the world is a total disregard for all
the values that the United Nations system has striven
to defend for more than 70 years and a clear violation
of the principles of international law. There cannot be
any excuse for targeting innocent civilians. We must
act decisively and establish genuine accountability
mechanisms in order to put an end to impunity.

This week, we will mark the second anniversary of
the first-ever World Humanitarian Summit, which was a
milestone in generating more than 3,000 commitments
to strengthening the protection of civilians and the
promotion of the centrality of protection. Taking this
opportunity, we call upon all Member States and
stakeholders to honour their commitments, which
can make a real difference to the lives of the millions
suffering from crises.

