Mr. Serrano (European Union): Thank you, Sir,
for giving the floor to the European Union and for
convening this important debate. The candidate
countries Turkey, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Montenegro and Iceland; the countries of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
Serbia; as well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova,
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia align themselves
with this statement.

Like other speakers, I thank Germany for its
strong commitment to advancing the approach of the
United Nations to the issue of children and armed
conflict and the hard work of the Working Group on
Children and Armed Conflict under the leadership of
Ambassador Wittig. I would also like to recognize
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's personal
commitment to this issue and to extend a warm
welcome to his Special Representative. The European
Union (EU) commends Ms. Radhika Coomaraswamy's
tireless efforts on behalf of the rights and well-being of
children facing armed conflict, and fully supports her
mandate and actions. Let me also express our
appreciation for UNICEF's contribution to child
protection, which the EU supports.

The European Union greatly values the progress
made in recent years in creating a strong normative
framework for the protection of children in situations
of armed conflict. We therefore welcome resolution
1998 (2011), adopted this morning, and the expansion
of the triggers for listing parties to attacks on schools
or hospitals, as well as to attacks or threats of attack
against protected persons connected to schools or
hospitals, including schoolchildren, patients and
education and medical personnel. We look forward to
comprehensive implementation of the resolution,
including through monitoring by country-level task
forces.

The European Union also joins in calls to
strengthen accountability and take further decisive
action against persistent perpetrators, including
through restrictive measures. When establishing or
reviewing the mandate of relevant sanctions
committees, the Security Council should include grave
violations against children as criteria meriting
sanctions. We also encourage the Security Council to
address accountability gaps where there are no
country-specific sanctions regimes, and to deal with
violations of applicable international law committed
against children in such cases.

The European Union also believes in the
importance of investigating, prosecuting and punishing
all those who commit grave violations against children.
We have stated on numerous occasions that every effort
must be made to end the culture of impunity, including
through the International Criminal Court and other
international criminal tribunals, which play a key role
in ensuring accountability in cases where a State is
unwilling or unable to fulfil its responsibilities. We
would like to recall here that children are specially
protected by the Rome Statute. We welcome the work
of the International Criminal Court in this field, of
which the ongoing trial of Thomas Lubanga for war
crimes is the first example.

Many in this Chamber today have highlighted the
crucial importance of decisive and comprehensive
implementation of our commitments. I would like to
use this occasion to update the Security Council on
recent steps taken by the European Union to enhance
its contribution to the work of protecting, rehabilitating
and empowering children - objectives that have been
high on its foreign policy, development and
humanitarian agenda for a number of years. I am happy
to report that, since December 2010, the European
Union has worked with a revised implementation
strategy for the EU guidelines on children and armed
conflict. European Union action in this area is firmly
based on Security Council resolutions and the Paris
Principles, and fully aligned with United Nations
priorities. In that context, I would like to highlight that
the EU guidelines pay particular attention to the
situation and specific needs of girls in and after armed
conflict.

The European Union has stepped up political
advocacy and public diplomacy. For instance, we
continue to support the universal ratification of the
Optional Protocols to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child, as also promoted by the Special
Representative in cooperation with other partners.

On this year's International Day against the Use
of Child Soldiers, the African Union and the European
Union have jointly called for the promotion of peace,
security and stability in Africa and Europe and for the
strengthening of efforts at all levels to prevent conflicts
and protect children from the effects of war, including
from being forced to serve as combatants, sex slaves or
servants.

The European Union has made further
improvements in mainstreaming. We now include new
standard language on human rights, gender and child
protection in all relevant mandates of European Union
special representatives. We have started to develop
training modules for our crisis management experts
and enhanced human rights training for European
Union diplomats, including for officials on postings in
EU delegations around the world, who should soon act
as children and armed conflict focal points.

Moreover, on the basis of its human rights
guidelines and as a measure of practical support to the
implementation of the country-specific conclusions and
recommendations of the Security Council Working
Group, the European Union has funded numerous
projects to support protection and rehabilitation for
children in post-conflict situations.

The European Union has enhanced its practical
cooperation with the Office of the Special
Representative and with the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations, in view of its crucial role in
mainstreaming protection issues within peacekeeping
missions. We look forward to further intensifying our
collaboration with the United Nations to the benefit of
children affected by armed conflict, including with
United Nations country teams in the field.

In conclusion, my thanks go out to all who work
on this noble cause on a daily basis, often in difficult
situations.

