Mr. Heinbecker (Canada)(spoke in French): In
recent years, Canada has placed a high priority on
supporting the efforts of African countries to address
the problems that confront Africa, including those
relating to peace and security. This year, Canada, as
Chair of the G-8, promoted dialogue between the G-8
and African partners who lead the implementation of
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD). Last June in Kananaskis, Canada, the G-8
leaders adopted an Africa Action Plan specifically
designed to respond to the visionary programme of
action contained in the NEPAD.

During Canada's recent term on the Security
Council, from 1999 to the year 2000, we pioneered the
effort to make sanctions more effective in helping to
end armed conflicts, notably in Africa. In this context,
we also actively supported establishing the original
mandate of this Panel of Experts on the Illegal
Exploitation of Natural Resources of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, the report of which found that this
activity was contributing significantly to the
continuation of armed conflict in that country. Today
we welcome the Panel's final report.

(spoke in English)

The Panel of Experts paints an unhappy picture of
the destructive effects of unrestrained and illegal traffic
in the natural resources of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, on its people and on its economy. The Panel
is clearly of the view that there are many actors
involved in this pillage, not least officials in the
Government and military of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo itself, but also foreign Governments and
their armed forces, and private individuals and
companies from many countries.

We have been encouraged by the progress made
in the withdrawal of foreign military forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, in accordance with
the Pretoria and Luanda agreements. This is a
necessary first step in bringing an end to one of
Africa's longest-running and most debilitating
conflicts, which has devastated the lives of millions of
people in that country and around it. No doubt the
Panel's work contributed to this welcome development.

The Panel has made some very important and far-
ranging recommendations designed to assist the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Those recommendations deserve this Council's serious
consideration. In one instance, however, we are
disappointed that the Panel has done itself and the
process, in our view, a disservice by naming in Annex
III as violators of Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Guidelines
companies whose alleged violations, with a few
exceptions, are neither specified nor substantiated in
the body of the report. In Canada, this unsupported
assertion has created controversy for the companies
concerned and attracted attention away from the other
valuable information and conclusions in the report.

One recommendation is of particular
significance - the establishment of a monitoring
process to follow up on the report and on its annexes.
This body could provide a continuing point of contact,
which could engage Governments and other actors,
including private companies, in the implementation of
its mandate. This recommendation also serves to
remind us of the ongoing need for the establishment of
a permanent body within the Secretariat to support the
work of the teams of experts, act as a contact point for
delegations and private companies and be the
institutional memory of this Organization.

We urge the Council to take early action on the
establishment of the follow-on monitoring mechanism
and on other relevant recommendations of the Panel.
Doing so will facilitate efforts to bring peace to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so that we all can
move forward with full and unbiased information on
the economic factors involved.

