Mr. Amorim (Brazil): First of all, let me congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of October. Under your able
and wise guidance, the work of the Security Council will be
conducted in a highly effective way. I would also like to
take this opportunity to express our appreciation to your
predecessor, Ambassador Alfredo Cabral, for the
competence with which he conducted the business of the
Council during the difficult month of September.
We would like to pay tribute to the key role played by
the Secretary-General, Mr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali, with
regard to recent developments in Angola. His Special
Representative, Maitre Blondin Beye, has been indefatigable
in his efforts to consolidate the process. The endeavours of
the troika of observer States should also be commended.

 

The importance of today's meeting is highlighted by
the presence of the Foreign Ministers of Angola,
Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe, as well as of the
Deputy Foreign Ministers of Portugal and Costa Rica.
Since the last meeting of the Council on the situation in
Angola, the peace process has stalled. We agree with the
latest assessment of the Secretary-General that the
continuing delays and unfulfilled promises, particularly on
the part of UNITA, in implementing the successive
timetables for the completion of the key military and
political issues are no longer acceptable.

The peace process is losing momentum from both
the military and the political points of View. On the
military side, the quartering process has yet to be
completed. More than 63,000 UNITA personnel have
registered at the quartering sites. However, there are
doubts about personnel quartered by UNITA and there are
disquieting rumors that UNITA's elite troops are still in
hiding. The number of desertions from the quartering
areas has now reached around 12,000. Moreover, the
quantity and quality of the weapons and ammunition
handed over to the United Nations Angola Verification
Mission (UNAVEM. III) remain low.

The formation of the Angolan Armed Forces has
made little progress. Less than 10,000 of the 26,000
UNITA personnel to be incorporated into the Angolan
Armed Forces have been selected. Five of the UNITA
generals who should join those Forces had not arrived in
Luanda by 8 October.

On the political side, uneasiness and strain still
prevail. In August, the Third Extraordinary Congress of
UNITA decided that Mr. Savimbi should not accept one
of the vice-presidencies offered by the Government. In
spite of efforts to that effect, the fifth meeting between
President J ose Eduardo dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi could
not be convened. We agree with the Secretary-General's
assessment that:

"the failure by Mr. Savimbi to attend the SADC
summit held at Luanda on 2 October was

unfortunate." (5/1996/827, para. 42)

We deeply regret that fact.
Brazil remains fully committed to the peace process
in Angola. Two years ago, as the then-Foreign Minister
of Brazil, I had the honour to be present at the signing of
the Lusaka Protocol. Brazil was the only non-African
country represented at the ministerial level on that

 

occasion. Our participation in UNAVEM. III as the largest
troop contributor is a reflection of a long-term commitment
to Angola and its people based on common cultural and
historical roots; but it is also a reflection of our desire to
help to put an end to one of the oldest conflicts, one that
has killed or maimed hundreds of thousands of innocent
people. Participation at this level requires considerable
financial resources on the part not only of the United
Nations but also of Brazil. As has been stated before,
patience, as well as resources, has limits.

Taking into account the seriousness of the situation,
and considering that we are quickly approaching the date
envisaged for the completion of the Mission, the Security
Council is facing a great challenge. The Secretary-General
recommends the extension of UNAVEM. III's mandate for
two months. The suggestion of a renewal for a short period
reflects the frustration of the international community -
which we share - at the systematic procrastination by one
of the parties.

A proposal has been presented by the Southern
African Development Community (SADC) Organ on
Politics, Defence and Security, subscribed by the Heads of
State and Government of 11 countries, for the Security
Council to adopt measures:

"within the framework of resolution 864 (1993) to
oblige UNITA to fully and urgently respect the
deadlines established by the Council." (S/1996/827, para. 9)

That proposal deserves to be considered with utmost
seriousness by the Council in light of the lack of progress
in the peace process. The international community cannot
allow one party persistently to defy its appeals and the
Council's own resolutions.

The situation in Angola is at a critical stage. Unless
serious progress is made in several key areas in the short
term, UNAVEM. III will not be able to fulfil all the tasks
assigned to it. It remains in the Council's hands to take the
appropriate steps to induce the reluctant party to listen to
the voice of reason and to set the peace process back on
track.
We have not relinquished the hope aroused by the
Lusaka Protocol of seeing a peaceful, united and prosperous
Angola.

 

