Mr. De Riviere (France) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremie, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, for their
presence. We listened carefully to both of their
statements.

As the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General stated in his briefing, the overall political and
security situation is stable and continues to improve
despite undoubtedly disturbing but isolated incidents.
In terms of political developments, democratic
institutions are gradually gaining strength, the
establishment of rule of law conforming to European
standards for the good of all Kosovars, regardless of
ethic origin, is continuing with the support of the
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX), and
the trend of decreasing tensions, which has been
observed since the independence of the country, is
continuing.

The international community has played and will
continue to play an indispensable role in supporting
these positive trends. In this regard, I should like once
again to commend the efforts of the Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
leads the activities of UNMIK in Kosovo effectively
and pragmatically, in close coordination with the
European Union. Indeed, it is EULEX that, alongside
the Kosovo authorities, is currently making an essential
contribution to the stability of Kosovo, especially
through its activities in the areas of justice, police and
customs. We are gratified by the fact that the EULEX
head of mission, Yves de Kermabon, had the
opportunity to speak before the Council last month
(S/PV.6353). His statement indicated the
professionalism of the European mission, which acts in
support of the Kosovo authorities and aims to maintain
ongoing dialogue with all of the stakeholders on the
ground.

In response to a request by the General Assembly,
on 22 July the International Court of Justice issued its
advisory opinion on whether the declaration of
independence of Kosovo is in accordance with
international law. That opinion confirms that the
declaration did not violate international law or
resolution 1244 (1999). This is an important milestone,
as it brings the legal debate on this subject to a
definitive end, which will allow all of the parties to
devote themselves from here on to the other
outstanding issues. Now is no longer the time for
quibbling or speculation. The opinion issued by the
International Court of Justice has definitively closed
these futile debates. What is needed now is to work
together for the future of the peoples of the region.
Kosovo and Serbia must now engage in political
dialogue in order to overcome, in a pragmatic way,
these concrete problems in the interests of all 4 and,
first and foremost, of the Serb community of Kosovo.
This dialogue must be forward-looking and must aim at
establishing good-neighbourly relations, achieving
progress towards European integration and improving
the living conditions of the population. It will thus
contribute to the stability of the region.

In this new phase which is just starting, the
European Union has, through High Representative
Catherine Ashton, stated its readiness to build such a
dialogue. The two States, Serbia and Kosovo, have the
prospect of becoming members of the European Union,
which will require that they establish normal relations
between themselves as member States, which will
enable them to work together to build the European
system. This is what we most wanted to hear in the
statements of Mr. Jeremic' and Mr. Hyseni: strong
common affirmation of their desire to enshrine their
countries' futures in the European framework. We seek
an early launch of dialogue, which will create the
conditions for a shared future within the European
Union. They can count on French support when they
start along this path.
