The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Poland.

Allow me to begin by thanking all our briefers
today for their very comprehensive presentations.
As this is the first time that the Security Council has
received a briefing from Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Swan, I wish to welcome him in his
new assignment and wish him every success.

Poland welcomes the resumption of cooperation
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament
of Somalia and looks forward to the advancement
of crucial legislation, including the electoral bill.
However, we remain concerned about the protracted
political impasse between the Federal Government
and the federal member states. It is our belief that
the upcoming political processes - if conducted in a
transparent and consensual manner - can contribute to
the re-establishment of constructive dialogue between
the Government and the regional authorities, for the
benefit of the Somali population. We continue to stress
the need for consensus and cooperation in order to keep
to the timelines of crucial reforms.

In that context, I would like to once again underline
the critical importance of political inclusiveness and
of ensuring the genuine involvement of women and
young people in political processes in Somalia. Poland
condemns in the strongest terms acts of sexual and
gender-based violence. We welcome the constructive
approach of the Somali Government in addressing
conflict-related sexual Violence and its willingness to
work with Special Representative of the Secretary-
General Patten to develop a new national plan to end
sexual violence in conflict.

We are deeply worried about the increasing
number of attacks by Al-Shabaab in Somalia and by the
increased use of improvised explosive devices. We see
a need to address the threats posed by explosive devices
in a comprehensive manner and to reflect on the critical
nexus linking mine-action activities and peace and
security. We believe that the international community
should step up its efforts against the trafficking and
illicit diversion of precursor chemicals by Al-Shabaab.

Poland remains deeply concerned about the dire
humanitarian situation in Somalia and the fact that today
more than 5 million people are affected by drought and
conflict, and in urgent need of humanitarian assistance
within Somalia. Children are bearing the brunt of the
drought, with increasing malnutrition, disease and
displacement, which we find particularly worrisome.

Let me conclude by expressing Poland's continued
appreciation for United Nations actors and those of the
African Union Mission in Somalia for their everyday
efforts and sacrifices.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

