Mr. Alday Gonzalez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
Mexico thanks Uruguay for having convened this
meeting and Deputy Secretary-General Eliasson and
the representatives of civil society for their briefings.

The protection of civilians is at the very heart of
all that the Council and the Organization are striving
to achieve, and is the measure against which the
United Nations system and its peacekeeping operations
are judged. It is a basic principle of international
humanitarian law and a moral responsibility of all
Member States. However, history has shown us that
moral exhortations and laws are often challenged or
ignored, and are therefore insufficient to prevent or
eliminate armed conflict or ensure the protection of
civilians in such conflicts. The effectiveness of the
Security Council and the United Nations in protecting
civilians has had mixed results; some timely actions
have managed to save lives, but in other cases systemic
constraints arising from the lack of consensus in the
Council or valid concerns about sovereignty have
prevented early action that would have been more
effective.

As we have seen in the prolonged and complex
conflicts in the Middle East and Central and Western
Africa, civilians are increasingly exposed, either
because schools and hospitals have become military
targets, or because hundreds of thousands are denied
timely access to humanitarian assistance. Both
cases constitute flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law, and we therefore believe that our
responsibility to protect must be supported by our
responsibility to improve our response capacity.
United Nations peacekeeping mandates have been
strengthened with training, policies and guidance on
the best way to implement the protection of civilians
and human rights. However, the inclusion of civilian
advisers on the protection of children or women has not
yet managed to change the reality on the ground.

As the High-level Independent Panel on Peace
Operationshasproposed,itisessentialwheneverpossible
to involve and ensure that Governments complement the
development of concepts, standards and deployment of
specialized United Nations personnel, assuming their
competency as the principals responsible for protecting
civilians. The presence of a United Nations mission
does not reduce the host Government's responsibility,
nor should the State's responsibility weaken the duty
of peacekeeping missions. We therefore welcome the
updated aide memoire annexed to the presidential
statement on the protection of civilians of November
2015 (S/PRST/2015/23), and emphasize its importance
as a practical tool to improve the Council's analysis and
diagnostics on the topic of protection.

Threats to international peace and security continue
to arise largely from the proliferation and possession of
weapons of mass destruction and from the notion that
the most powerful countries can choose to position
themselves above international law. In all the Council's
efforts to fulfil its primary responsibility, disarmament
and non-proliferation remain a dominant need. The
ease with which conventional weapons can be acquired,
especially through illicit trafficking, multiplies the
impact of conflicts on and risks to civilian populations.
Mexico reiterates its call for the implementation of the
Arms Trade Treaty in order to ensure, inter alia, that
arms transfers by Member States are subject to the
compliance of the recipient State with international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.

As the High-level Independent Panel and the
Secretary-General indicate in their respective reports
(S/2015/446 and S/2015/453), prevention must be at the
heart of all efforts to maintain international peace and
security. If the Security Council is able to anticipate and
better respond to potential threats, we are convinced
that it could also be more effective in preventing crises
from becoming uncontrollable armed conflicts with
their inherent ramifications for the civilian population.
In that context, we hope that the Council members' visit
to Burundi in the coming days will be an important
step in that direction.

We support the recommendations of both the
Independent Panel and of the Secretary-General to
improve the effectiveness of peacekeeping operations
in the field of protection in areas such as planning,
evaluation, capacity-building and leadership, as well to
give them with realistic mandates tailored to specific
contexts and linked to broader political solutions. We
urgetheCouncilinparticularto considerthelndependent
Panel's recommendation that peacekeeping missions
collaborate more closely with local communities and
non-governmental organizations on the ground in order
to establish an effective environment for protection and
provide rapid responses to potential threats.

Delays and inaction in the protection of civilians
can often mean the difference between life and death. In
Mexico's opinion, the multilateral system of collective
security, especially the Security Council, remain the
best option to implement the lessons learned in the
service of our ongoing aspiration to achieve sustainable
peace. The fusion of prevention and political influence
with rapid response on the ground can help us to ensure
that the Organization will no longer leave a place where
it is most needed or abandon the most vulnerable when
their protection is most urgent.

