Mr. Saha (India): It is my privilege to address the
Security Council under your presidency, Sir.

I'll begin by conveying our deep sympathy for the
people of Afghanistan. The continuing war has brought
immense suffering to them for almost two decades. The
fighting which took place this summer, despite appeals and
warnings from the international community, has
compounded their misery. We are disturbed by reports that
human rights have been violated on a large scale, in
particular through the killing of children, women and
POWs. We expect that the next report of the Secretary-
General will give us a fuller picture of what has so far
appeared in snatches in the media.
Peace and stability in Afghanistan are in our security
interest, as they are for almost all of Afghanistan's
neighbours. We have always respected the unity,
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Afghanistan. We are particularly concerned, therefore, that
all the evidence points to a de facto invasion of Afghanistan
by foreign military forces, in support of the Taliban. It also
worries us that the fighting is both exploiting and
heightening ethnic differences. If this continues, the unity
and independence of Afghanistan will be in danger, and if
Afghanistan unravels, the impact will be felt throughout the
region.

There is an Afghan personality which transcends
ethnic consciousness. The international community must
sustain and strengthen that personality, not widen ethnic
cleavages. A genuine power-sharing arrangement in which
all Afghan people are represented must take hold if peace
is to return. Territorial gains won through force, trickery or
bribery will be short lived if the people who live there are
alienated or, as has increasingly been the case, brutalized.

There have been many debates in the Council, in the
General Assembly and in meetings organized by the United
Nations, where we have heard statements deploring foreign
interference in Afghanistan. The Secretary-General has
rightly pointed out in his report [S/ 1998/532] on the
situation in Afghanistan dated 19 June 1998 that this is the
key to ending the Afghan tragedy. Does the international
community, and in particular this Council, have the
resolve to take steps that would stop the continuing
foreign interference, through the provision of arms,
supplies and advisers to the warring factions, and of late,
through the direct participation in the fighting of foreign
military personnel?

The anarchy in Afghanistan has drawn terrorist
groups to it. Though the events of the last few weeks
have brought international focus to this aspect of the
Afghan problem, for years it has been known that the
most ruthless terrorist organizations have used
Afghanistan as a base to recruit, train and harbour
operatives who were sent out to carry out atrocities
abroad. The responsibility for allowing the Afghan
territory to be used for training international terrorists
falls on those who give them sanctuary.

This is an issue of particular concern to us, as India
has been the victim of state-sponsored, cross-border
terrorism in a most vicious form. We have, on many
occasions, drawn the world's attention to the presence of
the training camps in our immediate neighbourhood, in
Pakistan-occupied Kashmir and Afghanistan, where
terrorists are trained and equipped to carry out merciless,
violent and subversive activities in India, in particular in
the state of J ammu and Kashmir. The international
community has unfortunately been silent or indifferent to
these developments and unable to agree on concerted
efforts to tackle the menace of international terrorism, in
our region or elsewhere.

The crisis in Afghanistan has three main elements.
The first is the continuing war, fomented and sustained by
foreign interference. The second is that Afghanistan has
been turned into a haven for international terrorism. The
third is the lack of respect for international norms and
human rights in the areas controlled by the Taliban.

On the first element, the countries that have
instigated and participated in the Afghan fighting should
realize that a resolution can come only through peaceful
means, in direct negotiations between Afghan factions
under United Nations auspices, aimed at achieving
mutually acceptable solutions that accommodate the rights
and interests of all ethnic, religious and political groups
of Afghan society. These countries should encourage the
factions whom they support to return to the negotiating
table without delay and preconditions, and cooperate with
the aim of creating a broad-based and fully representative
Government which would protect the rights of all

 

Afghans and observe the international obligations of
Afghanistan.

On the second issue, the international community
perhaps now realizes the magnitude and the ramifications
of the problem caused by the presence and activities of
foreign mercenaries and their foreign patrons, who have not
only destabilized Afghanistan but also made it a seminary
for international terrorists. However, selective unilateral
action cannot solve the problem of international terrorism.
Only an effective international cooperative effort to identify
and act against those responsible for international
terrorism - whether individual terrorist groups or States -
will succeed.

On the third issue, a condemnation of the violation of
international norms of conduct is not sufficient. The
international community must act together now to mobilize
the human rights machinery to ensure the observance of
internationally recognized human rights in all of
Afghanistan. The perpetrators of gross and systematic
violations of human rights must not be given the
international legitimacy they crave. This would be an
appropriate message to convey as we prepare to
commemorate the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
