The President: On behalf of the members of
the Security Council, I should like to reiterate our
condemnation, in the strongest terms, of the deaths of
Michael Sharp and Zaida Catalan, from the Group of
Experts, who were senselessly killed while conducting
their work in the Kasai Central region of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The members of the Security
Council express their deepest sympathy to the families
of the victims and to the Governments of Chile, Sweden
and the United States, as well as to the Group ofExperts
on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and to the
United Nations Secretariat.

Michael and Zaida lost their lives seeking to bring
peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its people.

I now invite Council members to rise to observe a
minute of silence in their memory and in the memory of
all the victims of violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The members of the Security Council observed a
minute ofsilence.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo

Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2017/206)

The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the United Republic of Tanzania to participate in
this meeting.

On behalf ofthe Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Augustine Phillip Mahiga, Minister for Foreign
Affairs, East Africa, Regional and International
Cooperation of the United Republic of Tanzania.

The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/268, which contains the text ofa draft resolution
submitted by France, Italy, Japan, Sweden, Ukraine, the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the United States of America.

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2017/206, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.

A vote was taken by show ofhands.

In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay


The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2348 (2017).

I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements after the voting.


