Ms. Meitzad (Israel): I know it has been a long day,
but I have requested the floor to exercise my right of
reply in order to comment on some of the remarks that
were made earlier today in this forum.

Let me first address the comments made by the
Lebanese Ambassador. On several occasions over
the past year, the Lebanese President has referred to
Hizbullah, a designated terrorist organization, as an
essential governing partner and a legitimate armed
Power in Lebanon. Among other things, he has
described Hizbullah as playing "a complementary role
to the Lebanese Army". That casts serious doubt on
Lebanon's declared commitment to international law.

The Ambassador also emphasized her Government's
support for resolution 1701 (2006), while in fact at the
same time Lebanon has allowed Hizbullah terrorists
to take full control of southern Lebanon. Lebanon has
allowed Hizbullah to accumulate more than 100,000
missiles and rockets, turning its own civilians into
human shields. Not only does Lebanon allow Hizbullah
to fully conduct its terrorist activities within Lebanese
territories, but it also turns a blind eye when Hizbullah
invites and hosts commandos of an Iraqi Shia militia in
southern Lebanon. I advise Lebanon to focus its energy
on ensuring both the full implementation of all Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004), and the full authority of the Lebanese
Government over its country.

Speaking of human rights abusers, let me refer to
the Syrian representative, who has once again debased
this forum with conspiracy theories and ludicrous
fabrications. It is difficult to comprehend where
the Syrian delegation actually finds the adacity to
take the floor when the Syrian regime routinely and
systematically targets its own civilians, prevents them
from receiving humanitarian aid, and deliberately causes
their suffering. On top of that, as we speak the Syrian
Government is perpetrating a brutal and inhumane
siege against its own people in eastern Ghouta, once
again using, as reported, chemical weapons to attack its
own people. Let me recall that when the Syrian regime
has committed such atrocities, Israel has provided
humanitarian aid to hundreds of Syrians, including by
treating them in Israeli hospitals. I shall not take any
more of the Council's time to respond to a regime that
has simply lost all credibility.

As for the comments made by the representative
of Venezuela, that country is in a state of economic
and moral bankruptcy. I would recommend that
the representative of Venezuela address the severe
shortcomings of his own country, in which endemic
violence, widespread hunger, brutal repression of
dissidents and State-sanctioned torture and execution
are taking place on a daily basis.

I turn now to Bolivia. It is deeply disappointing
that once again the representative of Bolivia has
delivered a one-sided, factually incorrect statement
that does not reflect the true situation on the ground
between the Israelis and the Palestinians. Bolivia has
been a member of the Security Council for over a year
now, yet not once has it approached Israel to conduct a
constructive conversation about the conflict. We would
expect at a minimum that before determining a position
Bolivia would listen to both sides.

Let me conclude by turning to the comments that
were made here earlier today by the representative of
Kuwait, a new Council member. Restricting freedom
of expression, practicing torture, permitting domestic
violence, mainly towards women, andjailing its citizens
for criticizing the Government are simply common
practices for Kuwait. If only the people of Kuwait
could exercise freedom of speech - the same freedom
of speech that their representative exploited today to
attack Israel - perhaps Kuwait's statement would have
sounded less absurd.

The meeting rose at 4.30pm.
