Mr. Tidjani (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno for
his briefing, which provided us with a clear sense of
the situation in Kosovo, especially with regard to
progress achieved since our last meeting. The
management of the situation in Kosovo by the
international community in general and the United
Nations in particular continues to give rise to hope and
expectation. We hope to rid this region of the old
demons of war, violence and hatred and to ensure
peace, security, stability, tolerance and reconciliation.
We believe that that is the only way to generate a
climate of confidence among the parties and to restore
better living conditions and socio-economic growth
that benefits all.

We are expectant in hoping that the parties
concerned will cooperate fully in the implementation of
the measures set forth in order to achieve our common
objectives. Such cooperation will be essential and will
require from all the parties a conciliatory and
responsible attitude at all times, taking into account the
requirements of peace and security in the region, as
well as of those resulting from geography and common
history.

The 24 April briefing on the situation in Kosovo
by Mr. Steiner, the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, convinced us that we were on the
right path. We even thought that new measures could
be taken with a view to speeding up the process of a
return to normal living conditions in the region.
Indeed, members may recall that Mr. Steiner, after
having described the progress achieved within the
framework of the new phase of United Nations
operations - the parliamentary and presidential
elections, the establishment of a multi-ethnic
Government, the initial stages of a civil service, the
improved functioning of the police force and judicial
system - said that he believed that the time had come
to gradually transfer authority within Kosovo to the
provisional institutions, without the future political
status of the province being affected. He then identified
benchmarks relating specifically to the existence of
representative, effective and functional institutions, the
primacy of law, respect for the right of all the
inhabitants of Kosovo to live there, the development of
a Viable market economy and normalized dialogue with
Belgrade and neighbouring States.

My delegation welcomes the news that these
elements have begun to take shape, in particular
through the establishment of a multi-ethnic
Government working to benefit all communities. This
is very important for Kosovo. We should also
emphasize the steps that have been taken to ensure the
rule of law, which has the support of all communities,
as well as to combat crime and terrorism by means of a
mechanism for regional cooperation. We welcome all
of this progress, as well as the prospects for the future,
because every time a conflict is brought to an end
somewhere in the world, international peace and
security are strengthened.

We should remember, however, that our optimism
and our expectations have suffered a setback as a result
of the adoption by the Kosovo Assembly of a
resolution that goes against the mandate of resolution
1244 (1999) and Violates the constitutional framework.
That initiative runs the risk of undermining all the
important progress achieved to date as a result of the
sustained efforts of the international community and
the United Nations. We, the members of the Security
Council, must fully assume our responsibilities. It is
thus up to us to ensure the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). My delegation believes that
Mr. Steiner's proposals seem to offer the best way
forward in this respect. His appeal for financial and
technical assistance in order to build on past
achievements takes on renewed importance today,
given Mr. Guehenno briefing.

The balance patiently negotiated and achieved at
Dayton must be strengthened, not eroded or destroyed.
In that regard, I would like to thank Mr. Steiner for his
personal commitment and forthrightness and for his
tireless efforts to restore peace and security in the
region. I would also like to encourage him to persevere
on that path and to assure him of my country's full
support, just as he has the support of the Security
Council as a whole.

Finally, we wish to commend the efforts made
with regard to the upcoming municipal elections, which
have in particular taken minority communities into
account. This illustrates the confidence and hope that
the people of Kosovo have in UNMIK. It also
demonstrates that UNMIK is doing very good work. I
also wish to mention the inter-ethnic dialogue begun
among families of the disappeared through the efforts
of Mr. Steiner, as well as the issues of refugee return
and reintegration, which also deserve special attention.

As in the past, authorities in Kosovo have been
able to demonstrate their ability to adapt in the face of
the requirements of their responsibilities to their
peoples, to the Balkan region and to the international
community, all the while being guided by the
imperatives of international peace and security. I
therefore hope that they will positively respond to the
appeal of Cameroon.

