Mr. Al-Khussaiby (Oman): My delegation, in its
statement delivered before the Council on 12 May 1995
during the general discussion concerning the issue under
consideration, has already illustrated very clearly that the
goal of the draft resolution before us, which was
subsequently submitted by my delegation in its capacity
as the Coordinator of the Security Council's Non-Aligned
Movement caucus for this month, is not meant to
complicate this issue, but rather to safeguard the peace
process itself.

The Arab and Islamic States and the non-aligned
countries, in the context of their tremendous efforts and
their great concern over the peace process and of their
endeavour to avoid the recurrence of a state of cold war
in the Middle East, have introduced the draft resolution
before the Council now. The non-aligned caucus members
have shown great flexibility and cooperation towards and
with the views and proposals presented by other Council
member States in their effort to ensure that the Council
deals with this matter in such a manner as to strengthen
the ongoing peace process in the Middle East. The non-
aligned countries have also exerted concerted efforts to
maintain the unified position and the support of the
Council members on this issue, and have made every
possible effort to realize their goal.

The draft resolution before the Council is the fruit of
the efforts made and extensive consultations conducted by
the non-aligned group to eliminate the impediment to the
peace process resulting from the recent Israeli
expropriation orders. We believe that the Council's
adoption of this draft resolution, which demands the
nullification of the Israeli Government's orders for the
confiscation of 53 hectares of Arab land in East
Jerusalem, accords with the Council's responsibility in
this regard, with the United Nations Charter and with the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Furthermore, the
adoption of this draft resolution will give a positive
impetus to the ongoing peace process which is desperately
needed at the present time.

In its capacity as the principal international organ
entrusted with maintaining international peace and

 

security, the Security Council's inability to take action in
this respect, despite the calls of the more than 40 nations
that participated in the general debate, will raise doubts
about the credibility and the international legitimacy of the
relevant resolutions and cast a shadow over future
negotiations in the peace process in the region.

Allow me to take this opportunity to extend my
gratitude to the members of the non-aligned caucus for their
constructive attitude and for their assistance to my
delegation in conducting consultations at various levels. In
my capacity as the Coordinator of the non-aligned caucus
for this month, I would also like to pay a special tribute to
you, Mr. President, to your hardworking delegation, to all
the members of the Council and to other countries that have
demonstrated their understanding and full cooperation, and
look forward to the adoption of this draft resolution by the
Council.

