Mr. Nin Novoa (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
debate and for your efforts during Russia's presidency
to achieve progress on the major issues on the agenda of
the Security Council.
For me, it is an honour to be here today to
exchange views on a topic of particular importance for
international peace and security, that is, the terrorist
threat in the Middle East and North Africa. It is one of
the greatest violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, as well as of the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and peaceful coexistence among
nations and among individuals. Its transnational nature,
its innovative modes of action and its growing impact
at the international level demand immediate responses
from the international community, and in particular
from the Security Council, the body to which the Charter
grants primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Uruguay condemns terrorism and all its forms
of action and stresses the need for measures by the
international community that are consistent with the
Charter of the United Nations and that make it possible
to counter the operations of terrorist groups.

We believe that the responses designed by the
international community should not focus exclusively on
the implementation of coercive measures in accordance
with international law, but should also offer solutions
based on a comprehensive approach that addresses the
structural factors that are at the root and origin of this
phenomenon. Poverty, the lack of job opportunities,
social exclusion, xenophobia and discrimination and
the challenges with regard to access to education create
an environment conducive to the formation of new
terrorist groups and the recruitment of followers. We
are convinced that addressing those challenges will
also prevent the emergence of new hotbeds of tension
related to the structural factors I just mentioned.

Uruguay notes with great concern the escalation
and brutality of the actions of the group called the
Islamic State, including the deliberate destruction of
the cultural heritage of humankind. We denounce in the
most emphatic way the cruelty and disregard for human
dignity that this group has demonstrated. That is why,
given the actions of the Islamic State, it is not possible
to sustain the principle of the peaceful settlement of
disputes and to demand dialogue and negotiation with
an entity that has adopted a clear strategy of terror. In
this context, Uruguay emphasizes the need for urgent
action by the international community, using means
consistent with the Charter of the United Nations, to
put a stop to the actions of this terrorist group. The
international community cannot remain indifferent
in the face of these crimes and the suffering of their
victims.

The attacks on the civilian populations, in
particular on women and children, perpetrated by
Boko Haram on the African continent demonstrate the
terrible escalation in frequency, brutality, cruelty and
virulence of the actions of this group against their own
compatriots. It systemically subjects them to terror
and violates their basic rights. Uruguay condemns its
actions and reiterates that there cannot be any religious,
ethnic or any kind of other justification to legitimize
such actions. Similarly, Uruguay hopes that these
barbaric actions do not go unpunished and that those
responsible will be tried and convicted in accordance
with the existing norms.

Uruguay supports the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy and is committed to
actions aimed at strengthening its implementation, as
it is aware of the importance of collective action. In
this framework, Uruguay would like to announce that
it is currently considering the definition of a national
strategy against terrorism that makes it possible to
cooperate effectively with international efforts in the
consideration of this global phenomenon.

No State or individual is exempt from becoming
a victim of a terrorist attack. We must act together
immediately to repair the damage caused to those
affected and their families and to prevent future attacks
in order to protect potential victims.

