Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): I also thank
Mr. Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his briefing on the current tensions in the
region following the announcement of the construction
of new housing units in East Jerusalem.

Last week the Security Council held an open debate
on the Middle East, including the Palestinian question
(see S/PV.7281). The Council noted that the situation
remained fragile, not only in Gaza but also in the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. The recent announcement by
the Israeli Government to advance construction plans
in East Jerusalem in the Ramat Shlomo and Har Homa
districts has predictably heightened tensions. The
situation, however, should be addressed peacefully and
responsibly with the aim of preserving the chances for
the resumption oftalks and ensuring the viability ofthe
two-State solution.

We should not lose sight of the fact that the effects
of the 50-day war in Gaza are still fresh and that
any unilateral action from any side could cause the
region to erupt into violence. Despite the Egyptian-
brokered ceasefire in August, as stated by Under-
Secretary-General Feltman, the current status quo
is not sustainable. But we also know that any failure
to move forward will incite the parties to resort to
unilateral decisions. Therefore, the parties should make
additional efforts to end the vicious cycle by resuming
negotiations.

In this context of heightened tension, my delegation
reiterates the importance of respect for religious
freedoms, including unhindered access for worshippers
of all faiths to their holy sites, and a commitment by
both Israelis and Palestinians to ensure that members
of their respective communities refrain from any
provocation.

The status of the Old City and its religious sites are
extremely sensitive to the final status issues, which can
be resolved only through direct negotiations between
parties. Therefore, we call upon parties to continue
to uphold the 20-year-old peace treaty regarding the
religious status of the area of the Al-Aqsa Mosque in
East Jerusalem. In that regard, we commend the Israeli
Government for announcing that it will maintain the
status quo agreement on the whole sites and will not
restrict access to anyone.

In order for the world to ever witness the realization
of our common goal of two States for two peoples living
side by side in peace and security, both parties, supported
by their peace partners, should commit themselves to
a comprehensive and negotiated settlement to end the
conflict and save succeeding generations in the region
from the scourge of war.

