Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): The United Kingdom
was pleased to vote in favour of this resolution.

I would like to take this opportunity to set out our
position on the Western Sahara. We reaffirm our support
for the efforts by the Secretary-General to advance the
political process and aimed at reaching ajust, realistic,
pragmatic, lasting and mutually acceptable political
solution to the issue of Western Sahara, based on
compromise and in accordance with Security Council
resolutions. We strongly support the continuing work
of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara (MINURSO) and Mr. Colin Stewart,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, as
well as the renewal of MINURSO's mandate for a
further 12 months, which will provide much-needed
certainty and support the Mission's valuable work.
The United Kingdom greatly appreciates the efforts
of Mr. Horst Kohler, the former Personal Envoy of the
Secretary-General, to advance the political process. We
welcome the engagement of delegations from Morocco,
the Frente Popular para la Liberacion de Saguia el-Hamra
y de Rio de Oro, Algeria and Mauritania in two round-
table meetings during Mr. Kohler's period of office. We
hope that a successor to Mr. Kohler can be appointed
to build on his efforts as soon as possible. To that end,
we reaffirm our support for the United Nations process
and our commitment to helping the parties achieve a
just, lasting and mutually acceptable political solution
based on compromise, which will provide for the self-
determination of the people of Western Sahara in the
context of arrangements consistent with the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

We underline the primary role of the United Nations
in mediation to resolve the issue and note the roles and
responsibilities of the parties. We welcome the serious
and credible Moroccan efforts to move the process
forward towards a resolution. We call on the parties
to demonstrate further political will towards finding
a solution, including by recommitting to supporting
United Nations efforts, and we urge the neighbouring
countries to continue to make positive contributions to
the process.

