Major General Lollesgaard: It is a great honour
to speak in this forum on the subject of operating
in an asymmetric environment. As the Council is
aware, I command the force of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), and in answer to the question
underlying the topic - whether or not MINUSMA is
geared to operate in an asymmetric environment - I
would say no, not really. I have some good assets, but
overall there are some major shortfalls that make us
extremely vulnerable.

Since Mali is often on the Council's agenda, I
will not explain the threats and challenges in the
country in detail. While we consider the Platform and
the Coordination coalitions to consist of so-called
compliant armed groups, it is primarily, but not only,
thejihadist groups that are hostile to MINUSMA. Their
preferred methods are improvised explosive devices
(IEDs), suicide attacks, laying mines along our routes,
ambushes and shelling our camps with rockets and
mortars. The consequence is that MINUSMA has by
far the most fatalities among United Nations mission
troops, with 36 soldiers killed and more than 200
wounded since 2013, something that deeply concerns
and upsets me.

We have a robust self-defence mandate for
conducting peacekeeping in such an environment.
However, we cannot, and should not, be mandated to
conduct offensive operations against the threats we face.
We are therefore limited to trying, mainly defensively,
to protect the population and ourselves as well as we
possibly can. In my opinion, that requires the ability
to master three main functions. The first of those is
understanding the environment - who, when, where,
how and so on. Only through that understanding can
we prevent attacks, either by influencing the leadership
or deterring groups by being in the right spot. We also
need strong situational awareness in order to monitor a
ceasefire in such a vast country. Secondly, we have to
reassure the population and convince them to believe
in the possibility of a future without the armed groups.
And while doing that, we must be able to protect
ourselves.

It is with the first function, that of understanding,
that we have the good news. In MINUSMA we have
implemented a new intelligence concept - the All
Sources Information Fusion Unit. In support of that
I also have at my disposal special operations forces
and helicopters. Accepting intelligence-gathering
as an integrated function of our operations is a huge
step forward in the United Nations modus operandi. I
now have a number of sophisticated assets, including
unmanned aerial vehicles, and a strong, centrally
placed intelligence staff capable of doing the
assessments. We have come a long way, and I am now
definitely being provided with good, solid intelligence
that helps me understand the environment. However, if
we - the United Nations - continue to operate in such
environments, we have to exploit that concept further.
We need more intelligence-gathering assets at the
lower levels and, most important, we need the staffing
capacity to make better use of the intelligence. I am
making a strong push for the full manning of all my
headquarters with, importantly, the proper skills set.
Intelligence is a priority.

The next function is reassuring and convincing the
population. The best way to counter an asymmetric
threat, of course, is to get the people's support. If
the population believes in the alternative - in the
peacekeeping force - they will be reluctant to support
terrorists or other armed groups, including bandits,
and eventually such groups could lose their hiding
places. The Mission has a strong public information
section that works effectively with the media, issuing
communiques, making radio news and so forth. But
we need what I would call an information operation
concept that combines all our messaging activities in a
coordinated manner. Commanders and soldiers on the
ground should talk and interact more closely with the
population, talking about what we are doing, why we
are there, what is going on and so forth. By combining
those messages with quick-impact projects and other
outreach activities, we will be able to create a positive
perception of the force, and of what is an alternative
to war, in a coordinated way. I am therefore happy to
see that the first draft of MINUSMA's new mission
concept actually mentions information operations. That
is also why I have now established a small information
operations cell in my planning section at force
headquarters. We should exploit that concept further.

While working on understanding the environment,
preventing attacks and convincing and reassuring the
population - in a word, stabilizing the situation - we
have to protect ourselves. Anything that moves by
road in an environment as hostile as that in northern
Mali has to be protected. That means protected against
mines, and all units should be able to search for, detect
and avoid mines and IEDs. It goes without saying that
eight United Nations soldiers sitting in the open air on
top of a soft Landcruiser pickup do not stand much of a
chance if the vehicle is hit by a mine or IED. The same
goes for unprotected civilian supply trucks. In short,
we must make sure that any contingent operating in a
hostile environment is well equipped with protected
vehicles for troops operating outside the camps.

We should also provide well-protected camps with
good living conditions, particularly when we set up
camps in contested areas where troops conduct risky
operations out of their camps on a daily basis. They
need a safe haven to come home to. We can never
achieve full protection against everything, but our
troops deserve to be well protected in their camps
against shelling or suicide-vehicle IEDs, which in
Mali is unfortunately not always the case. However, I
should add that we are working on improving that by,
among other things, implementing new technology, an
example of which is the indirect fire warning device.
Soldiers also need access to proper accommodation,
water, power sources and a basic level of welfare. I am
aware that much of that is basically the responsibility of
troop-contributing nations, one that I believe should be
assessed and certified before the contingent is allowed
to deploy. But to the extent that a unit does not bring
those capacities into the Mission, I suppose it is only
the United Nations that can help them.

Finally, I should mention that we need robust
logistics. What do I mean by that? The proven United
Nations system, whereby mission support delivers
supplies using civilian contractors throughout the
mission area, may work in certain well-established,
low-threat missions. But it does not work in a hostile
environment like that in Mali. To be very specific, north
of the Niger River, the hostilities are so imminent and
the road conditions are so poor that it is irresponsible
to keep going there with old, fragile civilian trucks
that are unprotected and driven by people who are not
soldiers. That is one of the main reasons that we cannot
sufficiently support our troops and our camps in the
north. Therefore, we strongly need a military logistics
unit to work in the most hostile parts of the country.
It is not so important who commands the Mission
support - whether it be the Force Commander - but
the capacity is important. We also need the requisite
aviation assets to help manage the burden of supplying
distant bases, and we need contractors with the right
equipment to be able to transport effectively along
difficult supply routes, even in areas that are not highly
contested.

Let me say a few words on training. It is ofthe utmost
importance that United Nations forces be properly
trained before deployment. Among the most important
issues are patrolling, procedures and techniques, basic
counter-IED capability, how to call for helicopters to
evacuate casualties, the code of conduct and weapons
training. There are other important skills as well, for
instance, how to conduct crowd control. I say that
because I have experienced that many of my troops are
not good enough at those basic skills. I am sorry to say
that I believe that we have suffered losses, because of
insufficient predeployment training, that could have
been avoided. The most important skill of all those
mentioned is counter-IED training. Every single soldier
needs to be able to search, detect and avoid IEDs and
mines at a basic level. That training is quite simple to
obtain. It does not require a very demanding training
programme, and it will save lives. If we can manage to
improve the predeployment training level, therefore, I
will promise to maintain the skills of the troops once
they have arrived in the Mission. IfI did possess the
envisaged mentor teams, the overall effectiveness of
the Force would be enhanced.

To conclude, drawing on my personal experience
from MINUSMA for a general recommendation, I
am not in doubt that in future there will certainly
be a continuous need for peacekeeping operations
in asymmetric environments. I do not doubt that the
United Nations will be called upon to establish those
kinds of missions, because who else would? But if we
want to be able to do it - and do it effectively - we
need to be fully capable of facing that environment in all
aspects. That means having the capability to face hostile
armed groups hiding among the population and to face
challenging climates, geography and infrastructure. To
do that, we need to be properly trained. We need to be
properly equipped with protected vehicles, to put a big
effort into counter-IED and robust logistics, to protect
the camps, to have proper intelligence, and we need to
ensure that all staff posts are manned and manned with
skilled officers. I know that sounds like a lot, but it is
what we need if we want to be able to survive in an
asymmetric environment. I know well that to achieve
it, we are demanding a lot from ourselves internally
in the United Nations, for instance, from the Mission
support, but also from the Member States paying the
bill. I am also well aware that we are fully depending
on troop-contributing nations providing the units that
can do it.

Let me finish by assuring the Council that, under
the circumstances, we are doing just OK in a way.
While conducting operations, we work very hard in
the Mission to improve capabilities and standards by
stepping up our training efforts. New equipment is also
coming in, and first and foremost, I am lucky that in
general I have brave, robust, courageous soldiers who
every day face the threat without shying away. But we
need to prepare and support them better.

