Switzerland would like to thank France for having organized this virtual debate and the speakers for their valuable contributions. Switzerland wishes to express its deep concern at the continuation of armed conflicts in various parts of the world and their devastating impact on children. Switzerland would like to recall that, in situations of armed conflict, children must be considered primarily as victims and treated as such; this includes children who are linked to armed groups or whose parents are so affiliated. We encourage the Security Council to strengthen its commitment to the protection of children in armed conflict. The call of the Secretary-General for an immediate global ceasefire is important and must be supported by the Council. This year, we are celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005) and the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In this context, Switzerland encourages the Secretary-General to continue to provide a complete, impartial and precise list of parties that commit grave violations of the rights of the child. The Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict is important for reviewing the reports of the monitoring and reporting mechanism and making recommendations to the Council on possible measures to promote the protection of children affected by armed conflict. In addition, Switzerland wishes to stress the following three points. First of all, Switzerland is concerned about the aggravating effects of the coronavirus-disease pandemic on the situation of children in armed conflict, and in particular that of girls, who are particularly exposed to the risks and consequences of conflict. Wherever access by humanitarian actors is restricted, the well-being of children is at risk. That is why Switzerland urges all parties to conflict to guarantee humanitarian actors unhindered access to affected populations. Secondly, Switzerland calls on the Council to take concrete steps to end attacks on schools. We regret that an increase in such attacks was observed over the past year. Deprived of the protective environment school provides, children are more exposed to the risks of exploitation, such as recruitment by armed groups, early marriage and forced labour. We encourage Member States to deter armed forces and non-State armed groups from occupying schools left empty due to the pandemic and to join the Safe Schools Declaration. Thirdly, the protection of children in armed conflict must be integrated into all conflict-prevention activities. In this regard, we welcome the launch of the Practical guidance for mediators to protect children in situations of armed conflict. Protecting children is an integral part of lasting peace. That is why Switzerland is committed to ensuring that children have who have participated in fighting or lived in conflict zones are taken care of with particular attention and closely supported in their reintegration into a safe environment. Protecting children means empowering them to build peace.
