Mr. Mladenov: On the eve of the holy month of
Ramadan, allow me to extend my warmest greetings to
all our Muslims and wish them Ramadan Kareem.

This briefing unfortunately follows on the heels
of the despicable terrorist attacks in Minya and in
Manchester. I offer my deep condolences to the families
of the victims and to the Governments and the people of
Egypt and the United Kingdom. There is nojustification
for terror. On his recent visit to the Middle East, while
United States President Trump pressed for a common
approach to addressing the scourge of extremism and
terrorism, he also made it very clear that resolving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is critical to combating this
threat and to achieving peace in the region. I welcome
his personal engagement and that of Arab, Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to advance this goal. However,
during the past month, the complex dynamics on the
ground have been creating an explosive environment.

In Gaza, we are walking into another crisis with our
eyes wide open. I am today warning the Security Council
that unless urgent measures are taken to de-escalate, the
crisis risks spiralling out of control, with devastating
consequences for Palestinians and Israelis alike. Since
Hamas established an administrative committee in
March, aparallel institution to run Governmental affairs
in Gaza, the intra-Palestinian political tug-of-war has
led to a significant deterioration in relations between
Fatah and Hamas. The result is a significant worsening
of the humanitarian crisis that risks exploding into
another conflict, which can only begin to be resolved
by compromise, the implementation of intra-Palestinian
agreements and an ending of the closures.

In April, the Palestinian Government upheld
its decision to reduce salary allowances to nearly
60,000 public sector employees in Gaza. While the
Government needs to ensure its fiscal sustainability
under increasingly difficult economic conditions,
it is important that reforms or decisions to reduce
expenditures be fairly distributed and made with
consideration to the harsh conditions in Gaza.

Gaza is also in the midst of an unprecedented
energy crisis. The power plant that supplies 30 per cent
of Gaza's electricity stopped functioning on 16 April,
due to a dispute between the Palestinian Authority and
Hamas over taxation on fuel. The lines supplying power
from Egypt into Gaza are often down for technical
reasons. This leaves Israeli power lines, which provide
some 60 per cent ofGaza's electricity, as the only reliable
energy source. Meanwhile, the Palestinian Government
has decided to cap its purchase of electricity from Israel
for Gaza. If implemented, this decision would further
reduce electricity supply to Gaza from Israel by some
30 per cent, plunging its population into a spiral of a
humanitarian catastrophe.

Since April, the majority of Palestinians in Gaza
have been receiving about four hours of electricity
per day. How long do Council members think they
can survive if this is further reduced to two hours
of electricity per day? Who will pay the price of the
ensuing violence and escalation? It will not be those
who live a life of exemption and privilege. The price
will be paid by poor Palestinians - by women and
children, by people already traumatized by conflict,
who have been held hostage for a decade now. They
are the ones who will not have access to electricity, to
water, to health services and sanitation.

No one has any interest in another conflict in Gaza.
Everyone has a responsibility to avoid it. For months,
the United Nations has warned that without addressing
the structural problems of Gaza's electricity supply we
would face a humanitarian crisis. Those warnings are
now a reality. Let me illustrate to the Council what that
reality looks like. Hospitals are now forced to postpone
elective surgeries and have already reduced 80 per cent
of cleaning, catering and sterilization services. Had it
not been for the timely United Nations humanitarian
intervention on 27 April to provide emergency fuel for
generators, some 51 surgical and obstetric operation
theatres, five hemodialysis centres and a number of
emergency departments would have had to close. Since
mid-April, desalination plants have been functioning at
15 per cent of their capacity, and drinking water has
been supplied for a few hours every two to four days.

As we speak 100,000 cubic metres of raw sewage
are discharged into the Mediterranean Sea on a daily
basis. This is the equivalent of 40 Olympic-size
swimming pools of untreated sewage daily, which is an
environmental disaster in the making for Israel, Egypt
and Gaza.

Food prices are soaring as the price of water
for irrigation has gone up by some 65 per cent. The
manufacturing sector is grinding to a halt, and over half
of private industry workers have been suspended. The
United Nations is working determinedly to mitigate the
humanitarian impact of this crisis. A United Nations-
managed emergency fuel operation is delivering fuel
to essential services for water, health and sanitation,
but our reserves will run out in the coming weeks. It
can only temporarily alleviate the suffering of the most
vulnerable, but is no substitute for a sustainable solution.

Defusing the current energy crisis will require
compromise on all sides, including tax concessions on
fuel for the power plant and a profound reform of how
energy is supplied in Gaza. The Palestinian Authority,
Hamas - which has controlled Gaza for a decade - and
Israel all have obligations for the welfare of Gaza's
residents and must live up to their responsibilities to
address the crisis and overcome its political impasse.
Over the past weeks, I have engaged with the parties and
our international partners not only to find a solution to
the immediate electricity challenges, but also to address
the broader political challenge of returning Gaza to the
control of the legitimate Palestinian authorities.

With respect to another troubling development,
allow me to join the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights in condemning yesterday's executions
of three men in Gaza, in contravention of international
law. These executions bring to 28 the number of death
sentences carried out since the Hamas takeover in 2007,
with nine just in the past year.

Turning to the broader Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
in recent weeks we have seen more tragic examples
of the human toll that this conflict is inflicting, with
six Palestinians killed in various acts of violence. I am
also very concerned by the ongoing hunger strike of
Palestinian detainees protesting against their conditions
in Israeli jails, which, on the eve of Ramadan, has
now entered its fortieth day. According to reports, the
Israeli prison service has evacuated at least 60 hunger-
striking prisoners to hospitals because their medical
condition had worsened, while another close to 600
prisoners have been moved to infirmaries set up in
the prisons. Reports of punitive measures against the
hunger strikers, including restricted access to lawyers
and the denial of family visits, are alarming. The right
of detainees to access a lawyer is a right that should
never be curtailed.

I call for a redoubling of efforts to end the strike
as soon as possible. The crisis must be resolved in line
with international humanitarian law and Israel's human
rights obligations. All actors should exercise maximum
restraint and responsibility and take the necessary steps
to avoid escalating tensions.

On 4 May, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for the
Coordination of International Assistance to Palestinians
met in Brussels to discuss the key socioeconomic
challenges faced by the Palestinian Authority.
Regrettably, a number of key issues remain unresolved
between the parties on access and movement, energy,
water and fiscal sustainability. While many of the
solutions are technical, ultimately the decisions to
implement them are political. I am encouraged by the
fact that in recent weeks, the Israeli and Palestinian
Ministers of Finance have come together in an effort to
move these issues forward. Their fruitful consultations,
the first meeting of the Joint Water Committee in seven
years and the progress in the implementation of last
year's landmark electricity agreement are positive steps
that need to be encouraged and supported.

I also take note of recently announced Israeli
measures designed to help the Palestinian economy
in the West Bank. These steps reportedly include the
proposed zoning of land in Area C, adjacent to several
Palestinian cities, for their residential, industrial and
agricultural use; the development of industrial zones
in Tarkumiya and Hebron; and expanding the hours
of operation of the Allenby Bridge crossing. These are
positive steps that will also need to be substantially
expanded if they are to achieve the desired effect.

Before closing, let me turn very briefly to Lebanon
and the Golan. Regrettably, the Lebanese Parliament has
not yet reconvened following its one-month adjournment

of 12 April. Agreement on an electoral law remains
elusive, less than a month before Parliament's tenure
ends on 20 June. I continue to hope that negotiations
can be finalized in time to avoid institutional instability
and to allow for the holding of elections, in accordance
with the Constitution.

In the Golan, the ceasefire between Israel and the
Syrian Arab Republic has been maintained, albeit in
a volatile environment attributable to the ongoing
conflict in Syria and against the backdrop of continued
military activity across the ceasefire line. This activity
has included incidents of spillover and retaliatory fire,
as well as Israeli air strikes in Syria targeting Hizbullah.
Both Israel and the Syrian Arab Republic have stated
their continued commitment to the separation of forces
agreement and their support for the full return of United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force to the area of
separation, conditions permitting.

In closing, allow me to say a few words on efforts
to advance the prospects for peace. As the conflict has
ebbed and flowed, the key messages to both sides from
the United Nations, including through its role in the
Quartet and the broader international community, have
remained clear, consistent and firm. Above all, Israel's
almost 50-year occupation and settlement enterprise are
untenable and must end through meaningful negotiations
that address the final status issues. Their perpetuation is
sending an unmistakable message to another generation
of Palestinians that their dream of statehood is destined
to remain just that - a dream - and to Israelis that
their desire for peace, security and regional recognition
also remains unattainable.

Still, much can and must be done. Israel can
undertake transformative steps to improve the daily
lives of Palestinians, to empower the Palestinian
leadership and to move meaningfully towards a
negotiated resolution of the conflict, in accordance with
international law and Security Council resolutions.
Palestinians, too, should heed the repeated calls to
combat violence and incitement. Internally, they
must also rise to the challenge of forging a genuine
reconciliation, which is critical to advancing peace and
fulfilling their national aspirations.

This summer will mark 10 years since Hamas'
violent 2007 takeover of the Gaza Strip. The past
decade has seen Gaza's infrastructure, its basic
services and its private sector gradually debilitated, its
economy weakened, with real gross domestic product
per capita and employment decreasing, and the gender
gap continuing to grow. Gaza faces a downward spiral
of de-development. The widening socioeconomic gap
between Gaza and the West Bank further highlights the
need to end the drivers of this inhumane and volatile
situation. Deteriorating conditions only fuel anger
and instability, strengthen extremists and undermine
chances for a serious political process.

If Israelis and Palestinians hope to extract
themselves from the immeasurable burden this conflict
has wrought, they must be willing to take the painful
steps that will ultimately lead to peace. Neither side can
afford another missed opportunity.

