The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list.

I take this opportunity to thank all members of
the Council for their cooperation in drafting the text of
the presidential statement that I shall shortly read out. I
also thank all those who participated in the debate for
their constructive contributions. I believe I am correct
in saying that this meeting has brought us closer to the
consensus that is so necessary in the global struggle
against terrorism, which poses a threat to everyone,
everywhere and at all times.

Following consultations among Council
members, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, underlining that
peace and security in the world are indivisible
and taking into account the interconnection and
interdependence of the world, reaffirms that
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations
constitutes one of the most serious threats to
international peace and security and that any acts
of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable
regardless of their motivations, whenever and by
whomsoever committed. It further reaffirms its
determination to combat threats to international
peace and security caused by acts of terrorism by
all possible means in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations.

"The Security Council welcomes recent
statements by intergovernmental organizations
condemning all forms of terrorism, including
suicide bombing and hostage-taking, which build
upon the universal condemnation by the
international community of unlawful acts of
terrorism, including against civilians, that cannot
be justified or excused under any circumstances
or pursuant to any political, philosophical,
ideological, racial, ethnic, religious or other
consideration, and reaffirms the need for Member
States to work together urgently to prevent and
suppress such acts.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
central role of the United Nations in the global
struggle against terrorism.

"The Security Council reaffirms the
importance of all its resolutions and statements
on terrorism, in particular resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005), and stresses the need for
their full implementation.

"The Security Council renews its call on
States to become parties as soon as possible to all
36

relevant international conventions and protocols
relating to terrorism and to implement those they
are party to.

"The Security Council believes that terrorist
safe havens continue to be a significant concern
and reaffirms the need for States to strengthen
cooperation in order to find, deny safe haven and
bring to justice, on the basis of the principle of
extradite or prosecute, any person who supports,
facilitates, participates or attempts to participate
in the financing, planning, preparation or
commission of terrorist acts or provides safe
havens.

"The Security Council reaffirms the

importance of the work of the committees
established pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),
1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004) and continues its
support and guidance to the committees.

"The Security Council particularly
expresses its support for and commitment to
contributing to the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
(A/60/288) of 8 September 2006 and welcomes
the adoption by the General Assembly of
resolution 62/272, which reaffirmed this Strategy
and its four pillars and called for its
implementation in an integrated manner and in all
its aspects.

"The Security Council emphasizes that
enhancing dialogue and broadening the
understanding among civilizations, in an effort to
prevent the indiscriminate targeting of different
religions and cultures, and addressing unresolved
regional conflicts and the full range of global
issues, including development issues, will
contribute to international cooperation, which by
itself is necessary to sustain the broadest possible
fight against terrorism.

"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest terms the incitement of terrorist acts
and repudiates attempts at the justification or
glorification of terrorist acts that may incite
further terrorist acts. It reaffirms the importance
of countering radicalization and extremism that
may lead to terrorism and preventing exploitation
of young people by violent extremists.

"The Security Council, reaffirming that the
promotion and protection of human rights for all
and the rule of law are essential to an effective
counter-terrorism strategy and that effective
counter-terrorism measures and the protection of
human rights are complementary and mutually
reinforcing, reminds States that they must ensure
that any measures taken to combat terrorism
comply with all their obligations under
international law, in particular international
human rights, refugee and humanitarian law.

"The Security Council emphasizes the
importance of technical assistance aimed at
increasing the capabilities of Member States in
the fight against terrorism by addressing their
counter-terrorism needs.

"The Security Council believes that the
strengthening of mutual trust among Member
States of the United Nations will facilitate the
creation of conditions for a successful fight
against terrorism, and that success in that fight
will positively reinforce peace and security in the
world.

"The Security Council, deeply concerned
with the continuous terrorist attacks around the
world, calls on all Member States of the United
Nations to renew the degree of solidarity
manifested immediately after the tragic event of
11 September 2001, and to redouble efforts to
08-63845
tackle global terrorism, dedicating significant
attention to bringing to justice the perpetrators,
facilitators and masterminds of terrorist acts
while expressing deep compassion with all
victims of terrorism.

"The Security Council will continue to
follow developments in order to organize as
efficiently as possible its efforts in combating
terrorism."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2008/45.

The Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.50 p.m.
37
