Mr. Oshima: I thank the Security Council for
once again providing me with an opportunity to brief
the Council on the latest humanitarian situation in
Angola. I have just returned from a mission to Angola
and southern Africa. In southern Africa, I visited three
of the several countries affected by the looming hunger
crisis - Zimbabwe, Malawi and Zambia. Tomorrow,
here in New York, we are organizing a launch of
national appeals for emergency assistance on behalf of
the six countries affected.

During my visits, I had the company of senior
officials from the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP) and the World Food Programme
(WFP). We travelled together so that we could develop
an integrated overview of the situation - not just from
a humanitarian, but also a reconstruction and
development perspective. Ms. Julia Taft, Director of
the Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery at
UNDP, was part of the mission. If members agree, she
is also available to answer questions today.

Our mission to Angola followed the earlier,
broad-based, mission led by Mr. Ibrahim Gambari to
assess and consult with the Government on the role and
structure of the United Nations presence in Angola in
the light of the new situation.

The purpose of my humanitarian mission was
twofold: first, to assess the situation on the ground
first-hand, and ensure that effective aid coordination is
in place and, secondly, to discuss a set of key issues
with the Government, including burden-sharing and
strategies for return and resettlement of internally
displaced persons, including UNITA combatants and
their families.

In addition to meetings in Luanda with key
Government ministers, the donor community and
humanitarian partners, including non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) active on the ground, we made
an informative field trip to the town of Kuito in Bie
province, which is one of the hardest-hit locations in
the country.

I have drawn three main conclusions from my
mission. First, the Government of Angola and the
United Nations and its partners have a unique
opportunity to create a new partnership to address both
humanitarian needs and reconstruction and
development issues. That opportunity should be seized
with renewed effort and commitment; it is important to
develop the appropriate framework for the partnership.

Secondly, the Government is working hard to
make the agreement set out in the 4 April
Memorandum of Understanding hold. It is looking to
the future and is already planning for rehabilitation and
reconstruction; it appears ready to increase the share of
spending for the social sector. Should that become a
reality, I believe that it will be complemented by
significant donor support.

Thirdly, the humanitarian community will have to
continue with massive lifesaving interventions for the
short term. In particular, return and resettlement
strategies for internally displaced persons - especially
UNITA combatants and their families - are quickly
becoming a major challenge. Helping displaced people
to return home and to re-establish a productive life will
be critically important in the consolidation of peace. To
carry out those activities immediately, we need a
significant step-up of donor support.

The overall situation in Angola has changed
dramatically since I last briefed the Council, in
February. The ceasefire established by the
Memorandum of Understanding is holding; the peace
process seems to be irreversible. The people of Angola
are to be commended for that momentous achievement.
The resulting improvements in humanitarian access to
many locations in the interior have had significant
positive consequences for the population.

However, the humanitarian situation in many
parts of the country continues to be dire. The enormous
needs of large parts of the population - inter alia, for
food, water, shelter and health care - require an
urgent and massive response. Despite the overall
positive developments, the people most affected by the
war have yet to see a significant peace dividend.

When the Memorandum of Understanding was
signed, in early April, approximately 1.9 million
vulnerable people were receiving assistance from the
international community. As soon as conditions
permitted after the signing of the Memorandum of
Understanding, United Nations agencies, the
Government and NGO partners immediately conducted
rapid needs assessments in previously inaccessible
areas, particularly in newly created family reception
areas. Those rapid assessments resulted in the
identification of an additional 1 million or so people
who are in need of emergency assistance - namely,
approximately 800,000 people in newly accessible
areas, plus an estimated 220,000 family members of
UNITA combatants, assembled in 31 of the 35 family
areas. In other words, altogether, the United
Nations and its partners are now targeting
approximately 3 million people - almost one quarter
of Angola's entire population - in vulnerable
situations.

The ongoing humanitarian relief operation in
Angola is one of the largest in the world, with more
than 400 national and international NGOs and 10
United Nations agencies involved in the effort. I should
mention that I was greatly impressed by the tireless
efforts of the humanitarian community in Angola to
respond to both the existing and the newly found
caseload. Those efforts are truly commendable. At the
same time, it was very clear to me that they are
painfully overextended and seriously underfunded.
Funding for food, health care, water, sanitation and
agricultural support is urgently required. The United
Nations 2002 Consolidated Appeal for Angola
requested $233 million. To date, just $81 million - or
35 per cent of the funds requested - has been granted.
Underfunding, therefore, is now the major constraint
on humanitarian action.

Looking ahead, the major challenge for the
humanitarian community will be the return and
resettlement of internally displaced persons. According
to the Government, up to 4 million people - a third of
the population - are internally displaced. The
Government has made return and resettlement a major
priority. According to the Government's plan, up to
500,000 people could be resettled by the end of the
year. When I visited camps for internally displaced
persons in the city of Kuito, I learned that some people
were already beginning to leave the camps and to
return spontaneously to their home areas. Humanitarian
organizations are working, on a priority basis, with
provincial authorities to develop plans to facilitate
return and resettlement before the next planting season,
in mid-August. That needs to be actively supported, for
obvious reasons.

I should remind the Council that return and
resettlement will need to occur in accordance with the
principle of voluntary return - as opposed to that of
forcible return - and with full attention to protection

needs. In that regard, the Council will recall that
Angola is at present the leading country in the world to
have enshrined in national legislation the guiding
principles on internally displaced persons developed by
the Representative of the Secretary-General for
Internally Displaced Persons, Mr. Francis Deng. That is
commendable. The United Nations is working closely
with the Government to ensure that those rules are put
into practice at the provincial as well as the national
level.

In that connection, I should also like to note that
mine action will play a major part in facilitating safe
return and resettlement. Humanitarian access remains
hampered by extensive mine infestation. With support
from the international community, the Government
must take the lead and redouble its efforts with regard
to demining activities. Here, I should like to mention
that the Government of Angola recently ratified the
Ottawa Convention on anti-personnel landmines, which
is a step in the right direction on which the
Government should be congratulated.

I should emphasize that the situation of the ex-
UNITA combatants and their family members who are
currently assembled in the quartering areas and the
family reception areas requires priority attention, for
obvious reasons. They are currently receiving
emergency assistance from the Government, from
United Nations agencies and from NGOs, but that is
not enough. Increased effort in that sector is urgently
needed. Moreover, after 20 July, responsibility for
these areas will shift from the military to the newly
founded Commission for National Reintegration. It
remains to be seen whether the Commission has the
necessary resources and capacity to cope with the
challenge. That situation will require careful
monitoring.

As I mentioned earlier, one of the purposes of my
mission was to discuss with the Government ways in
which we could improve our working relationship in
the light of the new situation. In our discussions, the
Government confirmed that it has the primary
responsibility to provide assistance and protection to its
own people. But, clearly, the problems and tasks facing
the Government are of an overwhelming nature, and
the Government indicated that it would ask for help
from the United Nations and from the international
community to meet the momentous tasks and
responsibilities at hand. At the same time, we are
talking about a country that is richly endowed with oil
and other natural resources. There is an expectation in
the international community that the Government
should be able to assume a greater share of the burden
in meeting the needs of its own people.

Moreover, now that the war has ended, the people
of Angola deserve a peace dividend. There is an
expectation that it should come from within the
country, because it has the means for this, even while
the international community should come in to
complement the Government effort. The current
situation can, and must, be turned into an opportunity.
This will occur if the United Nations and the
Government create a new and equitable partnership in
the area of humanitarian and development assistance.
There is an expectation that this partnership will be
based on the concepts of burden-sharing and
transparency.

We would hope that the Government will step up
its efforts to fulfil many of the commitments that have
already been made, as well as the new commitments
we expect will be made. Many donors have expressed
their concern and stressed that visible burden-sharing,
transparency and the fulfilment of those commitments
are essential. I raised these issues with the
Government. I trust they will do their utmost to meet
these expectations.

Additionally, there are a number of steps the
Government can take on their own to facilitate ongoing
humanitarian activities. They include repairing road
and bridge infrastructure to enable cheaper deliveries
by road, expediting customs clearance for humanitarian
goods, maintaining the tax-free status of humanitarian
goods, and simplifying visa requirements for
international humanitarian workers. I raised these
issues with the Government and urged their prompt
attention to them.

In the light of the changed circumstances and the
additional needs created, as I have mentioned, there is
a need to revise the Consolidated Appeal for Angola
for international donor support. I have already briefed
the donor community in Geneva and here in New York.
Concurrently, in Angola the United Nations country
team is working with the Government, donors and non-
governmental organizations to identify the additional
funding needed to meet the increased requirements,
with the aim of revising the Consolidated Appeal,
which should be ready for launch at the end of this
month. I would ask Council members and other
Member States to be generous in their support of this
new appeal for Angola.

Despite the enormous challenges over recent
years, the humanitarian effort in Angola saved the lives
of many in the midst of tragedies. I think we have here
something that we can further build on. More
importantly, we must pay tribute to the people of
Angola, who have demonstrated incredible resilience
and are now ready to build new lives. Meeting the
urgent needs for humanitarian assistance in Angola will
require the concerted efforts of the United Nations, its
partners, donor Governments and the Government of
Angola. With such efforts, I hope that the international
community can help the people of Angola consolidate
their hard-won peace and national reconciliation and
help them move into normalcy, which will allow for the
reconstruction and development of the country.

