Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom welcomes the adoption of resolution 2317
(2016). This sanctions regime continues to play a
vital role in promoting peace and stability in the
Horn of Africa. In Somalia, it is preventing the flow
of illicit arms and cutting off AI-Shabaab's funding.
It is preserving natural resources to the benefit of all
Somalis and for their economic empowerment, and it
is helping to provide better weapons and ammunition
management for the Somali security forces.

But renewing the resolution today is just one part of
our support to Somalia. A timely and credible electoral
process this month is critical to Somalia's future, and
we look forward to continuing support of the incoming
Federal Government of Somalia over the coming months.
One of the key priorities for the new Government will
be a political agreement on security sector reform that
is affordable, accountable, sustainable and acceptable
to federal and regional authorities in Somalia.

Turning to Eritrea, the resolution could have looked
very different if the Government of Eritrea had wanted
it to, but the continuing lack of cooperation from Eritrea
with the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea and
the Council left us with no choice. We could not welcome
a visit as there has been no invitation. We could not
welcome progress because nothing has changed. So we
urge Eritrea to take steps to engage constructively and
in a sustained manner with the Monitoring Group, as
mandated by the Council. We cannot be in the same
position next year.

Some Council members have questioned the lack
of movement by the Council on sanctions on Eritrea.
In the resolution, we have recognized the positive
developments. We have welcomed the release in March
of four Djiboutian prisoners of war who had been held
since 2008. We have recognized the lack of evidence of
Eritrean support for Al-Shabaab, and we have expressed
an intention to review the measures on Eritrea in six
months' time. But without the cooperation of Eritrea,
in compliance with the resolutions of the Council, our
hands are tied. Council members that regret the lack of
movement on this sanctions regime should look to only
one place - Eritrea.

The resolution has regional implications, and as
penholder we took extensive steps to engage with all
of the relevant regional stakeholders so that we could
balance the views of the Council and of the region. It is
therefore particularly disappointing that some Council
members felt that they could not support it, despite
those extensive efforts.

