Mr. Elaraby (Egypt) (interpretation from Arabic):
The inauguration on 11 April 1997 of the Government of
Unity and National Reconciliation in Angola is
undoubtedly an important positive development and is
welcomed by Egypt. We should also like to welcome
other recent political achievements in Angola. The most
important of these are, perhaps, the arrival in Luanda of
most of the UNITA deputies, and the fact that they have
taken their seats in the National Assembly; and the
enactment of a law on the special status of Mr. Savimbi
and his role in political life in Angola. These are all
important achievements whose effects cannot be
jeopardized by those negative elements that, for the most
part, result from the feeling of insecurity and lack of trust
after more than two decades of destructive civil war.

What has taken place in Angola is truly a triumph of
the will for peace. It represents the hopes of the Angolan

 

people for stability and security that will allow them to
begin truly to exercise their national right to life and
development. Those achievements would have been
impossible without the sustained efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Maitre Blondin
Beye, and the support of the three troika States for his
endeavours. Furthermore, the presence of 13 Heads of State
at the inauguration ceremony of the new Government
provides the best evidence of the concern of the
international community, particularly African States, for the
establishment of peace in Angola and its economic
development efforts.

My delegation must observe that these positive
political developments have not been matched by similar
progress in the military aspects of the Lusaka Protocol,
which remain to be implemented. The most important of
these are the disarming of civilians, to enable the
Government to extend full authority throughout the entire
State territory, and incorporation of selected UNITA
soldiers into a unified armed forces. All these matters are
pending. My delegation hopes that solutions to these urgent
issues will be found in the near future. Perhaps arranging
a meeting between President Dos Santos and Mr. Savimbi
soon would be a step towards a final settlement of these
issues.

The delegation of Egypt fully supports the Secretary-
General's recommendations, contained in his two most
recent reports to the Council, on the future of the United
Nations presence in Angola, particularly as they relate, first,
to the creation of a new United Nations observer mission in
Angola (UNOMA) on 1 July 1997 as the successor to
UNAVEM. III, which would monitor the completion by
both parties of the implementation of remaining military
commitments and support national reconciliation; and
secondly, to maintaining the Special Representative in
Luanda with the appropriate human-resources support.
We agree with the Secretary-General that Angola
needs the aid of the international community today perhaps
more than ever before. As we all know, the war has
destroyed the State infrastructure, including education and
health facilities. The war has also spawned some 10 million
landmines, one for each Angolan. In addition, there are
more than a million displaced persons inside Angola's
borders and about 300,000 refugees in neighbouring States.
Briefly, these are the conditions of the next phase awaiting
the Angolan Government, which require all available
assistance and support from the international community
and relevant United Nations bodies to realize the hopes and
aspirations of the Angolan people for a better life. Egypt
will withhold no possible help or support from the
brotherly people of Angola.

Finally, the delegation of Egypt supports the
extension of the mandate of UNAVEM. III until 30 June
1997 and will vote in favour of the draft resolution before
the Council.

