The Secretary-General: Let me start by thanking
you, Mr. President, and your Government for initiating
this discussion of the lessons to be derived from the
experience of the United Nations in previous conflict
and post-conflict situations.

As members know, the United Nations has been
engaged in a wide range of activities in this area, from
the negotiation of political settlements to profound
institutional reconstruction efforts, including the
creation of a new State. Reviewing such past
experiences can tell us what we did well and what we
did less well, and perhaps the reasons in those
particular circumstances. It should also help us to
improve our performance over time.

But the thing that stands out when we review
international engagement in countries affected by
conflict is that no single approach has ever been
adopted twice, because no two conflicts or post-
conflict situations are alike. Even the four recent cases
of Afghanistan, Kosovo, Timor-Leste and Sierra Leone
are very different from one another, in terms of the
causes and consequences of the conflicts, the previous
involvement of the United Nations, the political and
legal context governing the international community's
response, and the sheer size of the affected population
and territory.

Therefore, one of the most important lessons
when it comes to planning the international
community's engagement in a new situation, such as
the one we face now in Iraq, is the need first to reach a
common understanding of what makes the crisis in
question unique, and then to develop our responses
accordingly. We should draw on previous experiences
to make our responses as effective as possible, while
bearing in mind that completely new approaches or
forms of assistance may be required.

That means that we need to begin by asking
ourselves some fundamental questions, such as the
following. Do the parties to the conflict seek, or
welcome, international involvement, and, if so, for
what purpose? Is the international community able, and
does it have the political will, to provide the necessary
financial and human resources and to sustain that
commitment long enough to ensure success? What are
the preconditions for ensuring a self-sustaining and
durable peace? What are the needs to be addressed, and
in what order of priority? At what pace does the
process need to run?

A few specific lessons stand out from the recent
case histories. The trust of the parties and the
population can be fragile, and cannot be taken for
granted over time; their consent needs to be cultivated
and preserved. The role of the international community
is not to solve all of a country's problems, but to help
its people become self-reliant. Priorities must be set,
starting with the essential humanitarian needs of the
population, which include the need for basic conditions
of security, law and order. Meeting those needs will
also make it easier to foster the conditions in which
viable political processes can emerge and grow - for
instance, by promoting reconciliation, good
governance, the rule of law, human rights and
transitional justice initiatives.

Decisions on the reform of key State institutions
and legal and political structures must, if they are to be
sustainable in the long run, be taken by the people of
the country themselves. Such a process can succeed
only if all the main groups in the country or territory
play a part in it, feel that it belongs to them and do not
perceive it as leading to a predetermined outcome.

The pacing of the overall process, and the
sequence and timing of its component parts, are also
crucial to success. They need to take into account the
political, security and socio-economic conditions in the
country, and the degree of support that can realistically
be expected from interested members of the
international community. Moving too slowly risks
losing momentum and fuelling frustration; but going
too fast can be equally counterproductive if it means
taking hurried decisions whose effects are difficult to
reverse.

The regional dimension needs early and sustained
attention.

Lastly, there is a direct correlation between
United Nations success and Security Council unity, and
between United Nations setbacks and divisions among
Council members, about the strategy to be pursued.
The Council must be united in setting out the overall
objectives for international assistance and a clear
division of labour, and must then maintain its unity in
providing strong political support, both during rough
periods when progress is at risk and when the acute
phase of the conflict has passed and no longer
commands the attention of the world's media.

In the case of Iraq, which, of course, we all have
in mind at the moment, the Council now has the chance
to leave behind earlier disagreements and to find unity
of purpose in the post-war phase.

Those decisions will not be easy, but they should
not be impossible if the Council keeps some shared
principles firmly in mind. As they debate those issues,
I would urge Council members to set aside past
divisions and to ask themselves what would help the
Iraqi people most. Their interests must come first. The
overriding objective must be to enable the Iraqi people
to take charge of their own destiny.

Already, in resolution 1472 (2003), the Council
has reaffirmed its commitment to the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Iraq, its respect for the right of
its people to determine their own political future and to
control their own natural resources, and its belief that
all parties must abide by their obligations under
international law, including the Fourth Geneva
Convention.

I am sure all the members of the Council would
agree that sovereignty implies political independence
and that, in order to determine their political future, the
Iraqi people must be free to choose their own system of
Government and political leadership. What is needed is
an impartial, representative and transparent process
leading to the choice, by Iraqis themselves, of a
credible and legitimate Iraqi political authority to
which sovereignty can be restored. I trust that the
members of the Council would also agree on the need
to put an end to Iraq's isolation and to help the people
of Iraq, as quickly as possible, to establish conditions
for a normal life.

Over the coming weeks, the Council will have
important decisions to take on existing mandates within
the context of the new situation - notably on the
issues of sanctions, the oil-for-food programme and
weapons inspections. Beyond that, it will need to
consider how best the international community can
help Iraqis rebuild their country and what part the
United Nations might play in assisting that effort and
in the process of restoring Iraqi sovereignty.

I hope I can rely on the Council to ensure that any
mandate it entrusts to the United Nations is clear,
coherent and matched by the necessary resources. In
just over 20 years the Iraqi people have lived through
three wars and over 10 years of harsh United Nations
sanctions. Let us all set aside our past disagreements,
ask what will help the Iraqi people most, and act
accordingly.

