Mrs. Viotti (Brazil) (spoke in French): I shall
follow the example of the representative of Lebanon by
speaking in French.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
organizing this debate. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his statement. We very much
appreciate the briefings by Mr. Le Roy and
Ms. Malcorra, as well as the valuable contributions by
Mr. Doss, Ms. Loj and Mr. Von der Schulenburg.

In discussing transition and exit strategies for
peacekeeping operations, we must not lose sight of the
fundamental objective of such operations. Their
ultimate goal is to contribute to the consolidation of
sustainable peace. Transition and exit strategies are
therefore always a means to an end, and never an end
in themselves. That distinction is not academic; it is
political. That means that such strategies should
respond to political dynamics on the ground.

The transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding should be an undertaking for the entire
United Nations system. Peacekeeping exit and
transition strategies must be coordinated with the wider
United Nations presence on the ground in a coherent
manner. That requires system-wide coordination from
the earliest stages of peacekeeping. We therefore need
to work on three main areas: intensifying the Council's
political support for peace processes, improving United
Nations structures for dealing with those situations,
and securing the necessary human and material
resources.

A minimal level of political stability is the sine
qua non condition for an exit strategy. We must
continue to gather lessons learned and improve our
efforts in such areas as capacity- and institution-
building, improving the ability of States to provide
basic services, protecting civilians, revitalizing the
economy and creating jobs. Local actors must be
constructively engaged in peace, reconciliation and
reconstruction processes. The crucial task of
peacekeeping is to help them to embark upon and
proceed along that path.

Re-establishing peace should be a priority for the
Council as it sets mandates and reacts to developments
on the ground. To that end, the Security Council should
improve its ability to monitor peace processes. The
establishment of benchmarks in several missions is a
positive innovation. I should like to thank Mr. Doss for
the clarity he has brought to our discussion in that
regard.

The transition from peacekeeping is a systemic
undertaking that requires the Council's cooperation
with other relevant parties. The General Assembly, in
particular its Fifth Committee and Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations (C-34), is a crucial
stakeholder in that regard. The Council should take
advantage of the breadth of membership and level of
expertise of those bodies in order to make
peacekeeping more effective and transparent.
The relationship between Security Council
decisions and the work of the Organization's
development bodies needs further attention.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding should not be
considered sequential stages of the United Nations
presence in a given country. Whenever possible,
development-related entities should be active on the
ground from the beginning of the post-conflict phase
so that, once peacekeepers leave, the socio-economic
conditions for peace are firmly in place.

The Peacebuilding Commission is another
potentially important actor. The latest report of the
C-34 (A/63/19) recognizes the value of the
Commission's advice on the peacebuilding aspects of
peacekeeping mandates. The roles and responsibilities
of the Commission vis-a-Vis the Security Council
should be further clarified. The Commission's review
is an opportunity to strengthen its capacity to dispense
such advice.

The Secretariat must also have at its disposal the
structures and expertise required to allow it to
adequately address peacebuilding elements of
peacekeeping. In that regard, social and economic
aspects of peacebuilding must receive greater attention.

There have been positive developments recently
with regard to human and material resources for
peacekeeping as such. Little progress, however, has
been made in securing resources to help implement
sustainable transition and exit strategies. The
well-known problems that undermine the effectiveness
of international aid are the same that must the
overcome when it comes to official development
assistance to post-conflict countries. Donors,
international financial institutions and the United
Nations itself must work more vigorously to free up
significant funds - from the outset of and throughout
the entire process - in a predictable, flexible and
coherent way. Coordination and programmatic
coherence could both contribute to reducing
duplication and filling existing gaps, thereby enhancing
the effectiveness of funds invested.

We must also strengthen the ability of
peacekeeping operations to liaise with United Nations
country teams on the ground and to mainstream
peacebuilding concerns in their day-to-day operations,
especially when transition and exit strategies are being
implemented. The special representatives of the
Secretary-General and resident coordinators have a key
role to play in this regard.

In conclusion, we should see transitions as a step
on the road towards helping countries achieve
sustainable peace and inclusive socio-economic
development. In so doing, we will be strengthening
international peace and security.

