Mr. Von der Schulenburg: I thank the members
of the Security Council for the opportunity to present
the third report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra
Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/2009/438).

Today is a day of national mourning in Sierra
Leone, following the death of approximately 100
people, who perished in the sea near Freetown when
their ferry capsized. Most of the victims were
schoolchildren. We in the United Nations country team
have worked with the Government over the past
several days to help recover the bodies and to provide
immediate assistance to the survivors. Let me here
express my condolences to the bereaved families. This
incident is a reminder to all of us of the fragility of
Sierra Leone's infrastructure and of how difficult life
remains for the average Sierra Leonean.

At the end of this month, UNIPSIL will complete
its first year of operations, and the Security Council
will consider the Secretary-General's recommendation
that it be extended for one year. The Secretary-
General's report before members outlines the progress
made in the implementation of UNIPSIL's mandate and
the remaining challenges to peace and security in
Sierra Leone. Let me therefore take this opportunity to
go beyond the report and raise three general issues and
make one more specific point.

As a first issue, I would like to highlight the
magnitude and the uniqueness, from a historical
perspective, of the task that Sierra Leone is trying to
09-51020
accomplish. Since the end of the civil war seven years
ago, Sierra Leone has embarked on a remarkable
journey towards becoming a stable, peaceful and
democratic country. During that short time, Sierra
Leone has not only left behind the horrors of the civil
war, but has also started to build a new national
identity and create State institutions that will turn
Sierra Leone into a functioning democratic society.
Even more important, Sierra Leone wants to do so by
maintaining its internal peace, promoting the rule of
law, observing democratic processes and creating
economic prosperity for its people. By any standard,
that is a colossal task, especially within the short time
frame within which we all want it to be achieved.

If history is anything to go by, there are very few -
if any - examples in the past in which nation- and
State-building have been a peaceful and democratic
affair. Democracy came to many countries only after a
certain level of economic prosperity had been achieved
and only after a strong and educated middle class had
developed. Economic prosperity was gained through
long and difficult processes that too often were
interrupted by economic crisis and misery. And, above
all, the process of building nations and of creating
functioning State institutions had taken most modern
nations centuries to accomplish.

We now expect Sierra Leone to make an
enormous historic leap forward by achieving peace,
democracy and prosperity - and this within a short
time span of only a few years. But Sierra Leone is one
of the poorest countries in the world. It does not have a
large educated middle class, and more than 70 per cent
of its population remains illiterate. Also, more than
70 per cent of its young people remain unemployed, its
child mortality rate is among the highest in the world
and its State institutions remain weak. Sierra Leone's
ethnic and linguistic diversity competes with its
national identity, and traditional forms of governance
compete with emerging modern Government
institutions. The challenges that need to be addressed
are therefore enormous. The question is how a poor
country such as Sierra Leone can achieve peace,
democracy and prosperity - something that most other
countries could not easily achieve under much better
circumstances.

I am raising this historical comparison because I
feel that we all have to recognize the magnitude and
uniqueness of what countries such as Sierra Leone are
trying to achieve. We must pay tribute to the political
09-51020

leadership both in the Government and in the
opposition, as well as to Sierra Leone's civil and
religious society, for their efforts, their courage and
their vision in having taken the difficult road towards
peace, democracy and prosperity. The recently
concluded joint communique that ended the March
outbreak of violence is proof of the new democratic
credentials of Sierra Leone's political leadership.

We also have to recognize that the road to peace,
democracy and prosperity for Sierra Leone will be a
bumpy, long and, at times, dangerous one. We must
anticipate derailments and mistakes. There is no magic
switch that can be turned on that would catapult Sierra
Leone into the future. There are no easy benchmarks
that will tell us that Sierra Leone is out of the woods.
What Sierra Leone will need to succeed is time,
patience, determined national leadership and continued
international support.

This brings me to the second issue - Sierra
Leone's importance in the regional context. Sierra
Leone's journey towards peace, democracy and
prosperity is taking place in a difficult regional
environment. The political and security situation in
West Africa remains highly precarious, and we are
seeing worrying signs of military coups, ethnic and
interreligious conflicts, and political intolerance
re-emerging. We are also seeing increasing threats from
international crime, illicit drug trafficking, smuggling,
the unfair exploration of natural resources, and illegal
fishing taking hold in West Africa. Given the
interdependence of most countries of the region, that
could ultimately threaten Sierra Leone's achievements.

On the other hand, a successful and peaceful
Sierra Leone could have a positive influence on
developments in the region. In fact, Sierra Leone,
along with other countries such as Ghana, could
become a model that could be followed by others and
prove that peace and democracy can bring benefits and
create prosperity. If we succeed in Sierra Leone, it
would send a positive message that even one of the
poorest countries in the world - a country that has
gone through ll years of exceptionally brutal civil war -
can build a functioning democratic State. Sierra Leone
is on the way towards presenting us with such a
success story. Let us not miss this chance. Sierra Leone
will need the international community to continue
providing political, financial and economic support,
but let us not forget that we, too, will need Sierra
Leone to foster regional peace and stability.
3
Let me now turn to the third issue - the new role
of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office
in Sierra Leone.

I hope that, over the past year, we have been able
to prove that the new concept of integrated
peacebuilding missions works and that it is possible to
draw down a large and expensive peacekeeping
operation and replace it with a much cheaper and
leaner peacebuilding mission. Let me here summarize
one of the most important points.

First, UNIPSIL today is a much leaner mission
with a light footprint. While at its height the
peacekeeping operation had a staff strength of about
20,000, the new peacebuilding mission is now staffed
by only 73. While the previous mission included
17,000 peacekeepers, the new peacebuilding mission
no longer has any military personnel. The new
peacebuilding mission has also become more national
in character; almost half of its staff are now locally
recruited, and 13 of them are national professionals.
The peacebuilding mission includes more specialists,
nationals and internationals, to develop sound technical
advice, and has considerably fewer administrative and
other support staff.

Second, despite becoming a much leaner
organizational structure, we have been able to maintain
a strong role as a political facilitator in the country, as
demonstrated by UNIPSIL's role in helping to solve the
recent outbreak of political violence in Sierra Leone
and in bringing about the joint communique. And
despite the much smaller staff, we have been able to
maintain a considerable field presence throughout the
country by joining hands with our United Nations
development partner agencies.

Third, we have been able to give the
peacebuilding mission a new orientation. Whereas the
previous peacekeeping mission focused mainly on
security, we are now focusing mainly on development.
For this reason, we have developed a strategy that is
based on integrating the political mandate of UNIPSIL
with the development mandates of members of the
United Nations country team. The result is the Joint
United Nations Vision for Sierra Leone that was
recently endorsed by the Government and the
Peacebuilding Commission. In addition to UNIPSIL,
17 United Nations agencies, funds or programmes have
signed up to the Joint Vision, working together on five
priority areas, a set of joint benchmarks and
21 programmes. Let me take this opportunity to thank
in particular the Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, Mr. Lynn Pascoe, for his support in getting the
new strategy accepted within the United Nations.

Fourth, in line with the Secretary-General's
policy, we have been able to reach an exceptional level
of operational integration between UNIPSIL and the
United Nations country team that includes a joint
strategic unit, a joint multi-donor trust fund, joint
regional field offices, joint outreach initiatives, a joint
medical clinic, joint security services and a joint
vehicle repair shop. Let me take this opportunity to
thank all my colleagues of the United Nations country
team, as well as the World Bank and the African
Development Bank, for their support and enthusiasm in
bringing about a truly integrated peacebuilding
operation. Our integration will be to the benefit of
Sierra Leone and will help to improve aid efficiency.

Fifth, we are now working jointly with the World
Bank and other development partners to improve aid
coordination and increase national ownership, in line
with the Paris Declaration. With the Ministry of
Finance, we are presently finalizing a new and simple
aid coordination structure. I am convinced that better
aid coordination can utilize much more effectively the
dollars that donors have pledged.

Sixth, we have been able to strengthen our
cooperation with the Peacebuilding Commission. The
recent special session was, in my view, an excellent
example of this cooperation between the Commission
in New York and a United Nations peacebuilding
mission in the field. The Peacebuilding Commission
has been and remains important to Sierra Leone. I
would like to take this opportunity to thank especially
Ambassador McNee for his great support and for
bringing the international community behind our
peacebuilding agenda.

Finally, we have been able to set up UNIPSIL in a
way that should make any future transition towards a
normal development presence, with a resident
coordinator system, easy. All programmes are
implemented by United Nations agencies; we share
professional staff with United Nations agencies; most
joint services, such as the regional field offices, are
already managed by different United Nations agencies;
and our new compound has been built with a View to
becoming a future United Nations House. In fact, it is
our integrated strategy, the Joint United Nations
09-51020
Vision, that is the conduit for a smooth transition in the
future.

Let me now turn to my last point, about funding.
The success of Sierra Leone's road towards becoming a
stable democratic country will largely depend on the
level at which the Government will be able to provide
a peace and democracy dividend for all Sierra
Leoneans. This in turn will depend on Sierra Leone's
ability to rally international financial support for its
Agenda for Change. Also, the credibility of the new
United Nations integrated peacebuilding mission will
depend on our ability to generate resources for the
Joint Vision.

I hope that we will be able to count on the
continuous support of the Security Council, and on the
Peacebuilding Commission to call on Member States to
participate in the forthcoming Consultative Group
meeting in London in November and contribute
towards Sierra Leone's development. I also hope that
Member States will support the United Nations multi-
donor trust fund and give our new approach to
peacebuilding the credibility it will need to succeed.

