Mr. Khan (Pakistan): I thank High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his informative briefing today and
for the comprehensive report submitted to the Security
Council earlier (see S/2012/813). We appreciate the
important role that he is playing. Mr. Inzko has given
us some good and some bad news.

The good news is that the country's fifth local
elections, held on 17 October and administered
completely by domestic authorities, were conducted
generally in line with democratic standards. We
congratulate the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina on
the success of those elections. We also welcome the
relatively calm and stable environment that prevails in
the country.

The bad news is alarming. The High Representative
has identified three disappointing developments: first,
little progress towards Euro-Atlantic integration;
secondly, direct challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement; and, thirdly, the intensification of divisive
and provocative rhetoric that could further Vitiate
the atmosphere and undermine long-term peaceful
coexistence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Those developments have led the High
Representative to cast off his usual optimism and to
warn the Council that progress on the five objectives
and two conditions has all but stalled. The most
disturbing concern is the Republika Srpska's open
defiance of the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, which is an intrinsic principle
built into the Dayton Agreement. Pakistan supports
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as well as the efforts to strengthen the
State at the national level, while preserving the rights
of all communal entities.

The Dayton Agreement has ensured peace
for 17 years. A direct challenge to the Agreement
should not be allowed to disrupt the fine and delicate
equilibrium that it has worked out. The sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina should
not be diluted. The Security Council must arrest any
drift towards dissolution.

Sharp political differences among the political
parties, as well as a deliberate effort to impair the
federal structure, will weaken the State and will divert
attention from the pressing issues of economic growth,
social development and efficient fiscal management.
We are glad to hear from Mr. Inzko that there are now
signs of rapprochement towards a new coalition.

We condemn the statements of senior officials of
the Republika Srpksa that deny the genocide committed
in Srebrenica in 1995, a fact which has been established
beyond the shadow of a doubt by the International Court
of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugloslavia. Such statements do serious harm to the
reconciliation process inside Bosnia and Herzegovina,
as well as within the region.

It is evident that there is a lack of progress on the
implementation of the five objectives and two conditions.
The time therefore is not right for considering the
closure of the Office of the High Representative. In
fact, in the present circumstances, there are compelling
reasons for the continuity of that mission.

It is vitally important that all parties recognize
the sanctity of the international legal framework for
the division of power. Pakistan supports all efforts to
ensure a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We urge the leaders of the country to
resolve their differences through dialogue with a View
to exploring common ground.

Today's meeting of the Security Council must send
the right signals. We urge the Council to continue to
assess the situation and play its role in steering all sides
away from growing estrangement towards engagement.
That is best for the consolidation and stability of the
State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. It is also good for
regional peace and security.

