Mr. Guehenno (spoke in French): I am grateful
to the Council for this opportunity today to brief it
once again on implementation of resolution 1308
(2000) by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and to share with the Council our efforts and some of
the challenges we face.

When I last reported to the Council on HIV/AIDS
and peacekeeping about three years ago, we were all
appalled by the estimates of the Joint United Nations
Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) and the World
Health Organization regarding the spread of the
epidemic. It was especially painful to realize that an
estimated 3 million people died of AIDS in 2000,
another 3 million died in 2001, and last year a further
3.1 million lives were destroyed by AIDS.

Despite our determination to face this challenge
worldwide, the number of persons infected by the virus
has continued to grow. In 2002, an estimated further 5
million people became infected, bringing the estimated
total of persons infected - adults and children living
with AIDS - to approximately 42 million. In and of
themselves, these numbers are overwhelming, but we
must not lose sight of the individual tragedies that lie
behind them.

Resolution 1308 (2000) recognized the
devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on all sectors and
levels of society. But its focus was on the vulnerability
of uniformed services, international peacekeeping
personnel and international civilian personnel deployed
in peacekeeping operations. When we speak of
peacekeepers, it is crucial to underscore that this
includes civilian staff as well as military and police
personnel.

In 2001, Mr. Piot and I announced that the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) and
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) had signed a cooperation framework to
work together on HIV/AIDS and peacekeeping. The
technical and advisory support from UNAIDS has been
fundamental to DPKO's response, both here at
Headquarters and in the field. Based on contributions
raised by UNAIDS from Denmark, DPKO has
established an HIV/AIDS Trust Fund and we are most
grateful for that contribution. All our efforts seek to
reduce the risk of peacekeepers contracting or
transmitting HIV while on mission.

(spoke in English)

One of our most concrete achievements is that
DPKO now has HIV/AIDS policy advisers, supported
by United Nations Volunteers, in four of our major

peacekeeping operations - in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, in Timor-Leste, in Ethiopia and
Eritrea and in Sierra Leone - and we will be

recruiting an HIV/AIDS policy adviser for Liberia. It is
our intention to deploy HIV/AIDS policy advisers in
all major peacekeeping operations. We have HIV/AIDS
focal points in six missions and are identifying others
in our remaining operations. UNAIDS currently funds
the position of an HIV/AIDS policy adviser working
within DPKO headquarters. She is coordinating overall
strategy and facilitating mission initiatives.

The importance of HIV/AIDS awareness training
was underscored not only by resolution 1308 (2000)
but also by the June 2001 Declaration of Commitment
by the United Nations General Assembly special
session on HIV/AIDS. I would like to update you today
on action we have been taking to strengthen existing
training programmes and materials and to introduce
new programmes where needed.

A primary element of our training strategy is the
update and improvement of our training materials. The
three publications, entitled "Protect yourself, and those
you care about, against HIV/AIDS", "HIV prevention
and behaviour change in international military
populations" and "Policy guidelines on HIV/AIDS
prevention and control for United Nations military
planners and commanders" are being reviewed and
simplified, in order to make them accessible to the
broadest possible audience.

With input from some 20 Member States, DPKO
has developed a pre-deployment training module on
HIV/AIDS. Through the conduct of four regional
seminars last year in Chile, Finland, Kenya and
Thailand, we obtained feedback on this module from
over 75 countries, including all major troop-
contributing countries.

Together with UNAIDS, DPKO distributes
HIV/AIDS awareness cards to deployed peacekeepers.
The cards cover the basic facts about the disease and
the United Nations Code of Conduct. They are
currently available in 10 languages. It is our goal to see
these cards become a standard feature of a
peacekeeper's uniform. UNAIDS has recently launched
a peer education kit for uniformed services, which
DPKO will be distributing to our peacekeeping
missions and to troop-contributing countries. We have
also participated in a working group to revise the
UNAIDS booklet "AIDS and HIV infection:
Information for United Nations employees and their
families".

HIV/AIDS awareness is a crucial component of
the train-the-trainer courses organized and sponsored
by DPKO to enhance national peacekeeping
capabilities. It is also central to mission-specific pre-
deployment training. Last month, for example, the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo HIV/AIDS policy
adviser participated in the training for Namibian troops
being deployed to Liberia. The HIV/AIDS policy
adviser for the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea is currently assisting with a similar programme
for Ethiopian peacekeepers.

To support in-mission programmes, there are now
mission training cells in eight peacekeeping operations
for military personnel. These cells work closely with
the HIV/AIDS policy advisers and focal points to
ensure that HIV awareness is included in induction
programmes. Similar induction training is conducted
for civilian police personnel. The HIV/AIDS policy
advisers provide training for civilian personnel and
civilian police. They also visit the contingents in the
field, keeping step with troop rotations, and assist
sector, contingent and unit commanders in designing
ongoing awareness programmes.

Partnerships are fundamental to DPKO's
response. In Sierra Leone, the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone (UN AMSIL) has joined forces with the
United Nations Development Fund for Women and the
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) to run
HIV/AIDS prevention, gender and human rights
awareness workshops for peacekeepers. In Ethiopia
and Eritrea, the training-of-trainers course for peer
educators has formed a new partnership with the local
group Bidho, which means challenge, which is the only
organization for people living with HIV/AIDS in
Eritrea. That organization is facilitating training on
discrimination and stigma.

Ninety-two countries currently contribute over
42,000 military personnel and civilian police. This
presents an immense challenge to our efforts to make
training culturally specific. It is therefore very
important for troop-contributing countries to
mainstream HIV awareness in their national training
programmes and to make use of the technical
assistance offered by UNAIDS. It would greatly help
us if - wherever possible - Member States could
identify individuals already trained as HIV/AIDS peer
educators. We could then build on their expertise to
reinforce our own initiatives. With this in mind, DPKO
is actively seeking police officers that have experience
as HIV peer educators or coordinators, when selecting
potential candidates for deployment.

It is also critical that we maintain high levels of
knowledge and training skills among our key personnel
dealing with HIV/AIDS issues. Last year, DPKO, in
cooperation with UNAIDS, UNFPA and the United
States and Norwegian departments of defence,
convened a workshop on malaria, HIV/AIDS and
related diseases in peacekeeping operations for senior
mission medical personnel and HIV/AIDS focal points.
A total of 20 troop-contributing countries were also
represented. This year, the HIV/AIDS policy advisers
were brought together for a training seminar in Sierra
Leone. DPKO and UNAIDS are already planning a
workshop for 2004.

But our efforts do not stop at HIV/AIDS
awareness and training. Some of the behaviour that
increases the risk of contracting or transmitting HIV,
such as engaging in sexual contact with commercial
sex workers, is unacceptable and damaging to the
central mission of peacekeeping.

I wish to underscore again a point I made last
month when I spoke to the Security Council on
resolution 1325 (2000), regarding women and peace
and security: the DPKO takes a zero-tolerance stance
regarding sexual abuse and exploitation by
peacekeeping personnel. For example, updated
disciplinary directives have been sent to missions, and
reporting and investigation mechanisms are being
strengthened. All personnel - whether military,
civilian or police - deployed in United Nations
peacekeeping operations are required to uphold the
highest standards of integrity. We seek to work with
Member States to ensure that those standards are met
and that cases of serious misconduct are properly
addressed.

Resolution 1308 (2000) also encouraged Member
States to provide voluntary confidential counselling
and testing as part of the preparation for participation
in peacekeeping missions. Voluntary confidential
counselling and testing were also endorsed by the
UNAIDS expert panel on HIV testing in United
Nations peacekeeping operations.

In 2001, during discussions focusing on the so-
called post-Phase V Working Group, the Secretariat
suggested that voluntary confidential counselling and
testing might be more universally performed if the
United Nations reimbursed troop contributors for the
technical costs of conducting HIV tests, both before
deployment and upon return. A number of Member
States opposed that approach, and therefore it has not
been formally pursued. It is the intention of DPKO to
bring this matter before the 2004 meeting of the post-
Phase V Working Group, and I very much hope that the
necessary consensus can be reached at that time.

DPKO is introducing voluntary confidential
counselling and testing capabilities into missions. Such
counselling and testing have been available in Timor-
Leste since February of this year. A voluntary
confidential counselling and testing centre has now
been established in our Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea.
The Mission recently held a two-week training course
for HIV/AIDS counsellors; the 21 participants included
military and civilian staff as well as United Nations
Volunteers. The Mission in Sierra Leone is planning a
similar training session. DPKO also just conducted an
assessment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
assist in planning for voluntary counselling and testing
facilities in the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). The
effort will continue into 2004, when other missions will
be assessed.

DPKO has also concluded a memorandum of
understanding with the United Nations Population
Fund for the provision of reproductive health items.
Condoms are now available to both staff and uniformed
personnel in all missions. Post-exposure prophylaxis
kits are held at our medical facilities for cases of
occupational exposure to HIV and of rape. Screened
blood supplies for transfusions have long been part of
our mission medical support.

Our efforts focus not only on how to reduce the
risks of HIV transmission, but also on how to capitalize
on the positive potential of peacekeepers as agents of
change. When we train troops in gender awareness,
human rights and child protection, we hope to
influence not only their own behaviour, but also their
ability to recognize and respond to sexual violence and
exploitation. That is part of creating a more secure
environment; it is central to our mandate.

Peacekeepers can also share their knowledge
about HIV with the local population. In Sierra Leone,
for example, troops have organized sensitization
workshops, cultural programmes, sporting activities
and dramatic presentations to increase the level of HIV
awareness in local communities. HIV/AIDS policy
advisers frequently include local groups in their
training sessions. In the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE), awareness programmes
involve both contingents and the larger community.
They target commercial sex workers, hotels, schools,
youth and women's groups and local institutions. The
Mission's work with the Eritrean and Ethiopian armed
forces is the subject of the first in a series of UNAIDS
case studies on engaging uniformed services in the
fight against AIDS. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the HIV/AIDS policy adviser has worked with
street children and local police. And in Timor-Leste, a
six-week schedule of living testimony by an HIV-
positive trainer included a special HIV peer education
programme for the Timorese police force and local
non-governmental organizations. The United Nations
Mission of Support in East Timor is collaborating with
Family Health International to ensure that that
technical support continues. DPKO also includes
HIV/AIDS awareness seminars in its training
curriculums for local police forces.

I should especially like to acknowledge the very
personal role played by the many United Nations
Volunteers working in our missions, in reaching out to
local populations affected by HIV and AIDS. For
instance, in UNMEE, United Nations Volunteers have
trained former commercial sex workers in tie-dye
techniques to provide them with an alternative source
of income. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
United Nations Volunteers held a fund-raising event
with MONUC's Afro-Caribbean group. They raised
money to cover school fees for children orphaned by
AIDS.

DPKO is also working to assist host nations at the
strategic level. In the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for example, the HIV/AIDS policy adviser is
providing guidance to the national armed forces on
how to mainstream awareness programming. All policy
advisers are members of the respective host-country
United Nations Theme Groups on HIV/AIDS. Those
Theme Groups assist in the development and
implementation of national strategies to respond to the
epidemic.

Equally important, our strategy has been to
reinforce support for the issue within DPKO. During a
joint conference in New York, Force Commanders and
Chief Administration Officers were briefed on DPKO
HIV/AIDS-related policy and initiatives. Missions are
also setting up HIV/AIDS task forces to develop and
oversee implementation of programmes at the field
level. In Ethiopia and Eritrea, such a task force has
proved instrumental in maintaining the energy of the
Mission's response.

How do we measure the impact of our efforts?
How do we know that behaviour is changing? Reliable
data on HIV prevalence rates rarely exist in conflict-
affected countries, and we are not in a position to carry
out epidemiological surveillance of peacekeeping
troops. But DPKO is carrying out more systematic
mission assessments. We are working with UNAIDS to
set up monitoring and evaluation systems, using such
tools as a knowledge, attitude and practice survey
specifically designed for the environment of
peacekeeping operations. UNAIDS and the United
Nations Children's Fund conducted a survey on the
implementation of the United Nations workplace policy
on HIV/AIDS in order to identify and respond to
shortcomings. Conducting a similar survey within
DPKO will help us to further develop our learning
strategy for staff.

We need to ensure that we have dynamic and
responsive HIV/AIDS programmes for the entire
duration of a peacekeeping mandate. Our efforts to date
are only the initial steps in what we envisage as an
expanding and constantly evolving programme. That
will mean fully staffing and supporting the HIV/AIDS
offices; it will also mean strengthening existing
partnerships and building new ones within the United
Nations, with host nations and with Member States. If
we are ever to turn the tide on this devastating
pandemic, statements of good intentions must be
translated into concrete and sustained action on the
ground.

