Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): My delegation thanks
the South African presidency for convening today's
important debate.

In my very first statement to the Council on
the situation in the Middle East in April 2015 (see S/PV.7430), I spoke of a growing tide of complex and
interconnected challenges that threatened to push the
region into a fresh vortex of violence and instability.
Today, as I take the floor in what will be my last
statement on the issue, I say with a heavy heart that
the grim situation prevailing on the ground appears
to have confirmed some of our worst fears. Riven by
protracted and emerging conflicts, escalating violence
and worsening humanitarian crises, the Middle East's
geostrategic landscape is clouded by competing and
divergent interests among the major regional Powers.
The role that external actors are playing adds another
layer of complexity to an already fraught regional
situation. Meanwhile, non-State actors and terrorist
organizations have tried to exploit the turmoil to gain a
foothold across the region. The activities of these terror
outfits, including the Kurdistan Workers' Party and its
affiliates, have created legitimate security concerns for
regional States. At this precarious moment in history,
reconciliation within the region is imperative if we
are to avoid further instability. It is also essential if
we are to achieve our shared vision of a peaceful and
prosperous Middle East.

The framework for regional peace must be built
on the abiding virtues of mutual respect and peaceful
coexistence, which are not merely principles of
international law or the Charter of the United Nations
but also constitute the fundamental essence of the
Islamic teachings of amity, goodwill and brotherhood.
Guided by those considerations, Pakistan's Prime
Minister Imran Khan has been consulting with the
leaders of Saudi Arabia and Iran to forge unity within
the ranks of the Muslim Ummah. Pakistan will continue
to play its part in promoting peace and stability in the
region, and there are certain points that we consider
critically important.

First, durable peace can be achieved only through
inclusive political solutions. We must therefore
prioritize respect for dialogue and diplomacy.

Secondly, de-escalatory steps and
confidence-building measures are vital to reducing
tensions and preventing the eruption of new conflicts.
In that connection, we welcome the recent gains
made in advancing the political process in Syria. We
are also encouraged by the positive overtures by the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for Yemen on the
political situation in the country. That momentum must
be sustained.

Thirdly, it is critical to abandon narrow national
interests and instead invest in lasting stability. Any
attempts to shape the region according to specific
political preferences are counterproductive and must
be avoided.

Fourthly, while the stability of the Middle East
has always been a question of global concern, the
involvement of the international community must be
based on an unequivocal commitment to multilateral
solutions and political processes. Not only are the threat
or use of sanctions, embargoes and kinetic actions
a throwback to imperial tactics, the recent history of
the region also affirms that unilateral measures have
brought only greater suffering and pain to its peoples.
Yet nowhere is this more apparent than in the case of
the occupied Palestinian territories, where established
norms of international law, including Security
Council resolutions, continue to be deliberately and
systematically flouted. Meanwhile, the continued
military occupation and expansion of settlement activity
in the occupied territory, including East Jerusalem,
along with the looming threat of the annexation of the
West Bank, have not only undermined the goal of a
two-State solution, they have also imperilled peace and
security in the Middle East and beyond.

Pakistan's solidarity with the people of Palestine is
firm and unwavering. It is, after all, an abiding lesson of
history that attempts to suppress and subjugate people
living under foreign occupation and to deny them
their fundamental rights, including the right to self-
determination, are ultimately bound to fail. Yesterday,
Kashmiris across the world marked the seventy-second
anniversary of the illegal Indian occupation of Jammu
and Kashmir. Next month the Palestinians will mark
the seventy-second anniversary of a partition plan that
outlined the creation of an independent Palestinian
State. Despite the fact that the continuing tragedy of
the Palestinians and the Kashmiris still waits to be
addressed, they are nonetheless reassured in their
conviction that while it may be dark and forbidding,
the night of occupation will one day yield to the light of
freedom and dignity for them and other people living
under foreign occupation.

Let me say finally that your own struggle against
apartheid, Mr. President, is itself living testimony to
that eternal prophecy.

