Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): Your
presence today is very much welcome, Mr. President. I
would like to congratulate and welcome President-elect
Preval and to thank the Special Representative,
Mr. Valdes, for his sustained contribution.

I align myself with the statement to be made
shortly by the Austrian presidency on behalf of the
European Union.

This morning, I believe it is vital that the Security
Council and the United Nations as a whole give their
clear, committed, long-term support to Haiti. Since
1995 there have been six United Nations missions in
Haiti. Now is the time to deliver the simple message
that we all stand behind the new Government of Haiti
and recognize our responsibility to be there for it and
recognize the role of that Government in leading the
process in Haiti.

Peacebuilding has three essential elements. The
first is to consolidate the democratic process, to build
democratic institutions based on the rule of law. The
immediate task is thus to get through the second round
of elections. But elections are not an end in
themselves; it is what comes after elections, what one
puts in place. That is the big challenge for Haiti.

The second element is to tackle poverty and
promote economic recovery in one of the poorest
nations on Earth. The Minister from Guyana referred to
the Millennium Development Goals. They are the basic
elements that one would hope to see a Haitian
Government put in place. But to do that is difficult
enough for any country; for Haiti in its present plight it
is exceedingly difficult. So there is a need for all of us
to rally behind those priorities on the basis of
programmes prepared and brought forward by the
Government. The extension of the Interim Cooperation
Framework to December 2007 is therefore a welcome
step in the right direction, but so much more is needed.

The third component, in my view, is to deliver
security. At the moment, the role of peacekeepers is
vital, but there must also be progress on disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration, as well as reform of
the Haitian national police - referred to by a number
of my colleagues - which was actually requested in
resolution 1608 (2005). Here again, it is basic to
security that the police take on a larger role and that
the "no-go" areas in the capital and the other problems
be tackled.

It is obvious from this discussion and from what
we know that the challenges are immense. The United
Kingdom hopes that today's meeting will be a signal
from the international community of our commitment
to provide sustained support as the country embarks on
a very new future - one in which we wish the country
every success. As I said before, we have to be there in
order to support it.
Finally, we can very much accept the draft
presidential statement prepared by your delegation.

