Mr. Mounzer (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We condemn Mr. Mladenov's continued failure
to deal with the situation in the occupied Syrian Golan
and with ongoing Israeli violations and practices there,
which are part of this particular agenda item. They also
form an integral part of Mr. Mladenov's mandate as
Special Coordinator.

This debate coincides with the upcoming 50-year
anniversary of Israel's occupation of Arab territories.
That includes systematic and documented violations
by Israel of international humanitarian law and human
rights law. The international community has not taken
real steps to end the occupation, which has encouraged
Israel to escalate its aggression and its unprecedented
settlement policy, the latest illustration of which is the
bill seeking to legalize the outposts.

The Security Council should immediately
implement resolution 2334 (2016). That resolution,
which was adopted weeks ago, condemns settlement
activity in the occupied Palestinian territory. The
resolution should also apply to Israeli occupation
policies in the occupied Syrian Golan. The Israeli
Government decided to establish 19 new districts and
400 housing units in Katzrin settlement, built on the
ruins ofthe Syrian village ofKasreen, and has increased
the settlers' numbers in the occupied Syrian Golan by
adding 750 farms. Those are matters not covered by
Mr. Mladenov in his briefing.

Syria has a principled position in support of the
rights of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
to an independent State on all of its national territory,
with Jerusalem as its capital, and to the right of return
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 194
(III) of 1948. The war from which we suffer in Syria is
due in large part to our refusal to succumb to pressure
to relinquish our support for the Palestinian people and
their just cause.

Israel still refuses to return the occupied Syrian
Golan to our homeland of Syria. Moreover, Israel has
not implemented resolution 497 (1981). It continues
systematically to Violate international humanitarian
law and human rights law with respect to our people
in the occupied Syrian Golan, with a view to erasing
the Syrian identity of the Golan and separating it from
the Syrian motherland. Israel has confiscated land,
expanded settlements and demolished homes. Recently,
that Government demolished the home of citizen
Bassam Ibrahim. Israel also arrested an elderly man,
aged 70, named Asa'ad Al-Waly, who died days ago in
an Israeli prison after being sentenced to eight months
of imprisonment for building a home on his own land.
That is a violation of international law, which prohibits
any occupying forces from confiscating the property
of the citizens of occupied territory, in this case the
Golan. The Golan is Arab Syrian land that Syrians have
inherited from their ancestors.

Israel continues looting the resources of the Golan,
distorting its history and plundering its antiquities,
and has planted more than 20 million land mines. It
has deprived steadfast Syrians on their territory of
the right to study using the Syrian national education
curriculum in Arabic. It has deprived them of the
right to carry Syrian identity cards and the to build
national Syrian hospitals. Israel continues its arrest
and coercion policy, victimizing scores of Syrians in
the Golan. The Syrian Government calls for pressuring
Israel for the immediate release from prison of Sidqui
Al-Maqt - the Syrian Mandela - and his co-prisoners
Iyad Al-Johari and Amal Abu Saleh, who are being held
in inhumane conditions in Israeli detention centres, as
well as rescinding the unjust sentences of Amal Abu
Saleh and a female prisoner, Bashira Mahmoud.

Since the beginning of the events in Syria, Israel,
the occupying Power, has added a new chapter to its
annals of terrorist aggression, in direct violation of
the Disengagement of Forces Agreement and Security
Council resolutions, in particular those resolutions
concerning counter-terrorism. It has provided support
of all kinds to armed terrorist groups in the area of
separation in the occupied Syrian Golan, including
the Al-Nusra Front and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant, facilitating their crossing of the ceasefire
line. It treats wounded terrorists in its hospitals with a
view to allowing them to return to Syria and continue
their terrorist activities. It has built a two-kilometre
berm that crosses the ceasefire line, with illegal gates
for use by armed terrorist groups, to the great concern
of the Syrian Government and the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force. That is well known to
the member States of the Council, but apparently not to
Mr. Mladenov.

While continuing its terrorism, policies of
aggression and defiance of international laws, norms
and resolutions and its support to terrorist groups,
Israel perpetrated a new, treacherous act of aggression
against the territory of Syria after midnight on
13 January. The launch of a large number missiles
by its warplanes north of Lake Tiberias, led to a fire
on the periphery of Al-Mezzeh airport in Damascus.
Apparently Mr. Mladenov and the United Nations do
not know about that particular act of aggression. This
illustrates that Israel and terrorism are two sides of the
same coins.

We call upon the Security Council to take
immediate action to punish Israel for its aggression and
to prevent it from being repeated. The Security Council
is also called upon to take immediate action against
Israel and force it to end its aggression and violations
and its occupation of the occupied Arab territories,
including the occupied Syrian Golan, and to withdraw
to withdraw to the borders of4 June 1967 in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, in
particular resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973), 497
(1981) and 2334 (2016). We reiterate that Syria has a
sovereign right over the occupied Syrian Golan up to
the line of 4 June 1967. It is not a right that is up for
negotiation, nor can it be waived. We are not asking for
concessions from Israel, which it describes as painful.
We are referring to lands and rights that have been
usurped and should be restored to their rightful owners
and holders. Israeli settlers will have to leave our land
in Golan sooner or later.

In conclusion, we reject the attempts by some

delegations to undermine the substance of the item on
today's agenda, which is dedicated to discussing how to
end the Israeli occupation of Arab lands, including the
Syrian Golan, and not to attempts to mislead the Council
through the discussion ofthe internal affairs ofcountries.
Not wanting to be part of those reprehensible attempts,
I will not reply or respond to the false allegations made
by certain countries, especially those that harbour,
support and finance terrorists, or that promote sabotage
and extremism in Syria and are working hard to derail
any peaceful solution to this crisis by intervening in our
internal affairs - in particular Qatar, Saudi Arabia, the
United Kingdom, the United States, France and others.
They use the diaspora of global terrorism as a political
tool to put pressure on my Government to change its
choices and positions.

