Mr. Rosselli Frieri (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I am honoured to take the floor again in the Chamber
and in particular under your presidency, Ambassador
Van Oosterom.

I thank the Kingdom of the Netherlands for
convening today's debate. I also thank Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres, Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat
and Ms. Fatimata Toure' for their briefings earlier today.

It has already been done by others, but nonetheless
Uruguay would like to pay tribute to the men and women
of all countries who have served in peacekeeping
operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved and continue to save countless lives. Regrettably,
many Blue Helmets have lost their lives in service to
the United Nations. We owe them an enormous debt of
gratitude.

Uruguay is one of the 20 largest contributors of
troops and police and fully agrees with the concept of
collective action to improve peacekeeping operations.
The Security Council, troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat play a key role in such
operations. The Security Council must understand that
political solutions will always guide the design and
deployment of operations and that political momentum
must be maintained throughout the various cycles of
conflict. Therefore, the political strategies that underpin
peacekeeping operations must have the support of a
united Security Council, without which the operations'
success could be seriously affected.

The Security Council also has the responsibility to
ensure the full functionality of a peacekeeping operation
once it has been deployed, which includes, among other
things, requesting and obtaining from host States full
respect for and compliance with the terms agreed to in
the status of forces agreements. Those agreements are
safeguards that protect the personnel that a country has
voluntarily seconded to a peacekeeping operation. The
Security Council has not always been able to demand
and ensure that host countries comply with the terms of
status of forces agreements.

With regard to troop- and police-contributing
countries, they bear the direct responsibility for
ensuring that they send peacekeepers who are properly
equipped and trained and prepared to implement all the
tasks under a mandate and in strict compliance with the
standards of conduct of the United Nations, in particular
those that pertain to the policy of zero tolerance against
exploitation and sexual abuse.

On that issue, my delegation would like to
underscore the point that national restrictions - the so-
called caveats - be they declared or, even worse, not
declared; the lack of effective chains of command and
control; the refusal to obey orders; the failure to respond
to attacks against civilians; and the lack of equipment
cannot be tolerated, given that they undermine the
shared responsibility for effective mandate delivery.
Moreover, the increase in the frequency of attacks
deliberately targeting United Nations staff and facilities
underscores the need for peacekeepers to be given
clear rules for their effective, proportionate and robust
defence against such attacks.

That topic has been addressed in detail by the
Santos Cruz report, which ends with a series ofpractical
recommendations. We highlight the importance of
implementing those recommendations, while recalling
the need to implement the recommendations of previous
reports, such as the 2015 High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations report (see S/2015/446) or the
Cammaert report, which have not necessarily received
the attention or response that they deserve.

With regard to the Secretariat, its role is decisive in
terms of providing advice and making recommendations
on addressing the reconfiguration needs of operations.
We acknowledge the important efforts that the
Secretariat is carrying out as part of the process of the
strategic reviews of the main peacekeeping operations.
We believe that those reviews are a vital exercise
within our efforts to adapt peacekeeping operations to
current needs.

We also commend the efforts we have seen in the
different forums where the theme of peacekeeping is
being addressed. Among them, we point to the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, which recently
wrapped up its session, which resulted in various
points of agreement on sensible and topical aspects of
peacekeeping, such as the security and performance of
peacekeepers, the concept ofthe protection of civilians,
and triangular cooperation. The Fifth Committee will
soon turn its attention to the peacekeeping budget. It is
essential that Member States reaffirm their commitment
to the peacekeeping operations reform process and
provide operations with sufficient resources to allow
them to achieve their mandates.

Uruguay also underscores the useful ministerial
meetings on peacekeeping, which have proven their
worth as platforms for achieving concrete outcomes
on issues, such as the generation of forces, through
new agreements.

In conclusion, my delegation believes it is crucial that
we frame those efforts within the broader United Nations
reform efforts being pursued by the Secretary-General,
that is, management reform and the restructuring of the
peace and security pillar. Both reform proposals by the
Secretary-General, could, depending on the decisions
of Member States, have a major positive impact on the
future of peacekeeping operations.

