Mr. Mahbubani (Singapore): The Council, Sir, is
greatly honoured that this meeting is being personally
chaired by the Foreign Minister of Norway, because
this demonstrates your country's commitment to this
issue and to other issues in the Horn of Africa.
Certainly, we would like to begin by congratulating
you on your initiative to launch the Security Council
mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea. I hope this
demonstrates also that elected members can make a
difference in the work of the Council. We also want to
join our colleague from Mexico in congratulating
Ambassador Kolby on the leadership he provided
before, during and after the mission. We further thank
the Government of Norway for the aircraft and
logistical support that were provided us. We also want
to thank the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and
Eritrea (UNMEE) and the Secretariat staff for their
vital role in making arrangements for the visit.

I would also like at this juncture to pay special
tribute to the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ambassador Legwaila Joseph Legwaila, and
his team in UNMEE for their sterling work and for
their tireless efforts in furthering the peace process.
The one thing I learned when I travelled down there is
that Ambassador Legwaila does not have a simple
nine-to-five job. Indeed, he seems to be on the move all
the time between the two countries and visiting all
corners of the border. We have every confidence in
Ambassador Legwaila and we fully support his work in
Eritrea and Ethiopia. We believe that as the mandate of
UNMEE is up for renewal - and I gather it is up for
renewal very soon, on 15 March - it is important for
the Council to give strong endorsement of and a clear
mandate for its continued work.

We believe that the Security Council Mission to
Ethiopia and Eritrea was indeed timely. I can say this
with some conviction because, before we left, I
actually had some personal questions as to whether or
not our timing was right, given the fact that the
Boundary Commission's decision was postponed. But I
thought, having returned from the visit, that indeed it
was very useful because it actually sensitized Council
members to the real dynamic and the situation on the
ground in Ethiopia and Eritrea. I must confess that I
have come back with a heightened sense of the
complex challenges that we face in the coming weeks.
Certainly the Security Council will face a real
challenge in handling the issue of the decision of the
Boundary Commission, and we hope that the Council
will rise to the challenge. Next week, when we engage
in our informal consultations on the subject, I hope that
the Council members will seriously reflect on this
issue.

The road to peace in Ethiopia and Eritrea has
been long and difficult. That is why we believe that the
leaders of both countries deserve tremendous
commendation for their resolve and determination to
move the peace process forward to forge a lasting
peace. As Ambassador Kolby stressed earlier, when he
presented his report: both parties remain committed to
the Algiers Agreement. Prime Minister Meles Zenawi
has said that Ethiopia will continue to be engaged
positively, while President Isaias Afwerki has affirmed
that the implementation of agreements already signed
should not pose serious problems. We welcome both of
these public commitments to work constructively with
UNMEE to implement the final and binding decision of
the Boundary Commission in accordance with the
Algiers Agreements, and we hope that our visit has in
many ways strengthened the commitment of these
leaders.

As the legal ruling on the boundary question will
soon be announced, it is useful for us to look ahead to
prepare for the next phase. While we note that the two
countries may have differing perspectives on how to
implement the boundary decision, this only
underscores, in our view, the importance of both sides
engaging with Ambassador Legwaila to work out a
common understanding on the modalities for
implementing delimitation and demarcation
expeditiously. However, regardless of the detailed
modalities, one key principle to emphasize - and I am
glad Ambassador Kolby emphasized this in his report
also - is that both parties should refrain from any
unilateral or destabilizing actions in the run-up to and
following the boundary decision.

At this point, I would like to make an observation
about an apparent paradox in the situation that we face.
On the one hand, there has been relatively good
compliance - indeed, I would say very good
compliance f with UNMEE in implementing the
Algiers Agreements on the ground. But, on the other
hand, there is also considerable uneasiness and,
perhaps, some tension in the atmosphere. Evidently, the
deep wounds and the hurt arising from two and one
half years of conflict will take time to heal.
Nevertheless, we will call on the two countries and
their leadership to make every effort to rise above the
unhappy past and, as has been alluded to by both
Governments, to look forward to a new chapter of
coexistence in which they can focus on combating
poverty and on socio-economic development for the
benefit of their peoples.

In this regard, we would like to briefly draw
attention to four critical aspects that we think are
fundamental to promoting normalization and
rehabilitation.

First, demining remains a top priority, as
Ambassador Kolby has said, in order to create
conditions for the safe return of internally displaced
persons, as well as to allow affected areas to be
restocked for traditional uses like agriculture and
livestock-grazing. I think one of the most vivid
memories we will take back from the visit is actually
observing the education of young children on
demining. To see the fields firsthand is a much more
vivid educational experience than anything we can say
in this room. We believe that the demining work is a
very important part of UNMEE's work.

Secondly, it is important for both sides to carry
out the release of the remaining prisoners of war and
civilian detainees without preconditions and delay, as
provided for under the Algiers Agreement.

Thirdly, effective demobilization needs to be
carried out so that scarce resources can be channelled
into national development and rehabilitation.

Fourthly, confidence-building measures should be
encouraged in order to rebuild the links between civil
society on both sides of the border. In this connection,
we are encouraged by the recent meeting of religious
leaders in Addis Ababa and Asmara, which represents
a significant breakthrough in enhancing people-to-
people contacts, and I am glad that Ambassador Kolby
also arranged for us to meet the religious leaders on
both sides. We certainly agree with a key point that
Ambassador Kolby made when he spoke at the Mereb
River Bridge: we now need to build bridges between
minds on both sides.

At the same time, we also urge both countries to
demonstrate flexibility and to cooperate with UNMEE
on all the other outstanding issues contained in the
statement ofthe President of the Security Council of 16
January 2002, including, firstly, ensuring freedom of
movement for UNMEE; secondly, disclosure of
information on militia and police units in the
Temporary Security Zone; thirdly, resolution of the
status-of-forces agreement; fourthly, the provision of
specific mine information; and fifthly, establishing a
direct air corridor between Asmara and Addis Ababa.
If I may make a personal comment here, I find it very
puzzling that we cannot get an agreement to establish a
flight that goes in a straight line between Addis Ababa
and Asmara. Our failure to achieve this is really quite
surprising.

We hope that resolving these issues will help in
promoting mutual confidence and demonstrating good
faith in moving the peace process forward. Indeed, as
both sides have actually complied with all the key
issues of these Agreements, it will be even better
testimony of their good will if they can cooperate in
these few remaining areas that we have listed in the
presidential statement.

Finally, let me emphasize the important role of
the international community in supporting the two
countries' steps to peace. Some members have pledged
practical assistance in the form of demining and
developmental programmes. Others, including the
guarantors and facilitators of the Algiers peace process,
the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the
Security Council can provide credible political support.
I agree with Ambassador Kolby that our meeting with
the Secretary-General of the OAU, Amara Essy, was
very important in this regard. Clearly, the subregion
has suffered conflict and instability for far too long.
Eritrea and Ethiopia are now at the threshold of a new
chapter in their history and they deserve every bit of
support and encouragement from the global community
as they work with UNMEE towards a lasting peace.

