Mr. Scares (Portugal): The successful conclusion of
the Hebron agreement had led us to believe that Israel
and the Palestinians would at this moment be focusing on
the timely implementation of all agreements already
concluded and would by now be starting talks on the final
status of the occupied territories.

Instead we are now facing an element of
destabilization that risks jeopardizing the atmosphere
which should prevail to enable the parties to tackle the
crucial issues that remain to be addressed. I am referring,
naturally, to the decision by the Israeli Government to
build a new settlement in the southern part of East
Jerusalem, in the Jabal Abu Ghneim area.

This decision increases the frustration felt by all
those who support the peace process. Unfortunately, it
also encourages, perversely, the forces that are, directly or
indirectly, opposing peace.

The Israeli Govemment's decision constitutes a
violation of numerous resolutions of the Security Council
and General Assembly, and also of the Fourth Geneva
Convention. The Portuguese Government regrets the
decision and wishes the Israeli Government had not taken
it.

We believe that this measure is inconsistent with the
terms of reference upon which the peace process is based,
in particular Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973). We cannot accept any decisions that aim at
creating facts on the ground, prejudging the outcome of
the final-status negotiations. Such measures can only
undermine the indispensable trust and confidence that the
parties must build in order to achieve a just,
comprehensive and longstanding political settlement and
to establish a new relationship based on cooperation, from
which all countries of the region will benefit.

Moreover, the construction or the expansion of
settlements, particularly in East Jerusalem -- perhaps the
most sensitive and emotional issue of the entire peace
process -- would create additional obstacles to the
accomplishment of the ultimate goals of peace and
cooperation envisaged by the parties. It will also further
complicate the task of those engaged in mediating or
assisting the parties in the peace process.
Security Council 3745th meeting
Fifty-second year 5 March [997

The presidency of the European Union will also
address the Council on this subject. I should like to stress
that Portugal fully subscribes to its statement.

Portugal firmly believes that there is no alternative to
the Middle East peace process. Therefore, we call upon the
Israeli authorities to refrain from any concrete action on
Jabal Abu Ghneim that would have a negative impact on
that process.

The Council must be clear and firm. Our purpose is to
preserve and encourage the peace process. Therefore, we
must urge parties to live up to their commitments and to
comply with their obligations under international law and
with the agreements they have reached. No one will
understand or accept it if the momentum towards peace is
lost as a result of disruptive actions by any of the parties.

