Mr. Bermudez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I
too wish to convey my thanks to the Secretary-General
for his briefing. We are grateful to the presidency of
New Zealand and to you, Foreign Minister Murray
McCulley, for convening today's meeting and for your
presence at the Security Council today.

Uruguay is concerned at the lack of progress in
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and its humanitarian,
political and security consequences in both countries
and the entire region. Unfortunately, in the past few
months we have had no significant news with respect
to the peace process. We were hoping to see a quicker
pace and a greater impact following the Quartet report
(S/20l6/595, annex) but that has not been the case. So
far, the parties have not taken any measure to reverse
the trends that are threatening the two-State solution
despite the helpful recommendations set out in the
report.

Despite the fact that there seems to have been a
gradual reduction in terrorist acts and the general level
ofviolence, the political climate has not really changed,
and we still see a paralysis when it comes to the possible
renewal of direct bilateral negotiations. In Uruguay's
opinion, as the Quartet's report rightly pointed out,
Israel's continuing construction of settlements is a
serious threat to peace. The fact that only a few days
after the publication of the report, Israel announced its
decision to build 560 new houses in the West Bank and
240 in East Jerusalem, without considering the report's
recommendations, is a very bad sign however we look
at it.

We reiterate our concerned about the protracted
stalemate in the peace process between Israel and
Palestine. Political signals should be sent so as to
break the vicious circle of misunderstanding and
violent clashes that undermine the Palestinian people's
aspirations to finally live in peace after half a century
of occupation and a serious humanitarian situation,
particularly in Gaza, which has worsened after every
armed escalation. We hope that both countries can
overcome their differences and reach an understanding
on the key issues that divide them. Today, almost 23
years after the Oslo Accords, at which both countries
recognized each other and laid the groundwork for
working towards a solution based on two independent
States, we were sorry to see that the Quartet indicates
a situation of continuing violence, attacks on civilians,
incitements to violence and weakening trust, none of
which is conducive to achieving a peaceful solution to
the conflict.

The importance of taking urgent measures to
reverse the current stalemate in the conflict compels
us to reiterate our call to the parties to resume their
contact on a basis capable of meeting the desires
of both sides. That means dealing with terrorism
in the Palestinian territories, ending Israel's illegal
settlement of those territories, silencing incitement to
violence through hate speech and striving for a genuine
commitment to achieving a two-State solution through
appropriate policies, such as the Quartet recommends
in its latest report.

I should reiterate that seeking solutions to issues
related to international peace and security is a priority
for Uruguay, and we will work unceasingly to try to
bring the parties together to that end. We do not ignore
the continuing serious problems, but we refuse to
give up hope and would like to remind everyone that
more complex situations have been resolved when the
requisite political will could be found, such as occurred
with the Camp David accords and the Sinai agreement
between Egypt and Israel. Similarly, in 1994, the State
of Israel and the Kingdom of Jordan were able to arrive
at a peace acceptable to both parties.

While Uruguay believes that the achievement of a
lasting solution is up to the two parties to the conflict,
the international community also plays a significant
role in it, particularly since up to now the parties have
been unable to reach an agreement on their own. It is
therefore important that the international community
step up its efforts to support the process and encourage
the parties to resume a dialogue and sit down once
again at the negotiating table, with a View to coming
up with a peaceful, just, negotiated and lasting solution
in accordance with international law. In that regard,
we emphasize the importance of ensuring that the
parties come up with a specific timetable and measures
that each of them has to take in areas where the path
to a solution has been blocked, such as combating
terrorism, demonstrating unity within the Palestinian
Government and agreeing on a process for removing
the illegal settlements.

Uruguay is ready to support and collaborate on
any proposal that can bring both parties back to the
negotiating table and make progress with the peace
process. In that regard, we commend the Arab Peace
Initiative, the French initiative and any others that may
emerge. Lastly, I would like to conclude by saying
that, sadly, almost 70 years since the process began,
and despite massive efforts, we still see no closure.
The international community continues to call for
a negotiated political agreement, the only way out of
this endless tunnel of death and destruction. I urge the
parties to listen to those calls and allow us to help them.
We must not forget that the most important part of
coexistence among States is peace; nor should we allow
generations of young people and children to continue to
grow up in mistrust, fear and hatred.

