Mr. Takasu (Japan): First of all, I would like to
thank you, Sir, for organizing an open debate on this
important subject. I would also like to express
gratitude to the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2009/ 189) and my appreciation to Under-Secretary-
General Pascoe for his assessment on what has been
learned from past experiences.

The peaceful settlement of disputes is a core
function of the United Nations in maintaining peace
and security. In accordance with Chapter VI of the
Charter, the parties to any dispute and the Security
Council are obliged to seek a solution through peaceful
means such as negotiation and mediation. The
Secretary-General also has a special role under the
Charter in promoting the peaceful settlement of
disputes.
Mediation should play a more important role in
promoting peace in a cost-effective manner. That is
especially true as the financial and human resources of
conflict management and peace operations have grown
to an unprecedented level. We need to place a higher
priority and focus on mediation activities in the United

Nations.

In the history of United Nations mediation, some
cases - such as El Salvador, Guatemala, Namibia,
Cambodia, Mozambique and many others - were
more successful than other cases. From those
experiences, we may point out that United Nations
mediation is more effective when it is matched with
joint efforts by the various stakeholders. The modality
of mediation needs to be adapted to each circumstance.
The level and type of United Nations engagement vary
from playing a lead role in some places to supporting
the efforts of other parties. It is important, however, to
coordinate and ensure the coherence of mediation
efforts by various actors. The United Nations should
strengthen partnerships with lead countries, groups of
stakeholders such as international contact groups,
regional and subregional organizations and, in some
cases, non-governmental actors.

United Nations mediation activity has a
comparative advantage in terms of its legitimacy,
impartiality and convening power. The United Nations
should focus on the following areas, based on its rich
experience and the diverse tools at its disposal, ranging
from the provision of security to humanitarian and
recovery assistance.

First, in terms of the provision of appropriate
support to mediators, the United Nations needs to
provide professional, technical, administrative and
logistical support to all kinds of mediation efforts by
different actors, including the United Nations itself, of
course, but also regional and subregional
organizations.

Secondly, in terms of the development of future
mediators, the United Nations should help develop the
next generation of mediators at all levels within and
outside of the United Nations. We fully agree with the
Secretary-General that the generation change now
under way and qualified senior mediators and their
experienced support teams are key to successful
mediation. We support the serious efforts that are
needed to train and build United Nations mediation
capacities.
Thirdly, in terms of comprehensive engagement
after peace agreements, the United Nations needs to
provide comprehensive and integrated conflict
resolution support by making full use of field offices
and the United Nations funds and agencies throughout
countries.

We are mindful that mediation is by no means a
simple task, but we hope that the United Nations will
continue to make the utmost effort to strengthen this
activity. In particular, I would like to emphasize three
key questions that the United Nations could address in
pursuit of successful mediation in the coming weeks.

First, in order to lay a solid foundation for
durable peace after a peace agreement is signed, we
should examine in depth how social and economic
stability aspects and peacebuilding aspects can be
incorporated from the beginning of mediation and
conflict resolution processes.

Secondly, in view of the centrality of the political
process in post-conflict situations, it is essential to
continue active mediation activity throughout the
implementation of a peace agreement and the peace
consolidation process. To this end, we need to clarify
the role of United Nations field missions and
representatives of the Secretary-General and their
required conditions and capacities.

Thirdly and lastly, in situations of intra-State
conflicts, the United Nations has been relatively
successful. What will be an effective and realistic role
for the United Nations in supporting mediation efforts
involving non-State actors?

In conclusion, I would like to thank Burkina Faso
for its initiative, and we would like to express our
support for the presidential statement. I would also like
to stress how important it is for the Secretary-General
to pursue active mediation efforts and to keep the
Council informed of his activities. We believe that it
would be useful for the Council to conduct periodic
reviews of the progress in this area.

