Mr. Ilkin (Turkey): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming and thanking High
Commissioner Antonio Guterres for his comprehensive
and thought-provoking briefing.

I would first like to take this opportunity to
express our deep appreciation to the High
Commissioner and the entire staff of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) for their hard work. Their dedication to
improving the lives of millions of refugees is most
commendable.

It is our firm opinion that the work of UNHCR is
an essential element of our collective efforts to
maintain international peace and security. Thus, we
very much welcome the opportunity to engage with the
High Commissioner. In this regard, I listened very
carefully to his briefing.

Unfortunately, the current security environment
and the evolving security challenges of our time are not
helping us to bring down the number of refugees. On
the contrary, the overall number of refugees, together
with other populations of interest to UNHCR, has risen
dramatically in recent years. That development, which
is an outcome of worsening security conditions in
many parts of the world, has now become a security
problem in itself. Indeed, there are now around 67
million forcibly displaced people in the world, giving
rise to much bigger challenges for the countries
involved, as well as for UNHCR.

That said, it is obvious that no single
international organization or individual country can
cope with a problem of this magnitude. International
cooperation and solidarity are imperative. Yes,
UNHCR is playing a leading role in this field, but it
deserves the support of everyone concerned, including
that of the Security Council. And, on this point, the
question that needs to be answered is how the Security
Council can further support the work of UNHCR.

This is indeed very important to us, as Turkey is
deeply committed to supporting the efforts and
activities of the Organization. And I have to underline
that this is not merely a humanitarian consideration for
Turkey; far more than that, it represents a hard-core
reality for us, given our close proximity to areas of
conflict in the Middle East, the Balkans and the
Caucasus, producing high number of refugees in and
around our country.

Throughout history, the Turkish people have
always welcomed, extended a helping hand and
provided safe haven to people who have fled
oppression and violence. For instance, in the not-too-
distant past, Turkey hosted vast numbers of refugees
fleeing from either the wars in the Balkans or the
repression of the former Iraqi regime. I am sure that
many here will recall the time when we provided
shelter and protection to more than 500,000 Iraqis
during the first Gulf War. It was a daunting

responsibility which we had to shoulder without
sufficient international support at that time. But, in the
end, we managed to perform a successful operation.
Unfortunately, Iraq today is again faced with a serious
displacement crisis. Although this time it is mainly
Syria and Jordan that have taken the brunt of the
refugee flow, Turkey also hosts a considerable number
of Iraqi refugees.

Despite recent improvements in the security
conditions prevailing in Iraq, the refugee problem is
still a serious one and requires continued international
support. In this regard, we would like to commend the
work done by UNHCR from the very early stages of
the crisis and reiterate our pledge to continue to
support UNHCR's Iraq programme.

Likewise, we also highly appreciate UNHCR's
latest efforts with respect to the situation in Gaza and
in support of its sister organization, the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East (UNRWA). In this regard, we join in the
High Commissioner's strong appeal to the international
community and all humanitarian actors to support
UNRWA, The situation in Gaza is indeed tragic and
totally unacceptable, and requires immediate action on
the part of the United Nations and the Security
Council.

That brings me to my final point, which is the
importance of providing the necessary resources to
UNHCR. Indeed, reliability and continuity in donor
contributions constitute a major element of our efforts
to address the refugee problem. Without such
commitment on the part of the international
community, we cannot expect organizations like
UNHCR to deliver what is expected of them. And
without an effective UNHCR, we cannot expect to
fulfil our responsibilities in maintaining global peace
and security.

That is why Turkey is a regular contributor to
UNHCR's main budget and its various programmes,
ranging from the Middle East to Africa. Here, I would
like to assure the High Commissioner once again of
Turkey's continued support to the activities of
UNHCR, as well as our firm determination to support
all international efforts aimed at improving the lives of
displaced people worldwide.

