The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United Kingdom.

The United Kingdom recognizes the gravity of the
situation in the Central African Republic and is concerned
at the difficulties that the authorities there have experienced
in maintaining public order following the recent series of
army mutinies. While we are encouraged that a ceasefire
has held since June, we are conscious of the continuing
insecurity and tension in Bangui and of the risk that this
instability may spread throughout the country and region.

The United Kingdom believes that the priority must be
to ensure that peace and stability are effectively restored,
and in that regard we commend the efforts of the African
and other States involved in the continued search for a
peaceful settlement in the Central African Republic. We
welcome in particular the contribution of those countries
that have provided troops to the Inter-African Mission to
Monitor the Implementation of the Bangui Agreements
(MISAB), and the continuing French commitment to
support the operation. We pay tribute to both the African
and French soldiers who have lost their lives attempting to
bring about peace and stability.

We applaud the role of regional leaders and others in
the current mediation efforts, and in particular the work of
General Toure as Chairman of the International Monitoring
Committee on the implementation of the Bangui
Agreements. We believe that the United Nations
Development Programme's support for the wider
peace-building process is an important factor in the
success of these efforts. The initiatives taken on the
Central African Republic to date clearly demonstrate the
importance and effectiveness of African leadership in
dealing with conflict and instability in the region, and the
United Kingdom wishes to reaffirm its support for such
initiatives.

We note the success so far of MISAB's efforts in
reducing the number of arms and heavy weaponry in the
Central African Republic. This is a crucial task. But we
remain concerned at the large amount of weapons still in
circulation and the continuing danger this presents. In this
regard, we believe it is essential that the scope of
MISAB'S operations is clearly defined. This draft
resolution helps to do this. We are grateful, too, for the
information received so far, including in General Toure's
report, on MISAB's activities to date and its future
objectives. We believe it is essential for the Security
Council to have a clear sense of MISAB's tasks so that
it can effectively monitor their implementation. We
therefore look forward to receiving further reports, as
provided for in this resolution, on MISAB's progress and
the longer-term prospects for the political process in the
country.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

I now put to the vote the draft resolution contained
in document S/ 1997/613.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Egypt, France, Guinea-
Bissau, Japan, Kenya, Poland, Portugal, Republic of

Korea, Russian Federation, Sweden, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America
The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1125 (1997).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.40 am.

