Mr. Munir (Pakistan): Before addressing today's
topic, we would like to convey our deep condolences to
the people and the Governments of France, Lebanon,
Iraq and Russia on the loss precious lives resulting
from the detestable recent terrorist attacks.

We thank the United Kingdom presidency for
organizing today's debate and for its useful concept
note (S/2015/845, annex) to inform the discussion. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
thoughtful remarks this morning.

The link between peace and security, development
and human rights is indeed inextricable. It is true that
the lack of development and of respect for human rights
can endanger international peace and security. However,
without peace and security, lack of development and
violations of human rights are a certainty. While we
must study the linkages between these three pillars,
we believe that peace and security is a prerequisite if
development goals are to be achieved and if human
rights are to be respected and promoted.

The Security Council's responsibility is in the arena
of international peace and security. Ensuring national
peace, security and stability is the responsibility of each
sovereign State. Accordingly, primary responsibility
in cases where there is a lack of development or the
absence of ideal human rights conditions also lies with
Member States.

By pronouncing on development and human rights
at the national level, the Security Council will be going
beyond its mandate of maintaining international peace
and security. We believe that the Council's ingress on
such issues should be avoided, for the following reasons.

First, there are international institutions,
especially United Nations institutions, that oversee
issues pertaining to development and human rights.
They are more suited to taking measures necessitated
by circumstances. If the Council were to start taking
up these responsibilities, the United Nations bodies
mandated to deal with these issues would lose their
relevance and importance.

Secondly, when we considered the annual report of
the Security Council (A/70/2) in the General Assembly
last week, we were told that the Security Council met
more than 250 times last year. This excluded meetings of
its numerous subsidiary bodies; the Council, therefore,
does not need to be burdened further with work that
would, at best, be a duplication of effort.

Thirdly, the Council needs to ask itself if its
structure and working methods are conducive to a
role that includes taking up these issues. It has only
10 elected members. Its openness, transparency and
accountability continue to be questioned by the wider
membership. By contrast, the Human Rights Council,
for example, comprises 47 elected members.

Lastly, the Council already has a large number of
situations on its plate, ones pertaining to its primary
mandate. If the Council were to spend its time on cross-
cutting issues, the amount of time that it can spend on
areas that fall under its direct responsibility is bound
to decrease.

Pakistan believes that United Nations bodies
should fulfil their responsibilities within their
prescribed mandates. Issues, indeed, are interlinked.
But United Nations bodies working within their
respective mandates can cooperate effectively with one
another, and Member States can continue to interact
meaningfully with one another and with all such United
Nations bodies. Together we can address most, if not
all, issues in a comprehensive and holistic manner.

Mr. President, we welcome your delegation's
desire to work towards a presidential statement in a
manner that enables you to take into account the views
expressed by Member States. We hope that in that
draft statement you will take into account the views
expressed by Pakistan as well.

I think that I stopped before the light started
blinking.

