Mr. Akbarrudin (India): United Nations
peacekeeping is a unique innovation of multilateralism
to respond to threats to international peace and
security. As a country that has been associated with
various facets of this phenomenon and contributed
to its evolution, we thank you, Sir, and the Russian
Federation for holding this debate and for providing us
an opportunity to express our views.

We also thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix
for providing the context for today's discussion.

I join other speakers in conveying our deep
condolences to the people and the Government of
Burkina Faso, the most recent victims of terrorism.
India is committed to implementing the Secretary-
General's Action for Peacekeeping initiative to improve
the efficiency and effectiveness ofpeacekeeping within
the contours of our shared understandings.

At present, peacekeeping is in a no-man's
land, between trying to keep the peace in fragile
environments and trying to enforce the maintenance
of peace where there is none to keep. Responses to
new security environments require a willingness
to adapt abilities to meet emerging realities. In that
context, we will offer three specific suggestions for the
Council's consideration.

First, the institutionalization of an approach
whereby all key actors, especially troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), are consistently and predictably
engaged in the decision-making matrix has now been
discussed for decades. The issue of consultations with
and communications to TCCs has been in focus since the
Council's presidential statement of 1994 on this matter
(S/PRST/l994/22). It has been reflected in a number of
other Council documents, for example: a presidential
statement of 1996 (S/PRST/1996/13), resolution 1327
(2000), on the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809); and
resolution 1353 (2001). However, in practice, we do
not see effective improvement in cooperation among
troop- and police-contributing countries, the Security
Council and the Secretariat. It is time to move from the
pursuit of individual activism by individual Member
States to collective action by the Security Council to
institutionalize this effort.

Secondly, further incentivizing women peacekeepers
is now essential. As of 31 July, women accounted for
only 6 per cent ofpeacekeepers. There are 5,243 female
peacekeepers out of a total of 86,687 peacekeepers. In
1993, during the first spurt of peacekeeping, women
made up 1 per cent of those deployed as uniformed
personnel. Today the number is 6 per cent. In 26 years,
we have increased the share of women by 5 per cent. At
this rate, it may not be possible to meet even minimum
targets. There need to be special incentives for women
peacekeepers and priority deployment of all women-
unit pledges. Otherwise, the targets will remain just
that, targets.

Thirdly, innovation in capacity-building for
peacekeepers needs to be apriority if we are to move away
from a culture of caveats that bedevils peacekeeping and
confines it to a segmented activity. Innovative options,
such as co-deployment of peacekeepers from different
countries, engender a genuine spirit of partnership for
peace and need to be promoted. Enhancing capabilities
and capacities through mobile training teams in large
missions is a useful mechanism to harness available
talent for specific, common objectives. Expansion of
online initiatives to develop the capacities of future
commanders and managers so that they lead by example
and raise awareness of United Nations standards of
conduct among their personnel is another innovation
that can be further promoted.

The best tribute that we can pay to the valiant men
and women who have served the cause of peacekeeping
and to the memories of those who paid the ultimate
sacrifice while serving United Nations peacekeeping
is to keep incentivizing change, institutionalizing best
practices and placing a premium on innovation. We
hope those objectives will inform the next generation
of changes to United Nations peacekeeping that the
Council undertakes.

