Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): We would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2018/165) on the situation in Afghanistan and the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). We also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto for
his briefing. As we mark International Women's Day,
reflecting on the important role of women in peace
and development and in the overall political process in
Afghanistan and elsewhere in our debate today makes
it all the more timely and relevant.

We thank the Dutch presidency for taking this
initiative and we are pleased to see you, Madam
Minister, personally presiding over today's debate.
We thank Ms. Habiba Sarabi, Deputy Chairperson of
Afghanistan's High Peace Council, and Ms. Mariam
Safi, Executive Director of the Organization for Policy
Research and Development Studies, for their briefings.

Afghanistan still faces multiple and complex
challenges to its security, stability and development.
Its people continue to pay a heavy price because of
the instability and violence affecting the country. As
the report of the Secretary-General highlights, it is
particularly women and children who constitute the
most vulnerable segments of the society.
We take note of the efforts being exerted by the
Government to improve the plight of Afghan women,
including by implementing the law on the elimination
of violence against women, as well as upholding
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security. As highlighted in the report of the Secretary-
General, we believe the implementation of the national
action plan on women and peace and security will
go a long way in promoting the full and effective
participation of Afghan women in the country's peace
and reconciliation endeavours.

Once again, we take this opportunity to express
our sympathy and solidarity with the people and the
Government of Afghanistan following the loss of
innocent lives, including women and children, as a result
of the recent suicide attacks in Kabul and Jalalabad. We
hope those who committed those atrocious crimes will
be held to account.

No doubt, the long-term security and stability
of Afghanistan can be ensured only through a
comprehensive and inclusive Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned reconciliation and political process.
In that regard, the renewed call made by the Afghan
Government for unconditional peace talks with the
Taliban and the outlining of a framework for peace
presented at the second conference ofthe Kabul Process
are encouraging. We fully support the Afghan-led and
Afghan-owned peace and reconciliation process and
appreciate the Government's offer for peace with the
Taliban. We hope the Taliban will respond positively to
that call and engage in direct talks with the Government
with a view to achieving a political settlement and
restoring lasting peace and security in Afghanistan.
The support of regional and international stakeholders
is key to the success of the peace process. We welcome
the declaration adopted on 28 February, which reiterates
the support of the international community to the Kabul
Process for an Afghan-led, Afghan-owned peace and
reconciliation process and reaffirms the commitment to
the necessary fight against terrorism in order to bring
about lasting peace, security, stability and prosperity
to Afghanistan.

With regard to the political situation in the country,
the tension between the Presidential Palace and
Jamiat-e-Islami is a matter of concern, which could
potentially undermine the National Unity Government
and upset the already fragile political arrangement,
as the report of the Secretary-General notes. We hope
that the parties will resolve the dispute peacefully
and expeditiously and redirect their efforts towards
addressing the multiple challenges facing Afghanistan.

The holding of peaceful and democratic
parliamentary and district council elections within the
set time frame is indeed very important, and we note
that some progress has been made in preparation for
the elections. Accelerating such efforts and building
the confidence of the Afghan people in the electoral
process through the involvement and participation of
all the relevant stakeholders will be key to ensuring the
timely and successful holding of the elections.

Without sustained and inclusive economic growth
and development, the peace and security challenges
faced by Afghanistan cannot be effectively addressed.
That is why the Unity Government needs the coordinated
and comprehensive support of the international
community to advance its political reform and national
development priorities, as envisaged in the Afghanistan
National Peace and Development Framework. It is vital
that the international community sustain its engagement
and deliver on its various commitments in that regard.

Given all the points I mentioned, the efforts of
UNAMA in promoting and in supporting the initiatives
for peace talks, reconciliation, dialogue and support
for social and economic development, with full respect
for the country's sovereignty and leadership, remain
very important. We therefore welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2405 (2018), which renews the
mandate of UNAMA for another year.

