Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
After a quiet winter, large-scale military conflict has
broken out again on the battlefield in Afghanistan. The
vicious circle of negotiating in the winter and fighting in
the summer has been rolling on in that country for 20
years now. How to effectively push the peace process
forward and put an early end to the war in Afghanistan is
a pressing issue facing the international community, and
that is why we are here today for this open debate in the
Security Council.

The Afghan people themselves hold the key to the
ultimate settlement of the issue of Afghanistan. To help
bring this issue to a just and lasting resolution, the
Chinese Government offers encouragement and support to
the conflicting parties in Afghanistan so that they can put
the interests of their nation and country above everything

 

else, disregard their ethnic, religious and political
differences, stop fighting among themselves as soon as
possible and establish a broad-based and stable government
acceptable to all sides, on the basis of mutual respect and
extensive consultations. The history and present reality of
Afghanistan have testified to the truth that military means
will not advance the achievement of a final settlement of
the issue, and the only way to achieve such a settlement is
for all the parties in Afghanistan to return to negotiations
under the auspices of the United Nations.

The international community should strive to create a
constructive, favourable and relaxed external environment
for the peaceful settlement of the Afghan issue. To be
specific, first, the international community, especially
countries that have great influence with the various parties
in Afghanistan, should work actively to persuade those
parties to sit down and conduct dialogues and negotiations
in a calm and reasonable manner. Secondly, countries,
especially those bordering on Afghanistan, should
immediately stop the provision of military assistance to the
various factions in Afghanistan. The United Nations may
want to consider imposing a stringent arms embargo on
Afghanistan and formulating a specific monitoring
mechanism. Thirdly, the international community should
respect the final decision of the Afghan people as to their
future.

For historical and practical reasons, we should be
realistic about this issue and acknowledge that decades-old
problems cannot be resolved by one or two meetings. China
sincerely hopes that all parties will show their political will
and work together towards the early achievement of the
goals set out in the Tashkent Declaration.

The Chinese delegation appreciates the mediation
efforts made by the Secretary-General's Special Envoy,
Mr. Brahimi, and by the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan, and it supports the United Nations continuing
to play the central and leading role in this issue. China is
ready to continue to participate actively in and work closely
with the peace-promoting efforts of the "six plus two"
group. There are still quite a few difficulties and stumbling-
blocks on the road to a comprehensive settlement of the
Afghan issue, but that should not overshadow the fact that
after years of turbulence and war, the Afghan people have
a deep longing for peace and stability. Therefore, we
believe that if the international community works together,
peace will come to Afghanistan soon.

