Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): First of
all, I would like to express, to his country and to the
Islamic Ummah alike, the deep condolences of the
people and Government of the Sudan upon the death of
Crown Prince Sultan Bin Abdulaziz Al-Saud. Our
sincere condolences go also to the victims of the
earthquake in Turkey and to their families.

At the outset, my delegation aligns itself with the
statements made on behalf of the Group of Arab States,
the Non-Aligned Movement and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation.

We also wish to congratulate you, Madame
President, for having convened this open debate on the
Middle East and the occupied Palestinian territories at
a time when the international community must, more
than ever, support the choice of the Palestinian people
and their just and legitimate demands - beginning
with the creation of an independent State of Palestine
with Jerusalem as its capital. The delegation of the
Sudan supports the application of Palestine for full
United Nations membership and urges Council
members to support that legitimate request.

It is now time for the international community,
represented by the United Nations and the Security
Council, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations and international law, to create two States as a
practical solution to the conflict in the occupied
territories. That is especially necessary given that
neither international nor regional mediation efforts, nor
those of the Quartet, have succeeded in resolving the
conflict.

In the light of Israel's ongoing illegal and
illegitimate settlement activities aimed at distorting the
facts on the ground and imposing a status quo, the
Security Council is aware of the fact that those
activities have expanded to East Jerusalem, where
more than 1,000 colonialist housing units have been
built with impunity. Also in Jerusalem, the occupation
authorities are depriving the Palestinian population of
their housing, going so far as to deny them
construction permits to rebuild. Moreover, the Holy
City is under siege by virtue of a network of
settlements that has resulted in its isolation from other
Palestinian cities.

The Sudan strongly condemns any Israeli policy
or practice that seeks to alter the demographic
composition of occupied Palestinian territories. We call
upon Council members to ensure that Israel abides by
its commitments under international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention and its Additional
Protocols, as well as all of the United Nations
resolutions adopted since 1948. Israel has thus far
ignored all of those measures. In that context, I wish in
particular to mention resolution 1860 (2009) which,
inter alia, stipulates that the two parties and the
international community should make every possible
effort to establish a just peace and to create two States
within secure and recognized borders.

It is therefore time for the Palestinian people to
enjoy their legitimate and just right to establish an
independent State after 63 years of suffering
deprivation. We must put an end to the tragedy of
millions of exiled Palestinian refugees who should be
able to live in a State that is a full-fledged Member of
the United Nations.

We welcome recent developments, including the
prisoner exchange and the return of more than 1,000
Palestinian prisoners and detainees from Israeli
prisons. We appreciate the efforts made by the sisterly
country of Egypt in that regard. Still, we do not forget
the fact that thousands of Palestinian prisoners and
detainees remain in Israeli prisons.
In that context, we note the ministerial statement
of the Non-Aligned Movement, issued last May in
Bali, calling for the immediate release of Palestinian
prisoners. We also point out that those prisoners
include women and children. That should be a priority
issue for the Security Council and the Human Rights
Council.

Finally, we recall resolution 1701 (2006), on
Lebanon, and other relevant resolutions. We call on
Israel to respect the provisions of those resolutions and
to put an end to its continuing violations of and
encroachment on Lebanon's sovereignty. We also
condemn Israeli policies seeking to impose legislation
and administrative structures on the occupied Syrian
Golan Heights. In that context, we call on Israel to
implement the Security Council's resolutions relating
to the Golan, especially resolution 497 (1981), which
calls for complete Israeli withdrawal from the Golan to
the 4 June 1967 borders.

