Mr. Aho-Glele (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation congratulates you, Sir, on France's
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. We pledge you our full cooperation in the
search for appropriate solutions to the problems and
challenges before the international community. We also
express our full appreciation to the delegation of China
for the skill with which it led the work of the Council
in February.

We welcome the presence among us of the
Chairman of the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We stand with his country in support of
the considerable progress accomplished towards
achieving peace and solidarity, which he has done an
excellent job in outlining today.

We note with great interest of the latest report of
the High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
report gives a cogent account of the progress made by
that country in the past few years and of the relevant
actions under way to consolidate those gains. We also
note the very relevant observations made by Mr. Jean-
Marie Guehenno.

We note that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
resolutely committed to the path of national
reconciliation and reconstruction. Institutions are
gradually being established and efforts made on behalf
of all those who suffered in the war and expect justice
and reparations. A large number of refugees and
displaced persons have returned home. Moreover,
many of the reforms undertaken are helping in the
country's gradual economic recovery. We believe that,
if Bosnia and Herzegovina continues on this path, it
will be able to overcome its tragic past once and for all.

We urge the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to seek appropriate solutions to the
country's institutional problems, particularly with
respect to the police and to the establishment of the war
crimes chamber.

At the political level, we are concerned to note
the difficulties that have been referred to, such as
ethnic divisions and tension between the two main
parties. We earnestly encourage the two parties to
pursue dialogue in a constructive spirit and in
conformity with democratic norms. We hope that the
municipal elections scheduled for October 2004 will
create optimal conditions for entrenching democracy
throughout the country.

Given that the maintenance of the status quo in
Mostar poses a genuine threat to the stabilization of the
country, it is urgent to solve the problem of the city's
status. We therefore welcome the strategy that has been
adopted to reunify the city. We encourage the High
Representative to pursue dialogue with the various
ethnic groups concerned to achieve the best possible
solution to the problem.

With respect to Srebrenica, my delegation
reiterates its compassion for the parents of the victims
of war. We hope that the painful issue of missing or
deceased persons can soon be resolved so that the city
may find the renewed strength to meet its future.

We welcome the harmonious relationships that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has established with its
neighbours. The tripartite agreement between Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia and Serbia and Montenegro
on the demarcation and inviolability of the borders
between those countries will guarantee peace and
stability in the region.

We also welcome the High Representative's
updated mission implementation plan. We reiterate our
firm support for him as he undertakes the main tasks
pending, which he has identified as necessary to the
completion of his mandate: entrenching the rule of law,
reforming the economy, strengthening good
governance and establishing political authority and
civilian control over the armed forces. Those tasks are
of critical importance to the future of the country.

