Mr. Sotirov (Bulgaria): I would like to commend His
Excellency Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, Foreign Minister of
Canada, for having presided over the first part of today's
open meeting of the Security Council in such an efficient
manner. My appreciation goes also to you, Ambassador
Fowler, and to your colleagues for your active role in
initiating this open debate on the general issues related to
sanctions.

Bulgaria aligns itself with the statement made by the
representative of Portugal on behalf of the European Union.
I will therefore confine myself to a number of remarks of
particular importance to my delegation.

The issue of the maintenance of international peace
and security is closely related to ongoing efforts to
strengthen the role of the United Nations and to reform the
Security Council. We consider the present discussion on
enhancing the effectiveness of sanctions regimes to be a
substantial part of that process. Ever since the entry into
force of the United Nations Charter, few issues have been
of greater relevance and importance for the Security
Council than the question of making sanctions appropriate
tools for achieving sustainable peace and stability.

That is why Bulgaria favors the current efforts of the
Security Council to establish monitoring mechanisms and
improve the administration of sanctions. We support the
Council's decision to establish an informal working group
to consider recommendations on how to improve the
effectiveness of United Nations sanctions. We believe that
this is a shortcut to the realization of the concept of smart
sanctions, including targeted sanctions. Sanctions must have
clearly defined objectives and goals. Destructive collateral
effects on the people of the target State could be minimized
by focusing the sanctions on the leaders of the ruling
regime of this State.

Furthermore, since the Security Council is the
principal organ of the United Nations with primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security, it should evaluate the dimensions of a
humanitarian crisis and possible related implications for
vulnerable groups in target States before imposing
preventive or enforcement measures under Chapter VII.
This is closely related to the question of introducing
flexibility into sanctions regimes.

The Government of Bulgaria believes that in every
case the Security Council should apply criteria of
proportionality when defining the scope of the sanctions,
which has to be compatible with their objectives. The
introduction of measures under Chapter VII of the Charter
should be considered in a comprehensive manner,
including the elaboration and implementation of additional
tools for a better assessment of economic and
humanitarian impact on non-targeted third States affected
by the application of sanctions.

It is worth recalling in this context the note by the
President of the Security Council dated 29 January 1999
on the work of the sanctions committees (S/1999/92),
which includes valuable suggestions for appropriate
improvements in the assessment of the economic impact
of sanctions on third States, including through facilitating
access by those States to the work of the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council.

A case in point is the enormous economic damage
suffered by Bulgaria and other third countries as a result
of the sanctions imposed on Iraq, on the former
Yugoslavia, on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, et cetera.
The direct losses incurred by Bulgaria amount to more
than $10 billion. Therefore, we have repeatedly supported
the opinion that the application of certain measures
adopted under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter
should be accompanied by concerted efforts to prevent
possible adverse implications for third States and by the
adoption of specific mechanisms to assist those States
promptly and effectively. It is important in this regard to
ensure the participation of the concerned third States in
preliminary impact assessments prior to the imposition of
sanctions.

The special importance that Bulgaria attaches to
these issues arises from their direct link to the question of
the proper implementation of Article 50 of the Charter. A

 

number of resolutions have already been adopted by the
General Assembly relating to assistance to third States
affected by the application of sanctions. In our view, that
marks significant progress in identifying key aspects of the
problem and in promoting activities in that field.

As has rightly been pointed out, the international
financial institutions and other international organizations,
including regional organizations, also have a vital role to
play with respect to addressing the special economic
problems of third States affected by sanctions.

In conclusion, I would like recall the General
Assembly's invitation to the Security Council, renewed in
Assembly resolution 54/107, to consider the establishment
of further mechanisms for consultations, under Article 50
of the Charter, with third States which are or may be
confronted with special economic problems arising from the
application of sanctions. With regard to a solution of those
problems, the Security Council is invited also to consider
appropriate ways and means for increasing the effectiveness
of its methods and procedures applied in the consideration
of requests by the affected States for assistance. We are
confident that the reassessment and review of Security
Council working methods with regard to the proper
implementation of Article 50 of the Charter will contribute
to the effectiveness of sanctions regimes.

We hope that our suggestions will be duly taken into
consideration in the future activities and recommendations
of the informal working group established by the Security
Council on improving the effectiveness of United Nations
sanctions.

