Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal): I would like to
thank you, Sir, for convening this meeting and for the
opportunity given to me to participate in it. As others
have, I would like to extend to His Excellency Mr. J ose
Luis Guterres, Deputy Prime Minister of Timor-Leste,
a warm welcome and to express our gratitude for his
contribution to this debate. Allow me as well to thank
the new Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for her very useful
briefing.

Portugal naturally concurs with the statement
delivered by the delegation of the European Union, but
I would like to underline some aspects. We praise the
encouraging achievements in Timor-Leste over the past
year. The continuing stable security environment is a
credit to Timor-Leste's determination to long-term
peace, stability and development. Nevertheless,
important challenges still have to be met that are well
reflected in the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/85)
and were highlighted in the Special Representative's
briefing.

National dialogue is central to addressing those
issues, as it is to ensure unity of efforts, if not broad
consensus, in matters of national concern. Portugal is
encouraged by the efforts of the Timorese leadership,
including the leader of the opposition, to engage in
discussions on issues of national interest, and
encourages pursuit of this constructive political
dialogue as an essential tool to meet these challenges.

Along with others, Portugal considers that long-
term security and stability will depend on the capacity
of the Timorese security institutions to function in an
effective, responsible and accountable way, with due
respect for the rule of law and benefiting from public
confidence and support. We fully share the views and
recommendations expressed by the technical
assessment mission. Further efforts are needed to
ensure clear articulation of strategies within and across
State institutions. A clear vision of the relationship
between the Defence Forces of Timor-Leste and the
National Police, as well as of their respective roles and
tasks, is crucial. Also, we share the view that additional
steps should be taken to facilitate the closest possible
coordination of the international community's support,
including that of bilateral partners, in this context.
Portugal encourages the Government of Timor-
Leste to continue working with the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) on the
resumption of police executive responsibilities. We
note that the enduring challenges facing the police in
Timor-Leste should not be underestimated. The
resumption of responsibilities by the National Police is
only one step, albeit an important one, but it also marks
the beginning of a new phase to which the full
commitment of the Government and the support of the
international community will prove essential.

10-2486]
Reconfiguring and continuing to reorient the
UNMIT police component to meet, as far as possible,
the post-resumption challenges will not be easy. It will

require high priority to be given - not only by
UNMIT and the Secretariat, but also and most
importantly by police-contributing countries - to

deploying officers with the required profiles and skills
to perform the crucial role of advising, monitoring and
reporting from all districts, while at the same time
remaining available to provide assistance and
operational support.

As one leading cooperation partner in the justice
sector, we also recognize the importance of a
coordinated approach to justice sector reform in order
to increase Timorese ownership and strengthen the
national institutions in this sector, in line with the
recommendations of the independent comprehensive
needs assessment coordinated by Judge Rapoza.

Strong economic and social development is also
essential to consolidating peace and stability. Thus,
another critical challenge in the near future will be to
build a sustainable economy that is nurtured by a
culture of democratic and transparent governance that
creates jobs and helps to fulfil the basic social
functions of the State. We commend the measures
taken by the Timorese Government in this respect, and
we appeal to the international community to increase
its economic cooperation with Timor-Leste, including
investment.

We are keenly aware that a number of
fundamental issues will require sustained, long-term
attention well beyond the date of 2012. The people of
Timor-Leste have repeatedly shown their resolve to
build a peaceful, democratic and stable society.
However the consolidation of those goals requires
continued support from the international community. It
is important that the people of Timor-Leste rest assured
that they do not and will not stand alone in pursuing
these endeavours. UNMIT continues to play a critical
role in assisting Timor-Leste, and we fully support a
decision of the Council to extend its mandate for an
additional period of 12 months.

Portugal remains fully engaged in supporting
Timor-Leste in its efforts to consolidate democracy and
development, as a member of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries and of the European
Union, and as a major bilateral partner in a wide
spectrum of areas, including governance and public

administration, justice, education and security sector
reform, and by contributing over 200 police officers
and military liaison officers to UNMIT, and fully
supporting all areas under the responsibility of the
Mission.

Let me conclude by saying that we are convinced
that Timor-Leste will succeed in its endeavours. But
for that to happen, the international community must
provide the necessary political support and appropriate
resources. To that end, we encourage and support
Ameerah Haq and the entire team of the United
Nations Integrated Mission in carrying out their
invaluable work. We wish to thank the Security
Council for its constant support of Timor-Leste.

