Mr. Grunditz (Sweden): Mr. President, I thank
you for convening this timely open debate on Somalia.

Sweden aligns itself with the statement of the
European Union (EU) and would like, in addition, to
make four points.

First, the momentum gained at the London
conference for the political process must be upheld.
Support is required if the Somali-led reform process is
to produce an inclusive, broad-based, representative and
credible political dispensation when the mandate of the
Transitional Federal Institutions (TFIs) ends in August.
By that time, a democratic constitutional framework
must be in place to further unify and rally the Somali
people around a common purpose of reconciliation and
nation-building. Flexible, transparent and accountable
financial mechanisms need to be further developed and
operationalized.
At this crucial moment, the Somali leadership,
the TFIs and the signatories of the road map have a
particular responsibility to demonstrate inclusivity and

a constructive commitment. In those endeavours,
political and financial support must be forthcoming,
contingent on progress.

Secondly, ensuring safety and security is of
paramount importance for an enabling political
environment. While significant gains have been made,
much thanks to the African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) alongside Transitional Federal Government
and allied security forces, security and stabilization can
only be sustained if they are accompanied by people-
centred governance, basic services and development.
The nexus between security, political progress and
recovery should be further strengthened. The protection
of civilians must be upheld at all times. We echo the
call made by the European Union that the resourcing of
AMISOM. from the EU and its member States needs to
be complemented by other new donors. A more
reliable, streamlined and transparent support system is
called for.

Thirdly, the United Nations has a central strategic
leadership role, in partnership with the African Union
and the Intergovernmental Authority on Development.
The United Nations integrated strategic approach
should bring more synergy and effectiveness into a
multipronged United Nations involvement. Transparency
is essential for trust and effectiveness.

As a participant at the London conference and
member of the International Contact Group, Sweden
looks forward to engaging to make our joint cooperation
more productive and effective. Coordination on policy
and operational response is vital. The United Nations
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, together with Somali authorities, are central
in facilitating that our joint efforts are being brought to
bear.

Finally, we welcome the announcement that
famine may have ended. However, the situation is
extremely fragile, with new alerts of recurring drought.
Now is the time to build resilience against future
shocks and to strengthen fragile livelihoods. Relief and
development are interlinked. Humanitarian actors must
be given full, safe and unhindered access to those in
need.

