Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia would like to
thank France, as the penholder, for its hard work in
facilitating the mandate renewal process. My delegation
voted in favour of resolution 2485 (2019), primarily as
a result of fully respecting and preserving the unity of
the Council. We have always stated that the unity of the
Council is of the utmost important.

Indonesia commends the dedication of all men
and women serving under the Blue Flag in the various
United Nations peacekeeping operations around the
world, including the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL). For the past two decades, United
Nations peacekeeping operations have proved to be
highly adaptable. They have significantly contributed
to the declining number of conflicts and have become
flagship activities of the United Nations. Let that
be clear.

For Indonesia, it is therefore unacceptable if the
objective and activities of such missions, including
those of UNIFIL, are to be undermined. Indonesia is
concerned about the trend of the systemic approach in
weakening the role of United Nations peacekeeping
operations. It is important to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping operations will always be collective
efforts, in which all stakeholders of United Nations
peacekeeping operations play an important role in
those concerted efforts.

My delegation has repeatedly stressed the important
and positive role of UNIFIL, in cooperation with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, in sustaining the cessation
of hostilities, preventing new conflicts and assisting
the Lebanese Government to ensure the return of its
effective authority in the area.

As a troop-contributing country. Indonesia
has always highlighted the importance of the
professionalism of our peacekeepers in implementing
their mandates on the ground. That includes engaging
with the host country and local communities in order
to assist the mission in ensuring that its activities are
indeed effective in improving the lives of the people
whom it is deployed to serve and protect.

Regarding the request to the Secretary-General to
conduct and provide the Council with an assessment of
UNIFIL's resources, my delegation would like to stress
that such an assessment needs to be conducted in close
consultation with all relevant stakeholders, particularly
the troop-contributing countries. It is only logical that
countries whose people participate in peacekeeping
missions should be properly engaged. Clearly, the
United Nations peacekeeping operation must be fully
prepared, especially in the face of the changing and
complex situation, as well as the increasingly dangerous
security environment. However, it is also critical to
ensure that the mission be given clear mandates, with
the necessary equipment and resources.

Lastly, there are those who question the
performance and effectiveness of the Blue Helmets
in serving UNIFIL. I would like to say that such a
view is not only demeaning but also disrespectful to
the many peacekeepers who have sacrificed their
lives serving humanity and peace, including the 314
peacekeepers who gave their lives serving UNIFIL and
the world to date in 2019. That is the highest number of
fatalities of United Nations peacekeepers in all United
Nations missions.

I would like to be clear in saying that I hope that we
have all made the right decision today. May the souls of
those 314 peacekeepers rest in peace,

