Mr. Hidayat (Indonesia): Mr. President, it is my
pleasure to have the opportunity to participate in this
wrap-up session under your presidency and to
contribute to the discussion on the subject of the role of
the United Nations in post-conflict situations. The
discussion of this very important subject in the Council
under the auspices of Mexico is testimony to its high
sense of responsibility and purpose, for which we are
most appreciative.

The first business of the United Nations remains
the business of peace. When there is conflict, the
objective is always the same: to achieve peace as soon
as possible, with a minimum of loss of life and
destruction. In a post-conflict scenario, the
maintenance of peace and security, as an important
value in itself but also as a precondition for
development, is - and ought to be - of the greatest
concern to Member States and to my delegation.

In the view of my delegation, the first order of
priority in a post-conflict situation is to respond to the
humanitarian needs of the people. The need for food,
water, medical care, security and housing cannot wait
until tomorrow or be delayed because of long speeches.
As the pre-eminent human organization, we must
respond to post-conflict humanitarian needs in a timely,
organized fashion. This must be the most basic,
minimum standard acceptable, and such a response
must be provided without debate or delay.

Of the diverse skills available to the international
community at the United Nations, those relating to
humanitarian assistance and peacekeeping must be
among those ranked highest, given the volume of crises
to which the Organization has had to respond in the last
half-century. In our view, there can never be an
overabundance of these skills, capacities or
institutional memory. The United Nations should
continue to develop and maintain them, in order to
have them available and tuned for deployment
wherever and whenever required.

My delegation recognizes that every conflict, and
therefore every post-conflict scenario, is different. The
capacity of the United Nations to learn from every
experience and to be prepared for every conceivable
scenario by studying and internalizing the lessons of
the past is one of our greatest strengths as an
Organization, and we must take advantage of it.

In the response to the immediate humanitarian
demands of every conflict are sown the seeds of
conflict resolution and peace-building, and the United
Nations must always be careful to maintain consistency
in the application and implementation of mandates.
One of the most critical contributions of the
Organization is to enter a conflict, or its aftermath as a
committed - but not controversial - arbiter. It is of
the utmost importance that the United Nations, in every
situation, be seen as a genuine friend and helper, not as
an external body with a suspect motive. The agenda of
the United Nations must never differ from what is set
out in the Charter of the Organization, or in the
resolutions informed by it.

Experience teaches us that the challenge of
political settlement often involve significant United
Nations involvement, not only to create the conditions
for nationals and groups to sit together to sort out their
differences, but often to be a part of the negotiations
and of the defining of new structures and directions.
Again, the ability of the United Nations to be prepared
for these events and to work with the people fairly,
authoritatively and impartially is one of our greatest
strengths, and it must be jealously guarded and
strengthened. If the people in conflict do not see the
United Nations as strong, united and impartial, they
cannot rely on it to supervise or be part of any
negotiations.

I have spoken of the need for the United Nations
always to be prepared, relying on experience, for
potential post-conflict challenges. At the same time, all
situations are different, and unintended mistakes are
possible, either in terms of specific mandates or of
their implementation. My delegation hopes that, as the
Security Council undertakes the periodic creation,
modification and review of mandates relating to post-
conflict situations, it will always bear in mind the
subtle and not-so-subtle differences in conflict
situations, and the political and cultural contexts in
which they are taking place. Unless we are conscious
of these issues and nuances, it may not be possible to
arrive at the kinds of decisions necessary to achieve
success, or to prevent situations from sliding back into
further conflict.

Finally, in every post-conflict situation, it is
crucial for the United Nations to support development
programmes and the equal access of all parties to the
benefits of such programmes. Given the well-
established relationship between peace and
development, this approach must be faithfully upheld
as a standard, in order that the basis of further conflicts
in the future might be discouraged.

