Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Lebanese initiative to convene a Council
meeting is dedicated to one of the most important
challenges of global politics today. The current state of
international relations, as failure to resolve long-
standing conflicts and the emergence of hotbeds of
instability have aggravated the threat to global security,
urgently calls for collectively agreed work in conflict
prevention and the pooling of the efforts of all major
members of the international community.

To avoid further shocks, international efforts
must refocus from reacting to outbreaks of conflicts
throughout the world to developing a comprehensive
strategy to prevent the initial causes of conflict,
ensuring long-term political stability and socio-economic
development, to which I would add the challenges of
counteracting global and cross-border threats and
challenges, above all international terrorism, illegal
drug trafficking, organized crime and the spread of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of
delivery.

In the past few years, the United Nations, through
its Security Council and the Secretary-General,
together with many regional and subregional
organizations, has done significant work in identifying
the reasons for and helping to prevent conflicts. Yet
fast, radical solutions to large-scale problems in this
area do not exist. The successful containment of
conflicts depends on a systemic application of early
warning instruments, using the capabilities of
preventive diplomacy, mediation and good offices
missions. Strengthening the capabilities of the United
Nations is one of the most important thrusts in the
reform of the Organization, and priority attention
should be paid to it.

To ensure the success of our work in this very
important area, we need to observe a number of
conditions. First of all, there is no room for double
standards dictated by short-term political
circumstances or the preferences of particular States.
Why are efforts undertaken with regard to some
countries to establish a political process and a national
dialogue - for example, in Yemen - while sanctions
are imposed on the incumbent Governments of other
States whose opposition is primed for confrontation?

Secondly, bearing in mind that the majority of
conflicts are intra-State, it is very important to
understand that interference in domestic political
processes, regardless of the position of the receiving
parties, hardly answers the interests of long-term
stabilization. The experience of Iraq and Libya are
eloquent testimonies to the fact that, in the end, only
the people themselves can determine the fate of their
countries, and external armed intervention in internal
conflicts creates the risk of a spiralling confrontation in
those parts of the world.

Regarding the Middle and Near East, we can
affirm that such a scenario will, inter alia, reduce the
prospects for a settlement of the Palestinian problem. If
that is not solved, it will be a strong source of fuel for
extremist propensities in the region.

Today's conflicts cannot be resolved by force.
There can be no ambiguity about that. Success in
resolving crisis situations resides in a painstaking
collective search for political and diplomatic solutions,
and a thorough and inclusive dialogue to address long-
standing problems and ensure stable political
development in those countries.

Developments in the world show the growing role
of mediators in preventing and settling conflicts. Their
work requires great skill and, most importantly,
patience. We continue to see the need for good offices
missions of the Secretary-General and his special
envoys. We have all borne witness to the important
mediation efforts of the Quartet to find ways to resolve
the Middle East situation; the United Nations in the
negotiating process between the Cypriot communities;
the High-level African Union panel in the Sudan; Qatar
in the Darfur settlement process; and Egypt and other
States in the area of intra-Palestinian reconciliation.

The responsiveness and effectiveness of the
United Nations anti-crisis machinery reside in its
peacekeeping missions. We do not support increasingly
popular assignment to peacekeeping missions of
protection of civilians and delivery of humanitarian
assistance tasks. As important as those roles are, we
must not forget the fundamental functions of
peacekeepers as facilitators of political process and the
maintenance of peace and security in their areas of
deployment.

We are prepared to continue to support
peacekeeping operations. We believe it necessary to
pay particular attention to increasing the military
expertise of the Security Council and stepping up the
work of the Military Staff Committee in conducting, in
particular, systemic analyses of the military and
political situations in problem areas of the world.

Important challenges in helping post-conflict
countries are handled by the United Nations
Peacebuilding Commission, whose coordinating and
mobilizing we fully support. We believe that the efforts
being made to improve the United Nations civilian
capability and the deployment of civilian contingents
in post-conflict regions are steps in the right direction.

A significant role belongs to the Secretariat,
which must be responsible for monitoring and
analysing situations in different regions, forecasting
the development of crises, planning and expeditiously
informing the Security Council about potential
outbreaks of conflict.

The crises of the past year have helped open up
the potential of regional organizations in the prevention
and political settlement of conflicts. The African Union
has shown its mediation capabilities in the Sudan,
Burundi and Madagascar and was ready to do more in
Libya. In line with this African example, we see good
possibilities for partnerships between the United
Nations and the Collective Security Treaty
Organization (CSTO) and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization (SCO), which are increasing their
political authority and contribution and strengthening
regional and international security.

We believe it extremely important that, as we
continue to actively rely on Chapter VIII of the
Charter, making use of the possibility of strong
regional organizations capable of assuming more
responsibility for situations in their regions will allow
the United Nations to be more focused on addressing
global questions in the interests of the entire
international community.

We support the practice of establishing United
Nations regional centres for preventive diplomacy as
effective instruments for identifying and preventing
conflicts, as well as in developing regional interaction.
We appreciate the work of the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia and
its Head, Mr. Miroslav Jenea, based on the principles
of neutrality, objectivity and cooperation with the
Governments of the States of Central Asia and aimed at
interacting with regional integration organizations,
such as the Commonwealth of Independent States, the
Eurasian Economic Community, CSTO and SCO.

We share the opinion of the Secretary-General
about the importance of interaction with representatives of
civil society, parliaments, business groups and
academics so as to keep a hand on the pulse of, and to
monitor on a regular basis, the development of
potential conflict situations.

It is an acknowledged fact that conflict
prevention in all respects is much less costly than
subsequent settlement efforts. The material and
24

intellectual investment of the international community
in early warning and in strengthening the United
Nations potential for peace mediation, political
analysis and assessment of conflict situations will be
money well spent.

The Russian Federation supports the Lebanese
delegation's draft presidential statement.

