First, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting and for the attention that your presidency is giving to such a relevant issue as the working methods of the Security Council. Relying on you also as Vice-Chair of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, I do hope that we can make significant strides in updating and implementing revised presidential note S/2017/507. I would like to commend Kuwait for its work in the past two years - and now Saint Vincent and the Grenadines - as Chairs of the Informal Working Group. I trust that, under the leadership of Ambassador Inga Rhonda King, we will indeed be able to introduce new, positive practices and enhance cooperation between the monthly presidencies and the Informal Working Group. Italy aligns itself with the statement delivered today by the representative of New Zealand on behalf of a number of recent elected members of the Council from all regional groups and would like to make some additional remarks in its national capacity. Estonia has repeatedly called for more transparency since its election as a non-permanent member - and rightly so. More transparency is the only way to foster the trust of public opinion in the Organization and to achieve the common goal of strengthening multilateralism. More transparency means scheduling more open- format meetings and informative briefings, inviting more briefers from civil society, especially women briefers, and, above all, allowing better access to information. The need for more transparency is often emphasized in the eight notes adopted by the Informal Working Group in late 2019. The notes clearly codify some Security Council working methods, and the whole membership can benefit from them, especially the 10 elected members that serve only two years on the Council. Thorough knowledge of its current procedures can help them hit the ground running. In turn, better performance of the elected members translates into easier interactions with the permanent members and increased efficiency and effectiveness of the Council as a whole. We are now facing unprecedented circumstances. Owing to coronavirus disease (COVID-19), we are learning to meet, discuss and take decisions virtually. An unforeseen, tragic crisis has led us to change our working methods. We have managed to introduce more remote or smart-working, but that is just a first step. Never has there been a more compelling time for more transparency, more collaboration among Security Council members and an increased accessibility to the Council for the other Member States. Furthermore, given that the United Nations premises will be physically closed at least until the end of June, Italy welcomes the letter from the Estonian presidency dated 7 May, following on the ones from China and the Dominican Republic, which calls on the Security Council to improve the efficiency of its work while retaining transparency. In that regard, we support the efforts to allow the participation of non-members of the Council in open video-teleconferences consistent with rules 37 and 39 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure. We also support the continuation of the work of subsidiary bodies, particularly by allowing them to meet and take decisions virtually. Such improvements show that the Security Council is able not only to adapt to extraordinary circumstances but also to seize new opportunities to evolve. As provided for in Article 24 (1) of the Charter of the United Nations, the Security Council is expected to make decisions that will secure effective action on behalf of the wider United Nations membership. The Security Council should therefore be accountable to the wider membership, especially when its inaction prevents the Council from fulfilling its responsibility to maintain international peace and security. Recently, the Council has even failed to endorse the call of the Secretary-General for a cessation of hostilities on humanitarian grounds in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak. The reasons for that inaction are the veto and the undemocratic nature of the Security Council itself. Accordingly, Italy supports all initiatives aimed at limiting the use of the veto and making the Council more accountable to the whole membership. Ensuring accountability, transparency, efficiency and effectiveness in the work of the Security Council means, in our view, striving for the democratization of the Council. A desirable outcome of such democratization would be for the 15 members to consistently act together on equal footing. It is vitally important to us that elected members take on a more active role in the drafting and consultation process. Italy supports fairer and more equal burden-sharing among the 15 members, including in the penholdership system and the distribution of chairs of subsidiary bodies. A fair and equal distribution of duties is consistent with a strengthened Security Council, one that is not only more transparent, effective and efficient but also more democratic, accountable and representative, especially of underrepresented regions like Africa. It is also consistent with enlarging the Security Council through non- permanent members, certainly not through members with exclusive rights. We are convinced that the Security Council will perform better with an expansion limited to non-permanent members, also taking into consideration the continuous momentum traditionally brought by the elected members in terms of proposals and new practices. Italy has been advocating for such an improvement for years. Our goal is to improve the Security Council's working methods and reform its structure and composition. In this unique experience we are currently living, we should not limit ourselves to merely finding adaptive measures to return to business as usual; rather, we should be inspired to find new ways to work together that would ultimately allow us, as a Council, to enjoy greater authority and legitimacy.
