Mr. Konishi (Japan): Like previous speakers, we have
followed the situation in Burundi with apprehension, and
we welcome this opportunity to discuss this matter in the
Council. We have particularly been appalled by the vicious
cycle of attacks and reprisals, which have often resulted in
the deaths of numerous innocent civilians. We are gravely
concerned by the recent, unlawful seizure of power. The
use of force and violence by any party in order to advance
political objectives cannot be allowed to continue.

 

In order to mitigate the plight of refugees from
Burundi and Rwanda seeking refuge in such countries as
Zaire, Japan extended humanitarian assistance totalling
some $54 million in the course of its previous fiscal year.
This was implemented mainly through United Nations
agencies and non-governmental organizations. We
contributed a further $10 million this year to the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) to protect and assist these refugees.

As the recent report of the Secretary-General
indicates, the conflict in Burundi is not susceptible to a
military solution. It is imperative that all the parties
refrain from the use of force and resume dialogue and
negotiations in order to seek an early political settlement.
Only such efforts can put an end to the turmoil in
Burundi and bring stability and development to the
country. We commend the efforts of former President
Julius K. Nyerere of Tanzania to facilitate negotiations
between the Burundi political parties, as well as the
initiatives of the Organization of African Unity, as an
important African effort to resolve an African conflict.
We urge the parties concerned to resume negotiations
through the Mwanza peace process as soon as possible.

While urging the Burundi parties to negotiate, we
must also give them an incentive to do so. The
international community should thus make it clear to them
that a comprehensive political settlement will open the
way for cooperation on the reconstruction and
development of their country. Japan accordingly supports
the idea of holding an international conference at an
appropriate time and in a suitable format, following such
a settlement.

In this connection, I might mention that the Japanese
Government will host a symposium next month in Tokyo
on a related set of issues: the problems which African
countries have faced in the wake of political settlements
of perennial conflicts, how a truly durable peace can be
achieved, and how to promote reconstruction and
development despite the difficulties they face. Participants
will include senior United Nations staff members,
Permanent Representatives of various African countries
and other authorities on these questions.

We have also noted with alarm the Secretary-
General's warning that if the worst-case scenario becomes
a reality there could be a genocide in Burundi, and his
appeal for concerned countries to undertake contingency
planning. While Japan is not in a position to provide
personnel or logistical support for a multinational force,

 

it will consider the possibility and modalities of a financial
contribution, based on the plan's details as they become
more clear.

I wish to conclude my statement by appealing to all
the Burundi parties to commit themselves to dialogue in
order to achieve a comprehensive political settlement and
create the necessary conditions for national reconciliation.

