The President: I should like to acknowledge the
presence at the Council table of the new Permanent
Representative of the Gambia to the United Nations, His
Excellency Mr. Baboucarr-Blaise Ismaila Jagne. We look
forward to cooperating with him in the work of the
Council.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Angola

The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Angola, in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Do Nascimento
(Angola) took a seat at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached in its
prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
armed attack in Angola on 19 May 1998 against
personnel from the United Nations and the Angolan
National Police, in which one person was killed and
three people were seriously injured. It demands that
the Government of Unity and National Reconciliation
(GURN) and in particular the Uniao Nacional para a
Independencia Total de Angola (UNITA) guarantee
unconditionally the safety and freedom of movement

of all United Nations and other international
personnel.
"The Security Council strongly deplores the
failure by UNITA to complete the implementation of
its remaining obligations under the "Acordos de
Paz" (S/22609, annex), the Lusaka Protocol
(S/ 1994/ 1441, annex) and relevant Security Council
resolutions, especially its failure to cooperate in
completing the normalization of State administration
throughout the national territory, including in
particular in Andulo and Bailundo. It also strongly
condemns the confirmed attacks by members of
UNITA on the personnel of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA),
international personnel and Angolan national
authorities. The Council expresses its deep concern
at the serious abuses committed by the Angolan
National Police, particularly in areas recently
transferred to State administration, as well as at the
recent increase in hostile propaganda. The lack of
progress in completing the remaining tasks of the
peace process has led to a serious deterioration in
the military and security situation in the country.
The Council calls on the GURN and UNITA in the
strongest terms to refrain from any action which
might lead to renewed hostilities or derail the peace
process.

"The Security Council endorses the plan for the
completion of the remaining tasks of the Lusaka
Protocol by 31 May 1998 that was submitted by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General to
the Joint Commission on 15 May 1998. The Council
demands that the GURN and in particular UNITA
fulfil their obligations in accordance with this plan.
In this context, the Council reaffirms its readiness to
review the measures specified in paragraph 4 of
resolution 1127 (1997) of 28 August 1997 and to
consider the imposition of additional measures in
accordance with paragraphs 8 and 9 of resolution
1127 (1997).

"The Security Council expresses its
appreciation to the Secretary-General, his Special
Representative, and the personnel of MONUA for
their efforts to assist the GURN and UNITA to
implement their peace process obligations.

"The Security Council will remain actively
seized of this matter."
 

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/l4.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda. The

Security Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 11.30 am.

