Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this important debate
on the promotion and strengthening of the rule of law
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
The concept note prepared by Lithuania (S/2014/75, annex) explores in an excellent way the challenges and
opportunities in this field.

My country aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union, and my full
statement is available.

In our view, respect for the rule of law is an
essential condition for peace and for lasting economic
development. It is inextricably linked to the protection
of human rights and fundamental freedoms. As an open
society and an open economy, the Netherlands depends
on a strong international order. Our Constitution even
obligates our Government to promote the international
legal order, and as my Minister, Mr. Timmermans, has
said, in Europe we have traded the rule of the strongest
for the rule of law.

I would like to make three specific points.

First, for the Netherlands, international law and the
legal order are crucial. International legal institutions,
such as the various courts and tribunals in The Hague,
make a positive contribution to preventing conflicts, to
strengthening the rule of law and to combating impunity
by holding to account those who have perpetrated
mass-atrocity crimes. International efforts should be
complementary to efforts under national law. States
have a fundamental responsibility to pursue the rule of
law towards everyone within their jurisdiction.

The Netherlands strongly believes that the Security
Council should refer the current mass atrocities in Syria
to the International Criminal Court. In general, the
interaction between this Council and the International
Criminal Court must be improved. More generally,
the international legal order will be strengthened if
all States Members of the United Nations accept the
compulsory jurisdiction of the International Court of
Justice in The Hague.

My second point is that in our view, the rule of law
is essential for sustainable development. Security and
the rule of law are important development outcomes in
their own right. They are also critical building blocks
for sustainable development and inclusive economic
growth. Therefore, we want to see the rule of law and
justice for all included in the post-2015 framework.

Peace and inclusive and effective institutions require
the leadership and ownership of the countries involved,
supported by the United Nations upon request. That can
be achieved only through the acceptance, involvement
and participation of citizens and communities. Women,
especially, are drivers of development.

Countries without a functioning system that
guarantees the rule of law will be unable to reach their
development goals. Bilateral efforts must complement
multilateral efforts. One of the four pillars of the Dutch
development cooperation policy is security and the
rule of law. I am proud to say that we have very active
bilateral cooperation programmes with both Uganda
and with Rwanda in this field.

The third point is that we need a comprehensive
approach. Let me recall the High-level Meeting of the
General Assembly on the Rule of Law at the National
and International Levels, which took place in September
2012. It was the first United Nations summit of its
kind. The Declaration that was adopted at that meeting
(General Assembly resolution 67/1) requests greater
coordination and coherence among the United Nations
entities and with donors and recipients with the aim of
improving the effectiveness of rule-of-law capacity-
building activities in countries. The Netherlands fully
agrees with that statement.

We therefore support United Nations engagement on

the rule of law through the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP), the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and the Peacebuilding Fund.
We support the decision of the Secretary-General to
appoint DPKO and UNDP as the focal point for police,
justice and corrections activities. We urge all involved
to continue strengthening the implementation of that
initiative, as requested by United Nations missions and
offices in the field. More generally, we believe that the
Security Council mandates for peacekeeping operations
should include provisions on the rule of law.

To ensure growth and development, the rule of
law is especially essential for States coming out of
conflict. We need to address the causes of conflict and
fragility so as to break the cycle and make development
possible. However, that works only if a coordinated
and comprehensive strategy is in place early on, one
to which bilateral and multilateral actors are truly
committed. National ownership and vision must guide
it in order to meet expectations and to maintain the
momentum and credibility of the process. There can
be no lasting peace without justice, accountability and
reconciliation.

To conclude, let me underline the relevance of the
rule of law for the people that we represent here at the
United Nations. As the Dutch philosopher Spinoza,
who lived some 350 years ago, said, the goal of the
State is actually freedom. For citizens worldwide, the
rule of law, safety and justice are crucial to guarantee
that freedom, to achieve lasting prosperity and to
prevent violence and conflict. Country leadership
and ownership are essential, and where needed, the
international community should stand ready with
coordinated and long-term assistance. The Netherlands
is and will continue to be a partner for peace, justice
and development to both the United Nations and its
Member States in that respect.

