Mr. Yamamoto: The events of recent days and
weeks have shown more than ever the urgency of
finding a political settlement to the long Afghan
conflict. Efforts over the past year produced
opportunities for peace, which created not only hope
but also fear for many. But one point remains clear: the
conflict can be resolved only by direct talks between
the Afghan people. Those talks must be inclusive and
must represent the whole spectrum of Afghan society.
It is imperative, therefore, that direct talks between
the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the Taliban
commence as soon as possible. Many efforts have been
made for that purpose, working with Afghan parties,
and have created an opportunity where the beginning
of direct talks between the two Afghan parties seems
to have come within reach. Yet often the period just
before coming to an agreement is the most difficult
phase. All those concerned with peace efforts, above all
the parties to the conflict, need to continue to work to
bring about direct talks. I call on the parties to continue
to seize the opportunity of direct talks so as to build a
peaceful future.

I have listened to many Afghan people from across
the country who express their hopes and fears about the
future. They hope for an end to the conflict, but they also
fear that peace might come at the sacrifice of freedom
and rights, which the country has striven to protect and
advance for the past 18 years. Many young people of
Afghanistan, especially young women, are worried
about future restrictions on their participation in the
social, economic and political life of their country. Any
political settlement must include a promise to continue
to protect and advance human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all who live in Afghanistan, including
those of women, youth and minorities, as well as the
freedom of expression the media.

Another important achievement over the past
18 years, which needs to be maintained and further
promoted, is the institutional capabilities of the State,
including in the areas of security and service delivery.
The recent informal talks between representatives from
Afghan society and the Taliban in Moscow and Doha
gave opportunities for dialogue to address some key
issues needed for peace. I hope that that experience
will be carried forward and help deepen dialogue for
constructive outcomes.

The United Nations stands ready to support an
intra-Afghan process drawing on impartiality and
expertise. I also wish to point out that peace efforts
need to address and bring about a reduction in violence
and an eventual ceasefire.
Finally, the support of the countries in the region
and beyond remains critical. Their active engagement
in, and support for, peace efforts will be essential going
forward, particularly from neighbouring countries
that have the most to gain from peace and stability
in Afghanistan.

On 20 September, the people of Afghanistan are
scheduled to head to the polls in the fourth presidential
election since 2001, whereby the country will take
another step in strengthening the foundation of a
representative democratic political system. The United
Nations fully supports the efforts of the Independent
Election Commission (IEC), the Electoral Complaints
Commission (ECC), security institutions, civil society
and, above all, candidates, their supporters and voters
to conduct credible and inclusive elections on schedule.
Credible elections would provide an important political
foundation for the future of the country as well as
legitimacy and authority to the elected President, which
will be particularly important in view of the anticipated
peace process.

As for the technical and operational preparations
for the elections, which are led by Afghan institutions,
things are so far on track. The ballot papers and other
voter materials are being delivered to provinces and
districts. The recruitment and training of polling staff
is ongoing. The timely roll-out of electronic technology
is being managed by the IEC. The voters" list has been
updated, and over 9 million records have gone through
the public display and corrections process. Those are
some examples of reforms that reflect lessons learned
from last year's parliamentary elections. They and
other measures will go a long way towards improving
key aspects of fraud-mitigation measures designed to
increase the transparency and credibility of the vote.
Our United Nations advisers are working hand in hand
with the electoral management bodies during these
last weeks and days of intense preparation. However,
concerns still remain ahead of the elections. One
is security, another is voter turnout, and another is
possible fraud and irregularities.

There are serious efforts under way by Afghan
security institutions, in collaboration with international
partners, to ensure adequate security arrangements
during the preparations and for the polling day.
However, we still hear much anxiety expressed by
Afghan citizens, particularly in view of the Taliban's
stated threat to disrupt the electoral process, especially
by targeting civilians participating in elections.
Attacks directed against polling centres and civilians
participating in the electoral process are unacceptable.
They are clear violations of international law. I urge the
Taliban to retract their threat, and I urge the Government
to provide adequate security arrangements to safeguard
the electoral process.

Voter turnout is important for elections, and
9.6 million people have registered. Voter turnout could
be negatively affected by security, but also by the
general interest of voters. Through our field offices, we
have a sense that interest in elections is not as high as it
could be. That might be partly because there has been
stronger interest in the peace process, but also because
campaigns, which started on 28 July, have not picked up
full momentum. I appeal to Afghan citizens to exercise
their right to vote. Electoral bodies and the candidates
also need to call on people to come out and vote.

Another challenge that could affect credibility is
the issue of fraud and irregularities, which includes the
need to provide a level playing field for all candidates.
In that regard, I should like to point out that the best
technical preparations cannot substitute for the political
commitment to play by the rules and accept the results
of the elections. Candidates, political parties, civil
society and the media all have the ability to field
monitors for the process on election day. I therefore
call on all stakeholders to obtain accreditation with the
IEC in order to be present in every polling station. I
also urge all actors to refrain from taking actions that
could give any candidate undue advantage or call into
question the legitimacy and credibility of the process.
I encourage all stakeholders to bring cases of alleged
violations to the relevant bodies, including the ECC.

The most difficult choice for candidates and
politicians after elections is to accept defeat, but it is the
supreme act of statesmanship in a democratic process.
All technical and operational efforts are put in place
to make the presidential election credible. I appeal to
and urge all candidates and supporters to respect the
democratic process to reach an outcome acceptable for
the people and the country.

Efforts for peace should be accompanied by a
reduction in violence. Yet violence has intensified in
recent days. Recent attacks by insurgents in Kunduz,
Baghlan and Farah, and, above all, the multiple attacks
in Kabul, are of serious concern. Trying to obtain the
position of strength in negotiation cannot be an excuse
for the escalation. The parties to the conflict must
reduce the levels of violence and civilian casualties to
demonstrate their seriousness for peace.

I am much troubled by the continuing high number
of civilian casualties from such attacks. In particular I
must point out that the deliberate targeting of civilians
is a matter of grave concern and that it is a war crime.
The increasing number of civilians killed during search
operations and air strikes is also of concern. I urge all
parties to review the way in which they conduct their
operations in order to protect civilians and to minimize
the harm caused.

In that connection, I am very concerned about the
continued harm to civilians caused by the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan Province, which is
showing signs of its unabated and persistent intention
to expand its influence.

While the search for peace goes on, let us not forget
the millions of people across Afghanistan who suffer
the consequences of conflict. United Nations agencies
and non-governmental organizations currently work
in 331 of the country's 400 districts, in particular in
the areas of agriculture, education and health. Their
access and reach provide short-term relief as well as
the building blocks for a better future.

At the same time, it is never too early to start
thinking about how to assist people following peace
as well as while peace is being negotiated. The
international community has already embarked on a
study of post-peace assistance, led by the World Bank
in collaboration with the United Nations and countries
such as the United Kingdom. International assistance
and mutual commitment to Afghanistan, starting from
the ministerial meeting in Tokyo in 2012 to those in
London, Brussels and Geneva, will need to be reviewed
so as to meet the new requirements and situations
brought about by peace. The United Nations, as the
co-chair of the 2018 Geneva Ministerial Conference, is
conscious of the need to work vigorously in that area,
and we stand ready to work with the co-chair of the
2020 Ministerial Conference, yet to be chosen.

I cannot stress enough the importance of advancing
efforts for delivering peace, specifically the start of
intra-Afghan negotiations. Examples from past peace
negotiations from around the globe show that as
the prospect for substantive talks becomes real, the
challenges will become greater. The final stages leading
to the start of intra-Afghan talks become more difficult
and require delicate handling. They require cooperation
from all of us. The United Nations commends the
efforts of all those concerned to bring about direct talks
between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and the
Taliban and we in the United Nations will continue to
assist such efforts.

