The President (spoke in Spanish): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Australia, Cuba, Israel, Japan,
Switzerland and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
in which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, the
representatives of the aforementioned countries
took the seats reservedfor them at the side of the
Council Chamber.

The President (spoke in Spanish): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

At this meeting, the Council will first hear a joint
statement by me on behalf of the three Committees,
followed by a briefing in my capacity as the Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).

Thereafter, the Council will hear briefings by His
Excellency Mr. Jan Grauls, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999) concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and
associated individuals and entities, and by His
Excellency Mr. Neven Jurica, Chairman of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1373 (2001) concerning counterterrorism.

I shall now to make a joint statement on behalf of
the Committees established pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
respectively.
2
On behalf of the Chairmen of the three subsidiary
bodies of the Security Council established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004),
which deal with the issue of terrorism, I would like to
make some remarks on the cooperation among the
Committees.

As requested by the Security Council in all its
recent resolutions pertaining to the 1267 Committee,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) and the 1540
Committee, and more specifically in resolutions 1805
(2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822 (2008), we have worked
on enhancing the ongoing cooperation among our three
Committees, including our expert groups.

Over the past six months, the three expert groups
have continued to implement simultaneously their
common strategy, approved by the three Committees in
2007, in order to assist States in providing the
requested information to the three Committees. After
the first regional workshop, held in Senegal at the end
of September 2007, for West and Central African
States, and a second one, held in Botswana at the end
of 2007, for the Southern African States, the third
subregional workshop for the Northern and Eastern
African States is taking place in Kenya, from 11 to
13 November 2008. All three events are organized in
cooperation with the Terrorism Prevention Branch of
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC). The workshops have provided an
opportunity for the three expert groups to enhance
Member States' understanding of the differing
mandates and roles of the three Committees and
interact directly with the officials in charge of
implementing the measures outlined in the respective
resolutions. That common strategy is also being
considered for other regions.

The success of the workshops is reflected in the
content and quality of the new reports and additional
information on States' implementation of the
resolutions provided by the States to the three
Committees. That success has led to an effort to apply
a common approach to other areas Where the three
expert groups are being encouraged to intensify their
cooperation. In particular, the expert groups are
working towards a common strategy to assist the three
Committees in their cooperation with key international,
regional and subregional organizations and relevant
United Nations agencies and entities, as directed by
this Council in resolution 1822 (2008). That is another
concrete example how cooperation and coordination
08-59882
among the three Committees and their expert groups
can be enhanced with the use of common resources to
increase efficiency and minimize possible duplication
when each group approaches the same organization on
similar issues.

(spoke in English)

Another concrete example of such cooperation is
the visits to Member States carried out jointly by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) and the experts of the Monitoring Team of the
1267 Committee. Over the past six months, such joint
visits have been conducted to South Africa and Egypt,
and another is scheduled for later this month. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the 1267 Monitoring Team are also preparing to
participate, for the first time, with the experts of the
1540 Committee in a new series of regional workshops
on the implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), the
first of which will take place in Sao Paulo, Brazil, at
the end of November. Those workshops are being
organized by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs and sponsored by the
Government of Norway and the European Union.

We continue to encourage our three expert groups
to share information and to work in common areas of
interest to facilitate efforts by Member States to
implement their obligations under the relevant Security
Council resolutions. That exchange of information also
relates to technical assistance and includes sharing
experiences and lessons learned on the implementation
of the resolutions. The three Committees welcome that
further evidence of the close working relationship
between the expert groups. The Committees attach
great importance to the joint work and, in order to
promote it further, hope that the Secretariat will take
every advantage of actions related to the Capital
Master Plan once again to ensure the co-location of the
Monitoring Team with their colleagues in CTED.

The three expert groups continue to cooperate
within the framework of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (CTITF), established to
ensure overall coordination and coherence in the
counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system,
in the context of the implementation of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The
Monitoring Team, CTED and the experts of the 1540
Committee are not only all part of Counter-Terrorism
08-59882
Implementation Task Force, they also play a leading
role in some of the working groups.

(spoke in French)

That cooperation is crucial to the effectiveness of
the work of the respective Committees and essential to
the coherence of the important contribution of the
Council to the fight against terrorism. Avoiding
duplication of efforts is of paramount importance. On
the occasion of the previous briefing in May 2008, a
comparative table was issued to highlight the main
aspects of the respective mandates and areas of
competence of the three Committees and of their expert
groups. That table has served as a useful tool for
Member States, as it has helped them to better
understand the specificities and complementarities of
our work. An updated version of the table is available
today and has been posted on our respective websites.
It is used in our various outreach activities and
interactions with Member States, with which rests the
primary responsibility to honour the obligations under
the relevant Security Council resolutions. A better
understanding of what is required can only be
beneficial to the effective implementation of the
measures decided by the Council and, ultimately, to
countering terrorism and preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction.

Terrorism remains one of the most serious threats
to international peace and security, and cooperation by
all continues to be crucial. The Al-Qaida and Taliban
Sanctions Committee, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004) and their respective expert
groups remain committed, Within their respective
mandates, to continue the fight against terrorism and
are convinced that their work contributes to the overall
United Nations and international efforts to assist States
to fully implement the various resolutions. In that
context, the three Committees look forward to further
guidance from the Council on areas of common interest
in order better to coordinate their efforts, as indicated
in resolutions 1805 (2008), 1810 (2008) and 1822
(2008).

(spoke in Spanish)

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Chairman of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004).
3

This briefing covers the six month-period since
the last joint briefing to the Security Council, which
was held on 6 May 2008. It focuses on the activities
related to the submission of and follow-up to the 1540
Committee's report to the Security Council in July
2008. The report summarizes the progress made during
the second biennium on the implementation of the
provisions of resolutions 1540 (2004) and 1673 (2006).

In accordance with resolution 1810 (2008), the
1540 Committee agreed to establish an open-ended
working group to develop its next annual programme
of work, which it must present by the end of January
2009. A Vice-Chairman of the Committee is leading
that effort.

In July 2008, as Chairman of the Committee, I
presented to the Security Council the second report on
the status of implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).
That report, which is contained in document
S/2008/493, was produced in accordance with
resolutions 1673 (2006) and 1810 (2008). That second
report, which built upon the first one, submitted in
April 2006, identified several specific measures taken
by Member States to implement resolution 1540
(2004). Those measures covered a wide range of areas,
from developing new institutional means and adopting
new legislation and enforcement measures to
establishing and implementing programmes to assist
States in fulfilling their obligations under resolution
1540 (2004).

Initial reports submitted by a number of countries
and new information received from previously
reporting States, together with information gathered
from official sources, enabled the Committee to
provide a more complete picture of measures already in
place or planned for the near future. As of 5 November
2008, 159 States had submitted their first reports, with
102 of them having provided additional information.
Since my briefing to the Security Council on 6 May
2008, six States have submitted their first reports and
five have submitted additional information.

The data and the assessment included in the July
2008 report revealed qualitative progress in the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004), although
more work is needed.

Resolution 1810 (2008) encourages the 1540
Committee to work more closely, in its outreach
activities, with global and regional intergovernmental
organizations, and arrangements within and outside the
United Nations system to foster the sharing of
experience, create forums for discussion and develop
innovative mechanisms to achieve the implementation
of the resolution.

The Committee would like to take this
opportunity to express its gratitude to all States that
have responded promptly to the Committee's appeals
for information, as well as to encourage States that
have not yet reported to do so as soon as possible.

The Committee has continued to rely on outreach
activities to encourage and promote the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). Since early
May 2008, the Chairman, members of the Committee
and the experts who assist it participated in 14 outreach
conferences, seminars and workshops. The purpose of
such participation ranged from raising awareness of
States' action to achieve full implementation of the
resolution and encouraging the submission of reports
on the status of implementation efforts by States, to
sharing experiences and lessons learned. The
Committee and its experts continued to engage in
dialogue with participating officials from Governments
and organizations particularly interested in the work of
the Committee.

(spoke in English)

The Committee has engaged in several types of
outreach activity since May 2008. In order to
encourage States that were not responding to calls from
the three Committees to submit reports or responses,
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC) Terrorism Prevention Branch sponsored a
third workshop on the preparation of responses.
Designed for northern and eastern African States, the
workshop is currently taking place in Nairobi, Kenya.
The common strategy events are organized jointly with
the 1540 Committee's experts, the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's Executive Directorate and the 1267
Committee's Monitoring Team.

Since May, members of the Committee and its
experts have participated in meetings on relevant
subjects ranging from the legal aspects of international
instruments for countering terrorist acts in the nuclear,
chemical or biological areas, to more specific topics,
such as proliferation financing, export controls and
illicit trafficking in nuclear materials. Such events
included a conference on export controls, events in
Argentina and Panama organized by the Organization
of American States, joint UNODC-sponsored
workshops with the Pacific Islands Forum secretariat in
Fiji and a workshop in Austria designed for small
island developing States. During the reporting period,
other events that offered opportunities to discuss and
promote resolution 1540 (2004) were organized by the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Financial
Action Task Force, the Global Initiative to Combat
Nuclear Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, the Implementation
Support Unit for States Parties of the Biological
Weapons Convention (BWC) and by the academic and
policy think tanks the Council for Security Cooperation
in the Asia Pacific, the United States Naval
Postgraduate School in Monterey and the Istituto Affari
Internazionali in Rome.

The 1540 Committee welcomes the launch of a
new series of UNODA-organized regional workshops
throughout 2009 on the implementation of resolution
1540 (2004), focusing on border and export controls,
preparations for the first of which, to be held in Sao
Paulo, Brazil, from 24 to 28 November, are under way.
The Counter-Terrorism Committee and the 1267
Committee have indicated their interest in participating
in those workshops. The Committee expresses its
appreciation to UNODC, UNODA, the Government of
Norway and the European Union for their ongoing
support in the aforementioned activities.

(spoke in French)

Since the joint briefing to the Security Council in
May 2008, the 1540 Committee has continued to work
in close cooperation with the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and the 1267 Committee. Moreover, the
groups of experts that assist the three Committees have
stepped up their collaboration by completing the
common strategy for improving the response
capabilities of African States and by developing a
common strategy to cooperate with the principal
international, regional and subregional organizations
and United Nations agencies and entities. The three
expert groups have also conducted small-group
discussions on issues of border, export and customs
controls in various regions in preparation for the
forthcoming 1540 workshops organized by the United
Nations Office for Disarmament Affairs.

Efforts continue to develop closer cooperation
with the relevant international and regional
organizations and arrangements. To that end, the head
of the UNODC Terrorism Prevention Branch gave a
08-59882

briefing to the 1540 Committee on 23 August 2008,
which was followed by discussions and exchange of
communications with the experts aimed at continuing
cooperation in developing common strategies; sharing
information within the mandates of the 1540
Committee and the Branch, including on the
experience gained by the Branch in developing model
legislative provisions against terrorism; and mutual
participation by the 1540 Committee and the Terrorism
Prevention Branch in activities of common interest.

On 23 October, the Chairman of the BWC
Meeting of Experts and the head of the BWC
Implementation Support Unit briefed the 1540
Committee on the outcome of the BWC Meeting in
preparation for the meeting of States Parties to be held
in December and on the role of the Geneva-based
Information Support Unit. In the context of future
cooperation between the 1540 Committee and the
Information Support Unit, it was agreed that each will
participate in meetings organized by the other and that
they will cooperate in the coordination of assistance
requests.

In conclusion, we note that the implementation
Security Council resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term
process that requires continuous efforts at the national,
regional and international levels in capacity-building
and assistance. We look forward to seeing the
Committee progress to the next phase as it develops its
new programme of work and steps up its efforts to
assist States to fully implement resolution 1540 (2004).

(spoke in Spanish)

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Jan Grauls, Chairman
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 concerning Al-Qaida and
the Taliban and associated individuals and entities.


