Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): Today we
have voted to take a major step towards stability in
Burundi: we have firmly declared that the culture of
impunity must be brought to an end. With this vote to

 

establish a commission of inquiry, we declare that it is no
longer tolerable to get away with murder in Burundi. In
doing so, we have acted in response to the initiative of the
Government of Burundi and the recommendation of the
Secretary-General. The cosponsors drafted this resolution in
close consultation with the Burundi authorities here and in
Bujumbura.

My Government is deeply concerned over the
precarious instability of Burundi, and we must do all we
can to prevent a replay of the horrendous tragedy in
Rwanda. We have acted here today out of our abiding
humanitarian concern in stemming the systematic,
widespread and flagrant violations of international
humanitarian law that have plagued Burundi in the
aftermath of the October 1993 assassination of its President.

The continuing instability in the area demonstrates the
importance and the urgency of fostering reconciliation and
accountability for human rights abuses. My Government
supports the September 1994 agreement that established a
power-sharing system. We deplore attempts to destabilize
the situation or to foment violence, including through the
broadcasting of incitement to hatred over the radio. My
Government is providing $4 million in development aid to
Burundi this year, with a special focus on building stable
and accountable democratic institutions.

It is our hope and our intent that the commission we
have authorized today will help to set Burundi firmly on the
path to renewed peaceful and democratic governance, along
with respect for human rights. It will establish the facts
relating to the assassination of the President of Burundi on
21 October 1993 and the massacres and other serious acts
of violence that followed. It will, in the words of the
resolution, recommend measures to prevent any repetition
of deeds similar to those investigated by the commission
and to eradicate impunity in Burundi. These measures will
be recommendations. It will remain up to the Government
of Burundi to decide on what measures are taken.

We trust that the Secretary-General, as he moves to
implement this resolution, will appoint distinguished
commissioners reflecting a variety of judicial backgrounds,
and that all in Burundi will cooperate fully and openly with
them. We look forward to their appointment and to their
embarking on an effort crucial to Burundi's future. We are
convinced that the Government and people of Burundi
strongly support the creation of this commission of inquiry
and agree with them that this is an important step in the
process of national reconciliation. With the end of impunity
will come the beginning of new hope.

