The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I want to start, obviously, by thanking all Council
members for their heartfelt condolences and wishes.
They are my brothers and sisters, and I think that is
why, when we speak about something like Syria, we are
all very passionate about it. We know what pain feels
like, we know what suffering is and we get frustrated
when we see things happening that we cannot control.

This meeting was called for the purpose of
discussing the Astana talks for a peaceful solution
in Syria. We welcome the opportunity to discuss the
prospects for a diplomatic solution in Syria, but let us
not waste time with the disinformation, distractions
and outright lies that the Al-Assad regime and its
Russian and Iranian partners constantly use to distort
this conversation. Let us talk about the facts on the
ground in Syria.

This month already, the world has seen a clear
military escalation in Idlib. The Russian and Al-Assad
regime air forces have launched over 100 air strikes.
They are using barrel bombs, rockets and artillery.
They are targeting hospitals and medical facilities.
They are conducting ruthless double-tap strikes on
civilian volunteers like the White Helmets. For those
listening who have not heard of double-tap strikes,
that is when pro-regime forces strike an area, wait a
few moments for first responders to arrive and then
strike again. It is a disgusting tactic of terrorists, not
professional soldiers.

According to the United Nations, over 30,000
people have already been displaced by ongoing air
strikes. We have heard a lot of talk today, but we have
not seen any actions to indicate that Russia, Iran and
Al-Assad are interested in a political solution. All we
have seen are the actions of cowards interested in a
bloody military conquest of Idlib. Turkey learned that
lesson last week when it met with Russia and Iran.
Turkey wanted them to agree to a ceasefire in Idlib,
but Russia and Iran rejected Turkey's request and the
Al-Assad regime continued its brutal attacks.
The United States is long past taking Russia and
Iran at their word that they are interested in protecting
civilians in Idlib from further violence. No matter what
type of weapons or methods are used, the United States
strongly opposes any escalation of violence in Idlib.
Every member of the Security Council should feel the
same. It is time for Russia to stop wasting our time
when it comes to peace in Syria. Russia and Iran have
had every opportunity to demonstrate their credibility
as constructive actors in Syria. But what have they
done with these opportunities? They created so-called
de-escalation zones throughout Syria, which they have
cynically, systematically and ruthlessly violated. In
February, they violated the de-escalation zone in eastern
Ghouta. In July, Russia blatantly broke a commitment
made by President Putin and President Trump to
upholding a ceasefire arrangement in south-western
Syria. Now, In Idlib, Russia and Iran are violating their
last remaining so-called de-escalation zone.

These are not the actions of good-faith parties
of peace. This is not how you demonstrate your
commitment to protecting civilian lives, and this
is not how you convince the United States and other
countries to fund reconstruction efforts in Syria. I
repeat that it would be absurd for the United States and
other countries to consider the demands from Russia
and its allies that the rest of the world should fund
reconstruction efforts in Syria as Russian air strikes
pummel Idlib in an escalation ofa new military assault.
Russia, Iran and Al-Assad are demolishing Idlib and
asking us to call it peace. But the reality is that Astana
has failed. It has failed to stop the violence or to promote
a political solution.

We will know that the Al-Assad regime and its
enablers are serious about a political process for peace
in Syria not when they repeat empty promises but when
the violence stops; when the air strikes and the ground
offensives stop; when they allow the United Nations to
deliver life-saving humanitarian aid to civilians and
allow them the freedom of movement to escape the
impending siege; when they work with us to pursue
real terrorists, not to create more of them by targeting
innocent civilians; when we see irreversible progress
made through the United Nations-led Geneva talks
to reach a political transition in line with resolution
2254 (2015); and when we see Iran's influence over
events in Syria completely extinguished. We will not
allow Iran, through the facade of the Astana process,
to hijack the future of the Syrian people. Iran's role
and Al-Assad's murderous attacks on civilians will
not be ignored by the United States and the rest of the
international community.

I would also like to reiterate what I said last week
to the Al-Assad regime and anyone else contemplating
the use of chemical weapons in Syria (see S/PV.8345).
The United States followed through when it said that
it would respond to the use of chemical weapons. We
stand by that warning. Russia has the power to stop the
catastrophe looming in Idlib. It has the power to stop
the killing. It still has the power to match its words of
peace with deeds by working in Geneva to achieve a
political transition in Syria. We consider any assault
on Idlib to be a reckless escalation of the conflict. If
Al-Assad, Russia and Iran continue along the same
path, the consequences will be dire. The world will hold
them responsible and no number of Security Council
meetings will change that.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked to make a further statement.

