Mr. Salam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
delegation of Lebanon, Sir, would like to congratulate
you and your delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the current
month. I should also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Indonesia and his team for their
efforts in presiding over the Council last month.

We are now considering the last report to be
submitted by Serge Brammertz in his capacity as
Commissioner of the International Independent
Investigation Commission, charged with investigating
the assassination of Rafik Hariri, former Prime
Minister of Lebanon, and his companions.
Mr. Brammertz is leaving us after two years of service,
during which he bore witness to bomb attacks, political
assassinations, destructive Israeli aggressions and
attempts to intimidate the international forces operating
in southern Lebanon.

We listened very attentively to the briefing given
by Mr. Brammertz on the outcomes of the work of the
Commission. Before addressing the briefing's content,
we should like to congratulate this honest investigator
and serious-minded jurist for his earnest, methodical,
studious, solid and consistent work, which have
demonstrated his professionalism, as well as for the
adoption of various action plans, the submission of
evidence and the assembling of the best specialized
expertise. All of that has helped to create an
atmosphere of trust among the States involved in the
investigation with a View to promoting the necessary
cooperation. We wish to thank Mr. Brammertz and his
team for their two years of work, during which they
built on previous accomplishments, providing a solid
legal foundation for an extremely important legal
investigation requested by the international community
to address organized terrorist acts and repeated
political crimes targeting Lebanon and its elites,
whether they be Government ministers, deputies,
intellectuals or defenders of free expression. Chief
among them, of course, was Rafik Hariri, whose
assassination was an attempt to undermine the
country's stability and the safety of its people.

We wish to stress the following five points
contained in the report. First, the Commission has been
able to narrow the scope of its investigation through
more specific preliminary conclusions regarding the
circumstances surrounding the crime, including the
identities of additional individuals concerned.

Secondly, there is more specific clarification of
the presumed motives for the assassination, which can
be linked to Prime Minister Hariri's political activities
in the run-up to the elections and in the months and
years before the assassination. These factors include
the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004); the extension
of the term of President Emile Lahoud; the electoral
law reform; and the political status of Mr. Hariri prior
to the parliamentary elections of 2005.

Thirdly, conclusions have been reached proving
the hypothesis that there were operational links
between the presumed perpetrators of the crime and the
bombings and terrorist acts that followed the
assassination. The Commission has provided support to
the Lebanese authorities, enabling them to investigate
those links.

Fourthly, the Commission has made progress in
transferring its work to the Office of the Prosecutor of
the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, in accordance with
the recommendations of the Secretary-General and
resolution 1757 (2007). This process includes the
preparation of documents, data files and elements of
evidence, as well as the formulation of a draft strategy
for establishing a witness protection programme,
updating information and setting up plans for the
liquidation of the Commission's assets in accordance
with United Nations procedures.

Fifthly - and perhaps this is the most serious
point - the Commission has established that the
evidence it has gathered concerning the assassination
of Rafik Hariri and other incidents, including the
recent assassination of Lebanese Member of
Parliament Antoine Ghanem, show that the perpetrators
or teams of perpetrators are still able to move rapidly
in Beirut and still have wide-ranging and well-
developed operational capabilities. These groups have
also been able to draw on the expertise of specialized
teams and resources.

As his mandate comes to an end, I wish to
express to Commissioner Brammertz the gratitude of
the Lebanese Government for the work accomplished
by the Commission and to wish him every success in
the future. We are certain that the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia will
benefit from his profound practical and legal expertise.

We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank the Secretary-General for his decision to appoint
Mr. Daniel Bellemare as the successor to
Commissioner Brammertz and as Prosecutor of the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon when it assumes its
functions. We also applaud the response of the Security
Council to this new appointment.

We are approaching the third anniversary of the
assassination of Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and his
colleagues, and we also recall the assassination of
other martyrs who had sought to consolidate the
independence of Lebanon and defend its freedoms. We
wish to express our appreciation to the Council, which
was able resolutely to shoulder its responsibilities by
establishing the International Independent Investigation
Commission. The Council also exercised its
responsibility by listening carefully to the periodic
reports that were submitted and by developing the
Statute of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
Council has thus entrusted the Secretary-General with
the task of taking all necessary measures to ensure that
the requisite conditions are in place for the Tribunal to
start its work soon so that justice is done and so that
these terrorist criminals receive the punishment that
they deserve.
