Mr. Ferrarin (Italy): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the European Union. The Czech Republic,
Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland,
Romania and Slovakia, as well as Norway, also associate
themselves with the content of this statement.

The European Union has always followed with great
attention and concern the situation in Eastern Slavonia. The
most recent demonstration of this was the Declaration on
former Yugoslavia attached to the Conclusions of the
European Council of Madrid on 15-16 December 1995,
which pointed to the importance of an urgent solution to the
problem in Eastern Slavonia for the entire peace process in
the region.

This is the thrust of the draft resolution to be adopted
today by the Security Council, which follows up the Basic
Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium, signed on 12 November 1995 between
the Government of the Republic of Croatia and the local
Serbian community; establishes a United Nations peace-
keeping operation, the United Nations Transitional
Administration for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western
Sirmium (UNTAES), with both military and civilian
components; and defines the mandate for both components.
It also reaffirms once again the Council's commitment to
the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Croatia, emphasizing in this regard that
the aforementioned territories are integral parts of the
Republic of Croatia, principles that the European Union
has firmly and consistently supported.

First of all, it should be pointed out that the mandate
described in the draft resolution faithfully reflects the
commitments made by the parties in the Basic
Agreement. The parties - the Government of the
Republic of Croatia and the local Serbian community -
are responsible for scrupulously fulfilling these
commitments. UNTAES has the task of helping them to
face up to this responsibility, overcoming the distrust and
rancour provoked by a long and painful conflict. Thus,
according to paragraph 7 of today's draft resolution, the
parties must cooperate fully with UNTAES. This
cooperation is a necessary condition for the success of the
operation.

I wish to underline the particular importance of
paragraph 12 of the draft resolution, which provides that:

"UNTAES shall monitor the parties' compliance
with their commitment to respect the highest
standards of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, promote an atmosphere of confidence
among all local residents irrespective of their ethnic
origin, monitor and facilitate the demining of
territory within the Region, and maintain an active
public affairs element". (S/I996/23, para. 12)

The observance of these commitments will have a
decisive impact on the implementation of the Basic
Agreement. In fact, it is an absolute condition for healing
the wounds of the past and for allowing the voluntary and
free return of refugees and displaced persons - the
images of the shelling of Vukovar are still sharp in the
memories of the peoples of the European Union - and
the continued presence in that territory of the Serbian
community and other ethnic groups that have coexisted in
that border region for centuries. If these commitments are
respected, Eastern Slavonia can become an example of
civil and peaceful coexistence - in short, a model for the
entire area of the former Yugoslavia, which in recent
years has been engulfed by the most tragic conflicts that
Europe has witnessed in the past 50 years.

I also wish to underline the importance of paragraph
14, which authorizes Member States to take, at the
request of UNTAES, all necessary measures, including

 

close air support, in defence of UNTAES, and, as
appropriate, to assist in its withdrawal. The same holds true
for paragraph 15, which requests that UNTAES and the
multinational implementation force (IFOR) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina cooperate with each other as well as with the
High Representative, acknowledging the close relationship
that exists between the two theatres of operation. In our
View, these are two essential measures to guarantee the
security of UNTAES personnel, preventing the repetition of
incidents that have taken place in recent years in former
Yugoslavia, causing the deaths of peace-keepers, and that
are incompatible with the dignity and credibility of the
United Nations and must be avoided at all costs.

Paragraphs 20 and 21 provide that Member States and
UNTAES shall cooperate with the International Tribunal in
the performance of its mandate. The legacy of the conflicts
in the former Yugoslavia can only be overcome if justice is
done and if the Tribunal can perform its functions with the
greatest freedom and the maximum cooperation of all.

The European Union welcomes today's simultaneous
adoption of a technical draft resolution that authorizes the
United Nations military observers to continue monitoring
the demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula in accordance
with the report of the Secretary-General of 13 December
1995. The continued presence of the United Nations
observers on the peninsula is essential to prevent an
increase in tensions there and for the success of the talks
currently under way between the Governments of the
Republic of Croatia and of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia for a settlement that would peacefully resolve
their differences.

Today's draft resolution on Eastern Slavonia
constitutes, in the opinion of the European Union, an
important stage of the peace process in the area of the
former Yugoslavia - a process that now allows us to look
at the future of that region with greater confidence and
optimism. The European Union urges the Secretary-General
to ensure the earliest deployment of the new peace-keeping
operation in Eastern Slavonia, in order to facilitate the full
implementation of the Basic Agreement, and calls on
Member States to act accordingly. We are confident that
this new peace-keeping operation will prevent the
rekindling of a conflict that could risk having negative
repercussions on the still fragile Bosnian peace and
generating a new mass exodus of refugees and displaced persons.

Only the consolidation of peace in Eastern Slavonia
and its gradual and peaceful reintegration into the political,
economic and administrative system of Croatia can promote
the development and economic reconstruction of that
region, a goal to which all States and international
financial institutions are invited to actively contribute in
paragraph 18 of today's draft resolution. In this context,
the European Union is ready to assume an important role,
without losing sight of the relationship, underlined by
paragraph 19 of the draft resolution, between the
fulfilment by the parties of their commitments in the
Basic Agreement and the readiness of the international
community to commit financial resources for
reconstruction and development.

