Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I thank you for holding this
important meeting, Mr. President. I also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Abou Moussa, for his informative briefing on the
activities of the United Nations Regional Office for
Central Africa (UNOCA) and on actions to address the
threat posed by the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA). I
also thank Mr. Tete Antonio and Mr. Louis Sylvain-
Goma for their presentations, and welcome the
presence at our meeting of the Permanent
Representatives of the Central African Republic and
South Sudan.

Brazil reiterates its confidence that UNOCA can
foster a stronger relationship between the United
Nations and the countries of Central Africa, as well as
better coordination with regional and subregional
organizations. Brazil commends UNOCA for having
already improved coordination within the United
Nations system in Central Africa. One good example of
that is the recent initiative of bringing together
representatives of the Organization in the region to
discuss how the United Nations can increase synergies
and better support the Economic Community of Central
African States. We also value the fact that the Office
has included in its agenda the development of an
integrated approach in the field of peacebuilding,
which we believe is indispensable to ensuring
sustainable peace in the region.

We encourage the Office to continue to consider
ways of mainstreaming United Nations support for
electoral processes in the region, especially with regard
to facilitating political dialogue, mediation and
technical assistance. It is encouraging that UNOCA has
begun to cooperate with countries of the region in
security matters. Support for regional initiatives to
control the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons
in Central Africa is most welcome.

The international community should spare no
effort in assisting Central African countries in finding a
lasting solution to the LRA threat. If such an endeavour
is to succeed, Brazil believes that a threefold policy
must be pursued. This involves, first, lending full
support to all the regional initiatives under the auspices
of the African Union, with a View to assisting the
countries concerned in developing a common strategy
for tackling the LRA.

Secondly, it involves striving to develop a more
holistic approach, including actions to consolidate
State authority in isolated regions. This means stepping
up support for peacebuilding activities, with a focus on
improving national capacities, infrastructure and access
to basic services in the areas most affected by LRA
attacks.

Thirdly, the United Nations and countries in the
region should continue to strengthen disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programmes,
including through the use of mass communications
such as radio, with a View to stimulating further
defections from the LRA ranks. It is also worth
recalling that military operations against the group
must be planned in accordance with international
humanitarian and human rights law in order to avoid
further suffering for the civilian population.

The creation and functioning of UNOCA
reassures us that the United Nations will continue to
enhance its dialogue and cooperation with Central
African countries in order to help them attain
sustainable peace, security and development. Brazil
pledges its full support for this process.

