The Deputy Secretary-General: I thank the
Security Council and the Spanish presidency for
arranging today's debate, and I congratulate them on
adopting resolution 2325 (2016) by consensus.

I am indeed honoured to be here today in what is my
final appearance before the Security Council. I cannot
thank you enough, Mr. President, for your extremely
generous and warm words directed to me. From my
side, I can only thank all the members of the Council
for their friendship and cooperation over the almost
five years that I have exercised my functions as Deputy
Secretary-General, although I have occupied other
functions in earlier parts of my United Nations career
since 1980, when I started mediating between Iran and
Iraq, together with Prime Minister Olof Palme. I have
been very grateful for and highly treasure the dialogue
that we enjoy with practically every representative
here today, on both the personal and the professional
levels. I think that this element of personal trust
and relationships is highly important in this organ.
Sometimes when tensions are very high in the world
outside, we need to keep our cool here and try to do our
best under difficult circumstances.

I am a great friend of Chapter VI, but I also say
that sometimes we need Chapter VII to remind us of
what could happen if we do not do the right thing under
Chapter VI. In order to prove that, I have to pull out
the Charter from my briefcase. It is there, and it will
remain there even when I leave for my home country,
Sweden, next week. Again, I thank everyone so much,
and I will follow events very closely, not least in the
Security Council. To hear those words in this Chamber
is a great honour for me.

I also want to thank the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) and its Group of
Experts, under the leadership of Ambassador Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi, for their work on the important
subject under consideration today.

Preventing non-State actors from acquiring and
using weapons of mass destruction is among the
most important responsibilities of the international
community. The Nuclear Security Summits, the
International Convention on the Suppression of Acts
of Nuclear Terrorism and the close engagement of
the Council on allegations of chemical weapons use
have all played an important role in keeping us safe.
The Secretariat has also played its part. In 2012, the
Secretary-General convened a high-level meeting to
strengthen legal frameworks against nuclear terrorism.
After the accident in Fukushima, Japan, he chaired a
high-level event to emphasise the connection between
nuclear safety and security. In 2013, he launched the
investigation into the use of chemical weapons in the
Syrian Arab Republic.

Yet in our rapidly evolving global security
environment, gaps will continue to open. We have
seen the rise of vicious non-State groups with no
regard for human life. They actively seek weapons of
mass destruction, I am sure, and those weapons are
increasingly accessible. We have seen that in the use of
chemical weapons by Da'esh in Syria and Iraq. There are
legitimate concerns about the security of large stockpiles
of weapons-usable fissile material outside international
regulation. Scientific advances have lowered barriers
to the production of biological weapons, and emerging
technologies, such as three-dimensional printing and
unmanned aerial vehicles, are adding to threats of an
attack using weapons of mass destruction.

We must also be aware of the growing nexus
between weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and
cybersecurity. Malicious actions in cyberspace have
real-world consequences. Non-state actors already
have the capacity to abuse cybertechnologies to create
mass disruption. The nightmare scenario of a hack on a
nuclear power plant, causing the uncontrolled release of
ionizing radiation, is growing.

To stay ahead of this technological curve, the
international community needs robust defences that
are nimble and flexible. Preventing weapon of mass
destruction attacks by a non-State actor will be a long-

term challenge that requires long-term responses.
Tools such as resolution 1540 (2004) need to be fit for
purpose, and I am pleased to see the comprehensive
review calling for greater efforts to build the capacities
of all States. After all, this is a threat to our collective
security. We all need to boost our ability to respond. A
biological attack would be a public health disaster. Yet,
there is no multilateral institutional response capability.
The Council also has a role to play in holding those that
use chemical or other inhumane weapons accountable.
There can be no impunity.

This is a complex web of global threats and risks
that requires a sophisticated global response. We must
take advantage of every opportunity to strengthen
our collective defences. In that regard, the Review
Conference of the States Parties to the Biological
Weapons Convention was in many ways disappointing,
and I count on all States to work together to prevent
potential disasters. I also count on the Council to lead.

In closing, let me emphasise that it is not simply
a case of letting these weapons fall into the wrong
hands. There are no right hands for wrong weapons,
and weapons of mass destruction are simply wrong.
There is only one sure way to prevent terrorists from
acquiring weapons of mass destruction, and that is
their complete elimination. We live in a world that is
overarmed and where peace is underfunded. On behalf
of Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, I urge all States to
fulfil their commitment to building a world free of all
weapons of mass destruction.

