Mr. Dejammet (France) (spoke in French): Taking
into consideration your repeated appeals for brevity,
Mr. President, I shall shorten the usual compliments that it
seems to me should be addressed to the Vice-President of
the United States and to you for having organized this
meeting, as well as to Mr. Wolfensohn, Mr. Malloch Brown
and Dr. Piot for participating in our work.

I also believe it is pointless to repeat all the statistics
that have already been given this morning and that will
probably be reiterated during our debate attesting to the
seriousness of the effects of AIDS. We wish simply to
thank the United States for having taken the initiative to
organize this meeting. What we have already heard clearly
demonstrates that the AIDS epidemic, in terms of its social
and economic effects, is indeed related to the instability that
can afflict African countries and consequently has a direct
bearing on security issues dealt with by this Council.

Therefore, I shall not emphasize the statistics, and at
the same time I regret that those that have been given or
projected on the screen dealt with a limited number of
countries. In this regard, I would like to thank Dr. Piot
for having corrected or supplemented our information by
also mentioning the positive aspects resulting from the
efforts of certain countries. He cited Senegal as one such
country, and I believe he was perfectly right to do so.

We wish to recall, with regard to the picture
sketched for us, that if we are not careful and if we do
not indeed follow up the appeal we are addressing to the
international community today, a lasting health, economic
and political crisis in Africa will win out over the
sustainable development strategies that we are trying to
promote. Therefore, everything we do here at the United
Nations, in other chambers besides that of the Security
Council and in other international forums will be reduced
to nothing if we do not try to clearly and courageously
confront the problems raised by the AIDS epidemic.

But let us devote ourselves to the positive actions
that can be taken. We must mobilize our efforts at the
economic level, as was mentioned earlier by the Minister
of Namibia. I do not wish to dwell on that; I simply wish
to recall that we are dealing with a general undertaking
that should include appeals for all forms of aid, in
particular to official development assistance and indeed
for debt relief endeavours. However, I would like to focus
on what we can do more specifically and directly to
combat AIDS and to recall that in this regard France,
which has the honour of being the leading donor of public
and private funds to Africa, has been aware since the
beginning of the 1980s of the need to render very
concrete assistance to the struggle against HIV/AIDS.

Over the last decade, 600 million French francs, or
approximately $100 million or more have been mobilized
under the French fund alone for aid and cooperation,
through 60 projects focused primarily on prevention,
safety of transfusions, medical oversight, support for
associations that are active in this area and support for
applied research.

Aside from these mostly public efforts, there are also
the French contributions to multilateral agencies, the
contributions made by our embassies and contributions
linked to decentralized cooperation carried out by local,
regional and municipal bodies in France. Altogether this
amounts to approximately FF 100 million that France
allocates annually to the struggle against HIV/AIDS in the
developing countries.

 

However, we are aware that those efforts and the
efforts of all donors cannot alone make it possible to cope
with the challenge of the epidemic. This is why we support
the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS
(UNAIDS) initiative of the International Partnership against
AIDS in Africa, which is designed to strengthen the
mobilization of the entire international community and in
which France intends to actively participate.

It is also in this spirit that we have hoped to see the
establishment of an international fund for therapeutic
solidarity, a fund that would receive public and private
contributions and that would be designed to promote better
access for populations in the developing countries to
treatment against AIDS, including anti-retroviruses. Aside
from its direct benefits, such an initiative should contribute
by giving new hope to populations of the countries of the
South stricken by this disease.

We cannot avoid the issue of access for developing
countries to treatment and to a future vaccine when 23
million Africans are already infected. AIDS highlights the
enormous gap between the rich and the most disadvantaged
countries and creates almost unbearable inequalities because
of its effects on the most essential right: the right to life.
As was asked by the French Minister of Health,
Dr. Kouchner, during the special session of the General
Assembly devoted to the follow-up to the Cairo Conference
in July 1999, how long will we be able to accept the fact
that the treatment is in the North and the patients in the
South? This is, in brief, what the Namibian Minister
recalled earlier with great conviction, I believe. We cannot
focus solely on prevention. Twenty-three million Africans
are already infected. We also need to concern ourselves
with the issue of treatment, and this is expensive. Hence the
interest in this fund for therapeutic solidarity.

To make progress in this area, we need to mobilize
funds and to have the courage to recognize that, yes, this
will cost money if we do not wish to limit ourselves to
prevention, but also to try to provide care and treatment.
The pharmaceutical industry must also more systematically
be able to propose to the developing countries, to the
African countries, modified financial conditions facilitating
the provision of guarantees regarding the lack of parallel or
consecutive exports to the developed countries. There really
are specific initiatives to be taken. In this regard, we
believe the United Nations could usefully organize joint
action on this question that would bring together
manufacturers, the donor countries and the recipient
countries. This is one of the specific initiatives that we
would like to see as a result of this debate.

This also seems to us to be an opportune time to
draw up a master listing, under the aegis of UNAIDS, of
all the bilateral and multilateral actions currently being
taken in order to ensure the cohesion and geographic and
medical-social complementarity of such actions. As
Dr. Piot said earlier, we have seen that some countries
have avoided the spread of this pandemic. There must
have been reasons for this, and we should perhaps look
for further cooperation in our bilateral and multilateral
actions.

Finally, all of the donors could commit themselves
to considering each of the possible actions for cooperation
regarding HIV/AIDS and could examine each of these
actions to see how to reduce the impact of the epidemic
and strengthen prevention and access to care.

In conclusion, I believe that we should emphasize
the key role that the Secretary-General can play in this
area. Once again, we would like to express our thanks for
his presence and participation in this debate, and for
having set its tone. The Secretary-General has the
political and moral authority to continue to keep our
collective awareness on alert in order to maintain the
vigilance of each country regarding this subject in order
to plot our course and to see to it that we act in
conformity with the very generous words that we are
hearing today.

Thus, I believe that, thanks to the commitment that
the Secretary-General has shown as a moral authority and,
I stress, as a political authority - thanks to that
commitment and to the efforts that we will be called upon
to make today because of his initiative - in this way we
might find it possible to drive back this disease and to
provide prospects for the genuine sustainable development
of the African countries.

