Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): It is of great importance
that the Security Council is having a meeting on the
current situation in Ukraine. I would like to thank all
members of the Security Council for their statements.
I am grateful for their support of our President's plan
for the peaceful settlement of the situation in eastern
Ukraine.

We thank Assistant Secretary-General Taye-Brook
Zerihoun for his briefing. We welcome the report on
the human rights situation in Ukraine, presented by
Assistant Secretary-General Mr. Simonovie, who has
travelled to Ukraine many times. The report contains
conclusions and recommendations that are important
to the Government of Ukraine and highly valuable to
our country. Ukraine is ready to further develop and
deepen cooperation with the United Nations human
rights bodies. We welcome the decision to extend
the United Nations human rights monitoring mission
mandate for another term.

The report notes the continuation of the worrying
trends in Crimea, including instances of enforced
disappearances, detentions, violence and ill treatment
by illegal paramilitary groups, or the so-called
Crimean self-defence, often targeting journalists,
human rights defenders and political opponents. It
also notes impunity for human rights violations. The
judicial system remains practically paralysed. Crimean
residents face serious difficulties in exercising their
civil and political rights. Following threats, many
Crimeans have been forced to give up Ukrainian
citizenship. There are only two Ukrainian schools in
Crimea, one of which has already been compelled to
become Russian and its director forced to resign. Today,
we learned that unknown armed men have occupied a
madrasa, or Muslim religious school, near Simferopol.

According to the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the officially confirmed
number of internally displaced persons from Crimea,
Ukraine, is more than 12,000, who have been forced
to leave the peninsula due to the unbearable living
conditions created by the occupying authorities. That is
truly alarming. We demand that the Russian Federation,
which has temporarily occupied the Crimean peninsula,
ensure the protection of the rights of Ukrainian citizens
of all nationalities who remain in Crimea, that is,
Ukrainians, Russians, Crimean Tatars and others,
including their right to freedom and to security and the
rights of religious communities.

Given the ongoing systematic violations of human
rights in Crimea, the Ukrainian side hopes that the
situation on the peninsula shall continue to receive the
attention of the international community. It supports the
report's call on the occupying authorities in the Crimea
to provide access for independent international experts,
primarily the United Nations monitoring mission.

The report, inter alia, contains updates on the
information regarding the tragic events in Odesa. It is
significant that the efforts of the Ukrainian authorities
to investigate both the tragic Maidan events and those
of 2 May in Odesa have been acknowledged in the
report. The assistance that the law enforcement bodies
provided to the mission and their observance of the
proper respect for the rights of those arrested in Odesa
are noted with appreciation. We thank the human rights
monitoring group for the objective approach to the
assessment of the events. As of the present moment,
several suspects have been arrested. State criminal
experts were able to establish the cause of death of the
victims. The investigation continues and the official
results will be made public as soon as they have been
established.

In the report, special attention is paid to the situation
in the eastern regions of Ukraine. The document notes
the growing number of illegal actions committed by
highly organized illegal armed groups in violation of
national and international laws. It is very important to
mention that human rights violations and humanitarian
problems occur only in those cities that are temporarily
under the control of illegal armed groups, such as
Slovyansk, Kramatorsk and Snizhne. The illegal
activities of those groups include murder, torture,
the seizure of administrative and public buildings,
the kidnapping and detention of civilians, including
journalists, taking hostages, including observers of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
and intimidating and terrorizing the local population.
The groups are capturing infrastructure management
buildings, causing disruption to the operation of
some water and electricity supply facilities that have
suffered gunfire. Terrorists are deliberately waging
a war against civilians, creating barriers to the free
movement of people, including disabled persons. Such
people are cynically used as live shields. We express
our deepest condolences over the deaths of the foreign
journalists, Italian and Russian, who became victims of
the fighting.

From the very beginning, I would like to stress
that there is no humanitarian crisis in Ukraine. The
humanitarian problems in some parts of the Donetsk
and Luhansk regions are caused only by the activities
of pro-Russian illegal armed groups that have managed
to seize control of the cities. On the other hand, the
Ukrainian Government is doing its utmost to exercise
control over the situation, to restore law and order and
to provide help for all our citizens. The President of
Ukraine ordered the establishment of all necessary
conditions for the civilian population willing to leave
cities temporarily seized by terrorists through safe
corridors.

The State emergency services were assigned to
establish a multifunctional coordination centre in order
to transport affected persons, as well as to maintain
the health-care and social needs of the civilians. The
local authorities of other regions of Ukraine ensure
the accommodation of people arriving from the area
who have suffered terrorist attacks. The National
Coordination Centre is assisting in the temporary
accommodation of the citizens of Ukraine who are
moving from the Donetsk and Luhansk regions to other
regions of the country. Special attention has been given
to the relocation of children who are being sent to and
accommodated at summer camps in all regions of the
country.

The Ukrainian Government is demonstrating its
ability to bring peace to people. The authorities of
liberated cities like Mariupol and others are now able
to deliver the message of peace to other cities, whose
populations are still influenced by false messages
containing anti-Ukrainian propaganda. As a practical
step, the President of Ukraine, Mr. Petro Poroshenko,
held a large, inclusive meeting-dialogue last week with
the true representatives of the eastern region of the
country - representatives of local communities and of
the business and political elite of Donetsk and Luhansk
and legitimately elected mayors.

In his inaugural speech on 7 June, President
Poroshenko stressed that he was assuming the office in
order to preserve the sovereignty, territorial integrity
and national unity of Ukraine, ensure sustainable
peace and guarantee security for all citizens. Last
Friday, President Poroshenko presented his plan for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
regions of Ukraine, which I assume the Security
Council supports. Council members will have noticed
that the plan includes three major parts: ceasefire,
restoration and dialogue.

President Poroshenko has already initiated the
implementation of the plan by ordering a unilateral
ceasefire in the east of Ukraine. I would now like
to quote from the speech with which my President
addressed the nation last Sunday and in which he
explained the details of the plan.

"The immediate implementation of the peace
plan will open the path to political dialogue. I
invite legally elected representatives of local
Government, non-governmental organizations and
everyone else tojoin in the dialogue. Diametrically
opposed views will not be a barrier to participation
in the negotiations. I am ready to talk with those
who have erred or who mistakenly took a position
in support of separatism, but not, of course, people
who were involved in acts of terrorism, murder
or torture. Moreover, I guarantee safety for all
participants in the negotiations, for anyone who
wants to speak the language of argument instead of
the language of weapons.

"It is important to state that the issue of the
territorial integrity of Ukraine is not on the table.
We hear and take into account the specific opinions
of Donbas citizens, but we cannot and will not
transform Ukraine, where there is a large consensus
on the issues of unity, territorial structure, language
and geopolitical orientation, to satisfy them.

"What then is the way out of this situation? It is in
a broad decentralization of power. Decentralization
provides for the expansion of the rights of regions
on issues of historical memory, cultural traditions
and language policy. Those issues will never
again divide the country. Local communities in
Donbas will have the right to freely use the Russian
language along with the State language."

The plan has been supported by major world leaders
and international organizations - the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council of
Europe and the United Nations. Ukraine is committed to
strictly following a path of building peace. In response
to the peace-restoring initiative, the gunmen and
terrorists launched continued armed attacks, blatantly
violating the truce terms.

We welcome the intention of the Russian President
to cancel of Federation Council decision on the use of
armed forces on the territory of Ukraine. However, in
areas of the Russian Federation adjacent to the border
with Ukraine, a notable increase in the concentration
of manpower and military equipment of the Russian
Federation's armed forces has been witnessed in recent
days.

Ukraine calls on all international partners to
support our sustained efforts to restore peace and the
unconditional implementation by all sides of the 17 April
Geneva statement. We have asked the international
community to support President Poroshenko's plan for
the peaceful settlement of the situation in the eastern
part of Ukraine.

