It is my distinct honour to address the Security Council at this open debate on pandemics and security. Let me at the outset congratulate you, Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July and also thank you for convening this timely debate. Sierra Leone aligns itself with the joint statement made on behalf of the Group of Friends of Solidarity for Global Health Security (see annex 54). My delegation appreciates the call for this open debate on the potential consequences of pandemics on global peace and security. As the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic continues to have a severe impact around the world, nations continue to grapple with the debilitating consequences of the disease. It is no gainsaying that the COVID-19 pandemic poses not only significant risks to our public health and to our economy but also substantial risks to global peace and security. Its debilitating effect could be more disastrous in countries that are in conflict, emerging from conflict or experiencing humanitarian crises and weak and fragile economies. It has the potential to undermine peace and security and reverse gains made in peacebuilding and consolidation efforts and could be an existential threat to humankind. It is a global emergency that should be addressed holistically in all its dimensions in order to prevent catastrophic outcomes and ensure global stability. The impact of this global emergency continues to be horrifying, and if we do not manage those risks effectively and do not put in place the right policy responses - the disease will significantly compromise our global health, economic and social progress and global peace and security, thereby undermining progress made towards maintaining international peace and security. In that context, Sierra Leone welcomes the adoption by the Security Council of resolution 2532 (2020), which resonates with the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic. We add our voice to the demand for a general and immediate cessation of hostilities in all situations on the Council's agenda and also join in calling upon all parties to armed conflicts to engage immediately in a durable humanitarian pause for at least 90 consecutive days to enable delivery of humanitarian assistance. When Sierra Leone confirmed its first case of the coronavirus, on 16 March, the Government, in hindsight, announced measures to protect public health and safety, including the declaration of a state of emergency. That notwithstanding, COVID-19 has already taken a serious economic toll on Sierra Leone. Informed by expert advice, the Government intensified contact tracing and detection, scaled up testing and isolation, expanded treatment and undertook measures necessary to break the COVID-19 transmission chain in the country. Furthermore, 25 hospitals and 14 districts have personnel prepared to implement the National Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines. The Sierra Leone COVID-19 emergency preparedness and response has put in place mechanisms for the prevention, detection and response to the threat posed by the virus. I would like, at this juncture, to thank the Security Council for adopting resolution 2532 (2020), on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, yesterday, 1 July, and call for global solidarity on all fronts for the prevention, mitigation and recovery programmes for future global outbreaks. No one country can do this on its own and, until every country is rid of the virus, there is no safe haven for anyone. Given Sierra Leone's experience with Ebola, the Government is aware that threats posed by public emergencies such as epidemics, pandemics, climate change and cybersecurity have long-term implications for economic growth and development. While developing economies will be the worst hit, with consequent effects on peace and security, the COVID-19 pandemic has the potential to cause the deepest global recession in recent history. As the United Nations, we therefore have an obligation to our present and future generations to be more strategic going forward and to dramatically shift the way we identify, prepare and respond to future pandemics. A successful response to COVID-19 requires financial and technical resources, as well as real-time data. In that regard, international cooperation is key. We have benefited from working closely with other Member States and institutions on strengthening laboratory, surveillance, emergency management and workforce capacities to respond to disease outbreaks. We reiterate our support for the efforts made by the President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General and groups of States, as well as individual States, in introducing and implementing various response measures across the globe. In conclusion, we call on Member States to support actions of the United Nations in its response to health emergencies so that preparedness, response and recovery from global emergencies can be reinforced and integrated across all the pillars of our work.
