I wish to thank you, for President, for having convened today's meeting, and I should also like to express my gratitude to the speakers for their valuable insights. As has been expressed by many today, the full implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic is the only path towards lasting peace in the Central African Republic. I should like to highlight three developments. First, it is good to hear that the preparations for the upcoming elections are in full swing. I hope that this work can continue safely in respect of the ongoing health crisis. The Government of the Central African Republic has demonstrated its ability to utilize innovative solutions in difficult circumstances, for example, the payment of civil-servant salaries using mobile networks. Secondly, the law establishing the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparation and Reconciliation has finally been promulgated. That is great news. I hope that the next steps necessary to operationalize the Commission will follow swiftly, including the naming of commissioners. The Commission will be an invaluable tool in the fight against injustice and impunity, and assist in national reconciliation. I hope that the health crisis will not hinder the continued capacity-building of justice and the rule of law in the country. Thirdly, but perhaps most important, violence and the abuse of human rights in the Central African Republic continue, with new hotspots emerging. Although the number of human rights abuses has decreased, it is important to remember that the monitoring and reporting of incidents has, unfortunately, been affected by the pandemic. Attacks on civilians and the abuse of human rights are direct violations of the peace agreement and as such are unacceptable. The most visible of such actions by some armed groups, spoilers, if you will, has been the announcement by the group Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation of the suspension of the armed group's participation in the agreement's follow-up and monitoring mechanisms, expanding the area of its activities and directly attacking the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and national forces. Retour, reclamation et rehabilitation, together with five other groups, has also been listed in the Secretary-General's report on patterns of conflict- related sexual violence (S/2019/280). In that light, I fully support the call made by the Secretary-General in paragraph 97 of his report (S/2020/545) "to take a firm, unequivocal stance regarding the application of sanctions under article 35 of the Agreement". I should like to end my statement by commending the robust cooperated response of MINUSCA, the authorities of the Central African Republic and partners to protect civilians from armed group violence and support the peace agreement.
