Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased, Sir, to see you, the Foreign
Minister of Bulgaria, in the Chair. We are grateful to
your delegation for having taken the initiative to
convene today's meeting to consider the problem of
Kosovo in depth. We would also like to thank Assistant
Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for his detailed
briefing.

As was made clear in the briefing, the situation in
and around Kosovo continues to be very difficult and
requires that the international community give it
constant attention and demonstrate its proactive
involvement in it. We note with satisfaction the success
that has been achieved by the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) under the
leadership of Michael Steiner to establish the
institutions of provisional self-government in the
province, to resolve outstanding economic and social
problems, to establish a dialogue with the Serbian
Return Coalition and to develop cooperation with the
Belgrade Government.

However, local authorities still have a long way
to go before we can seriously start talking about
consolidation of the day-to-day workings of Kosovo's
institutions of self-government and about the principle
of multi-ethnicity. It remains a fact that there are still
frequent cases of those bodies disregarding the
interests of minorities, which could have a negative
impact on the level of minority participation in the
upcoming municipal elections. If that happens, we will
not have the balance needed to create the conditions for
the further normalization of daily life in Kosovo.

The situation regarding inter-ethnic relations is
already alarming. Efforts by UNMIK to establish the
necessary conditions for the return of minorities have
so far not produced significant results. Mr. Annabi has
mentioned how delicate this problem is. In fact,
according to assessments by the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO), one of the most problematic
areas in terms of ethnically motivated violence, is the
south-east sector of Kosovo, namely, the Klokot area.
According to NATO reports, which are available from
Brussels, there are still cases of intimidation and of
trying to instil fear in Serbs. Explosions and house
burnings also continue to take place there. Obviously,
similar actions, including the examples just given by
Mr. Annabi, are aimed at expelling Serbs from the
province. That is of course intolerable.

We resolutely support the efforts of Michael
Steiner to consolidate the rule of law in Kosovo.
However, it is quite clear that the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo is still facing many serious
problems in this area. We believe the main problem is
the deliberate resistance by the criminalized segment of
society, principally by former fighters of the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) and members of other radical
nationalist groups. The fact is that those groups have
representatives in Kosovo's governing structures. It is
precisely those groups that provoked the disturbances
in Pristina and a number of other places by protesting
legitimate actions taken by UNMIK and KFOR police
to arrest former KLA commanders and people who had
committed serious crimes.

We are convinced that, strictly in keeping with
resolution 1244 (1999), UNMIK should continue to
take robust action to restore order in the province and
to establish law and order. In that regard, UNMIK
should staunchly protect its staff from all kinds of
insinuation and should counter any attempts to
discredit them, including politically motivated
attempts. We believe that the Security Council should
help create the necessary political background and stop
any attacks on international staff performing the tasks
entrusted to them. Attempts by Kosovo's institutions of
self-government to call into question the legitimacy of
UNMIK's efforts to combat crime and extremism are
also inadmissible. In fact, the representative of
Cameroon has just mentioned this point. I agree with
his position regarding the need to condemn such
attempts.

The question of Mitrovica continues to be an
acute problem. We are convinced that we need to use
exclusively political methods to resolve this matter, in
close contact with Belgrade and without any use of
force or type of coercion. The situation in Mitrovica is
very sensitive. It is important that the international
presence act in a very responsible manner and that it
avoid any rash or improperly thought out action.

There is another unresolved problem: the
demarcation of the Yugoslavia-Macedonia border in
keeping with the Agreement concluded between
Belgrade and Skopje. The demarcation of the Kosovo
section of that border will be possible only with the
direct participation of UNMIK. Once again, we call for
an acceleration of the start of the work that must be
done in this regard. This is an important matter, which
needs to be resolved; it is being delayed in an
unjustified way.

Speaking in this Chamber last April, Michael
Steiner and the head of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia/ Serbia Coordinating Centre for Kosovo and
Metohija, Mr. Covie, invited members of the Security
Council to visit Kosovo in order to get to know the
situation on the ground and to assess the progress
made. We think such a visit would be timely and could
perhaps take place in November after the holding of
municipal elections. Of course, the mission would also
visit Belgrade to make contact with the leadership of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. We think that
sending a Security Council mission would make it
possible once again to demonstrate strong support for
UNMIK's work to secure full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999). Such a mission would also
serve to reaffirm the international community's
commitment to a comprehensive settlement.

