We would like to begin by thanking the presidency for organizing today's meeting, and we thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing. It is our belief that the best way for the three countries to resolve their differences over the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is through direct talks. It is encouraging to hear that the parties have decided to continue a negotiation process led by the African Union (AU). In this regard, we welcome the announcement by the Chairperson of the African Union Commission that more than 90 per cent of the disputed issues have been resolved and that a legal and technical committee to discuss outstanding issues has been formed. The decision taken by the three parties to refrain from making statements or taking any action that may threaten or further complicate the AU-led process shows their good faith and willingness to compromise in striving to reach an amicable agreement. It is encouraging that the parties involved are displaying a constructive and positive approach in the negotiations, which may lead them to reach a mutually acceptable solution on the outstanding technical and legal issues. All three parties will need to make compromises in good faith in order to reach a deal in the coming weeks. We highly encourage them to keep building trust, and we stand ready to closely follow the developments of the AU-led negotiation process and collaborate with the parties. Resolving outstanding key issues like water sharing, drought mitigation and setting up a dispute-resolution mechanism would set an excellent regional and international precedent for future disputes on such issues. It is important to avoid any potentially negative effects on the populations' households, incomes and ways of life. We humbly recommend that the parties take into account each other's legitimate concerns and interests to avoid mutual mistrust so that the necessary compromises can be made, and a timely agreement reached. Let us preserve this renewed spirit of conciliation and take advantage of the window of opportunity that has opened up to steer clear of any possible confrontation, with a view to creating a joint instrument through which the three countries could build trust and formalize cooperation. Finally, we would like to reiterate the need to continue the discussions based on common understanding, good faith, mutual benefit and trust until an agreement is reached. The diplomatic path should always prevail.
