Ms. Yanez Loza (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Mr. President, for convening today's
open debate on challenges to international peace and
security. There is no doubt that the maintenance of
peace and the prevention of conflicts are linked to a
series of indubitably complex factors.

However, this is not a new reality. The United
Nations was created with the objective, among others,
of saving future generations from the scourge of war.
In order to fulfil that goal and the other objectives
outlined in the Preamble to the Charter of the United
Nations, the international community has adopted a
series of proposals that interlink the maintenance of
international peace and security, the peaceful settlement
of disputes, the self-determination of peoples, friendly
coexistence among all nations and the solution of
economic, social, cultural or humanitarian problems
through international cooperation.

Ever since its foundational document was
written, the United Nations has recognized the close
interlinkage of those issues. One of the most obvious
of these is the relationship between disarmament and
development. Article 26 of the Charter expresses the
need to maintain international peace and security
with the least diversion for armaments of the world's
human and economic resources. The relationship
between disarmament and development was most
clearly expressed at the International Conference on the
Relationship between Disarmament and Development,
convened by the General Assembly in 1987. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
commitment to achieving the Sustainable Development
Goals, as well as the vast means required for its
implementation, highlight even further the relationship
between disarmament and development.

Recognizing the complexity of those factors, the
Charter envisages a series of organs with different
competences, albeit with a certain overlap between
them. That is why the General Assembly, the Security
Council and the Economic and Social Council, together
with the Secretariat, must work in a coordinated
manner to meet the objectives and purposes of the
Charter, all while respecting the prerogatives of each
organ and avoiding the duplication of functions. There
is no doubt that these complex interrelationships
mean that the maintenance of international peace and
security is affected by various issues such as climate
change, respect for human rights and, as we have seen
very recently, the damage caused by natural disasters.
We must nevertheless emphasize how important it is
to ensure that the Security Council avoids making
security issues out of topics that may be current at
any given moment and thereby arrogate to itself
functions that come under the purview of other United
Nations entities.

Article 99 of the Charter of the United Nations
assigns to the Secretary-General the important duty
of informing the Council about threats to international
peace and security. We believe that together with the
appropriate implementation of preventive diplomacy, as
Secretary-General Guterres has advocated, he should
make use of that function when appropriate.

The Secretary-General's proposed reform of
the peace and security pillar is currently under
discussion in the General Assembly, in accordance
with its responsibilities. Once the Assembly has taken
a final decision, we hope to see all United Nations
bodies working in coordination so that peacekeeping
operations, special political missions and peacebuilding
efforts are effective and efficient. The participation
of women and a focus on gender, whose benefits are
indisputable, should occupy a special place in these
areas, especially peacebuilding.

In conclusion, we believe that we should emphasize
some initiatives that can prove very helpful, such as the
early use of mediation as an effective way to prevent
conflicts, and we therefore commend the Secretary-
General's initiative establishing a High-level Advisory
Board on Mediation, since we support all efforts
towards diplomacy for peace, and especially as they
accord with the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations.

