Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia shares the grief affecting the international
community and the United Nations family at the tragic
attack that occurred in Nigeria this morning. In
condemning that attack and all terrorist actions, we
convey our heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims.

I wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his presence and for his presentation on the matter

before us. I congratulate you, Mr. President, on the
initiative in organizing a debate on peacekeeping
operations, based on a document (S/2011/496, annex)
of great interest and importance.

We concur with the View stated in that document
that although the notion of peacekeeping does not
appear explicitly in the Charter of the United Nations,
it has become one of the main tools of the
Organization. Furthermore, we agree that despite the
shortcomings that still occur, peacekeeping operations
represent perhaps the most tangible manifestation of
the collective and joint efforts of the Member States to
maintain international peace and security.

Colombia closely follows the discussions on
restructuring and enhancing the functioning of
peacekeeping operations. Convinced of the necessity of
promoting peaceful coexistence, we always
constructively participate in tasks that the Organization
develops in that area, particularly in peacekeeping and
peacebuilding operations such as the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the Multinational Force
and Observers in the Sinai and the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Sierra Leone.

For Colombia, the fundamental principles of

peacekeeping - such as consent of the parties,
impartiality, and the use of force only in the case of
self-defence or defence of the mandate - must be

observed. We believe it appropriate to reiterate the
validity of such principles and to highlight the fact that
they must be taken into account when analysing the
options for responding to the challenges imposed by
reality.

We are encouraged by initiatives that seek to
improve the approaches between the Security
Council - the organ that plans and adopts mandates
for peacekeeping operations - and those that must
implement them, particularly troop-contributing
countries. We agree with the View that in establishing
the mandates of peacekeeping operations the political
context must be addressed and there must be clear and
realistic objectives that are in keeping with the
available resources. In that regard, the contributions of
the broad membership represented in the General
Assembly, especially the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations and the Fifth Committee, are
fundamental to seeking greater efficiency and
transparency in the tasks of peacekeeping operations.

I believe it is important to highlight three key
elements for the effective and efficient functioning of
peacekeeping operations. The first is collaboration on
purposes, focusing on the political and planning
aspects of peacekeeping operations. Second is
collaboration in action, oriented to operational aspects
in the field. A third key issue is collaboration for the
future, focused on the development of sustainable
capacities to meet the challenges ahead.

One essential element in creating genuine
collaboration is engaging in timely dialogue before the
approval and renewal of mandates. In this context, I
note the established practice of the Security Council of
convening meetings with troop-contributing countries
prior to the renewal of the mandate of a mission. We
encourage the Council to resort to that procedure on a
regular basis.

We should strike a balance between the
significance and scope of United Nations peacekeeping
missions and review and, when necessary, rethink the
nature and purpose of those missions. We should also
be bolder in the deployment of troops and the civilian
component, which is particularly relevant because the
dynamics of conflicts have changed substantially, due
to factors such as organized crime, mass displacement
and human rights violations, among others. It is well
known that peacekeeping missions cannot merely
deploy military and police elements, but must also
have a strategic plan that takes into account the host
countries' national capacities and that includes social,
political and self-sustaining development programmes
based on the principles of respect, the protection of
civilians - who are the most vulnerable - and the
sovereignty and self-determination of peoples, as
enshrined in the Charter.

Finally, I note the ongoing willingness and
openness to dialogue that my delegation has found in
the officials of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations during the coordination of my country's
various contributions in Haiti, both bilaterally and
through the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti. Colombia reconfirms its readiness to take part in
the evolving peacekeeping framework; to continue to
contribute to peacekeeping operations to the extent that
our domestic conditions allow; and to participate
actively in discussions on restructuring and
strengthening the United Nations capacity in this field.

11-4815]

