The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Burundi, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the discussion of the item
on the Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nsanze
(Burundi) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Council, I wish to extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Augustin Nsanze, Minister for Foreign
Relations and International Cooperation of Burundi.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Youssef Mahmoud, Executive Representative of
the Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Mahmoud to take a seat at the
Council table.

In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council's prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to His
Excellency Mr. Peter Maurer, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland and Chairperson of the
country-specific configuration on Burundi of the
Peacebuilding Commission.
It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Maurer to take a seat at the Council
table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document 8/2009/611, which contains the sixth report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by Mr. Mahmoud and Mr. Maurer. I now give
the floor to Mr. Mahmoud.


