Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Zerrougui for today's briefing
and for her tireless efforts, which contributed to the first
peaceful transfer of power in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo earlier this year. I also thank Ms. Modi
for joining us and adding her voice to those of other
Congolese calling for change.

Since taking office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
has responded to this historic moment by committing
to combat corruption and human rights by Democratic
Republic of the Congo security forces, improve
security, strengthen the Democratic Republic of the
Congo's investment climate and promote development.
He has also committed to working closely with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
to neutralize armed groups and pave the way for
MONUSCO's drawdown and departure.

Just two months since this historic transfer of power,
the Congolese people are already beginning to see
positive developments. Last month, President Tshisekedi
moved to arrest and prosecute police accused of firing
on peaceful protesters. He has released prisoners of
conscience and pledged to reform the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's abusive national intelligence
agency and close unofficial detention centres.

Partly in response to that change, thousands of
combatants are laying down their weapons in hopes
of transitioning into a peaceful civilian life. We urge
President Tshisekedi to keep the commitments he has
made to fully implementing this hopeful vision for the
future of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
look forward to the naming of the Cabinet ministers
who will help him carry that out.

The United States is committed to helping the
Congolese people create a more peaceful and prosperous
Congo. We hope to work with the new Government to
forge a more constructive relationship with MONUSCO.
We would like to recognize and support the proactive
decisions taken by MONUSCO's leadership, consistent
with its mandate, to redirect efforts away from
Kinshasa and towards the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo, streamline the force and renew efforts to
address the root causes of violence.

Turning to the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we are deeply concerned about rising tensions
among Burundi, Rwanda and Uganda, including
reports of cross-border attacks. Given the history, these
are especially worrisome developments. No one wins
from a proxy war in the Great Lakes. The United States
urges all parties to refrain from the use of violence and
to respect the territorial integrity of all States in the
region. We urge MONUSCO, the Office of the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes
Region and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Burundi to work more closely
together as we refocus the peacekeeping efforts of the
United Nations in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

Finally, it has been two years since the murders
of United Nations experts Michael Sharp and Zaida
Catalan. From the first time he travelled to the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo to support the
demobilization of child soldiers, Michael Sharp was
deeply committed to peace and reconciliation. We
regret that he did not live to see the changes taking place
today in the Kasais and wish we could still benefit from
his thorough reporting and his thoughtful analysis.
The United States continues to call for accountability
for those responsible for those murders. We urge the
Council to continue to give robust support to the
follow-on mechanism of the United Nations in support
of Congolese investigations.

