Mr. Wetland (Norway): The year 2011 will
clearly be a critical crossroads in the Middle East
peace process. By August, Prime Minister Fayyad's
Government is set to complete its two-year plan for
Palestinian State-building. The agreed timeframe of the
currently stalled Israeli-Palestinian negotiations will
also come to an end. In other words, the time to seize
the opportunity is now. Failing to do so will not merely
result in yet another lost opportunity; the very prospect
of a negotiated two-State solution is at stake. That is
why we must all stand firm behind the stated goal of
negotiating a framework agreement on permanent
status and a subsequent comprehensive peace treaty,
within the agreed timeline.

This was a main message voiced by the Foreign
Minister of Norway during his visit to the region this
month. As Chair of the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Minister Store also expressed his
confidence that the international donor community will
do its share to make this happen. At the AHLC meeting
here in New York last September, we were greatly
encouraged by the World Bank conclusion that the
Palestinian Authority stands ready to establish a State
in the near future. We have no doubt that, at the
upcoming AHLC meeting in April, to be convened by
Norway and hosted by the European Union in Brussels,
major donors will recommit to help the Fayyad
Government bring the State-building project to
completion by the August deadline.

However, by September 2011, we will need to see
a substantial breakthrough on the political track. The
bottom-up approach to Palestinian State-building is in
itself not sufficient. Questions will arise in earnest
concerning its sustainability beyond 2011 if a decisive
top-down push is not brought to bear.

If the Palestinian State-to-be is to break out of
structural donor dependence, it will need political and
economic conditions to do so. Restricted access to
resources and markets in Area C and East Jerusalem, as
well as to foreign markets, is a major barrier to
economic growth in the private sector. This potential
must be tapped to fuel the drive towards independence.

The peace process is in a fragile state. Norway is
deeply concerned, and so we call on the parties to
urgently return to negotiations in good faith. Both sides
know perfectly well what they have to do and what
they must not do to create an environment conducive to
negotiations. For one, maintaining security for all is a
key factor for the parties to build confidence and trust
in each other as partners in peace. Moreover, it is
imperative to refrain from actions that are illegal under
international law and that are gradually eroding the
ground on which the two-State solution is to be built.
In that respect, we take note of the Security Council's
draft resolution on Israeli settlements submitted
yesterday.

Current policies in the occupied Palestinian
territory are simply not sustainable, and time is running
out. If international donors lose sight of the two-State
solution, it will no longer be possible to take their
tireless support for granted. Two decades after the
Madrid peace conference, a real sense of urgency is
overdue, and decisive action should not be too much to
ask for. Not only should the parties return to the table;
they must act rapidly to rescue the two-State solution.

