Mr. Cabral (Guinea-Bissau) (interpretation from French): My delegation would like to thank you, Sir, for
being so kind as to preside over this open meeting of the
Security Council on the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Your presence among us bears witness to
the important contribution of your country, Costa Rica, to
international affairs. I would like, with your permission,
to take this opportunity to underscore the important role
of the delegation of Costa Rica in the Security Council
and to say how much we have appreciated being able to
cooperate with it under the skilful and diligent guidance
of Ambassador Fernando Berrocal Soto.

As we approach the Christmas holiday, which is the
best time for each and every one of us to renew or
consolidate family ties, I would like, on behalf of my
delegation, to express our affection for the families of the
12 men and women of the International Police Task Force
(IPTF) and the Office of the High Representative who
lost their lives in the tragic helicopter accident last 17
September. I wish to extend the heartfelt condolences of
my delegation to all those families in their suffering.

Bosnia and Herzegovina has the sad distinction of
having numerous conferences and debates focused on its
tragic destiny - among them those of the Security
Council - aimed at finding a fair and peaceful settlement
of the conflict tearing it asunder.

We have seen that the peace process is continuing,
but the progress achieved has been very slow, and
sometimes even modest. This means that there is a great
deal yet to be done. It is obvious that the success of all
the activities intended to establish durable peace in Bosnia

 

and Herzegovina depends essentially on the implementation
of the Dayton Agreement, and that however important the
role of the international community, it is up to the
authorities of that country to work towards the
establishment of a lasting peace. It is also up to them to
work responsibly towards the implementation of the
Agreement into which they freely entered. It is therefore
important that all the parties commit themselves with
determination to honour their commitments stemming from
the Agreement, first and foremost by ensuring the proper
functioning of their common institutions.

We are pleased to note today that progress has been
achieved in several areas. Nevertheless, as was pointed out
by the delegations that preceded us, much remains to be
done in order that the peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina
can live together in complete peace and security.
We note with bitterness that the humanitarian situation
in that country remains difficult. The future of a large
number of refugees and displaced persons remains
uncertain. Those people have the right to return to their
places of origin if they so desire, with the assistance of the
High Commissioner for Refugees, in accordance with annex
7 of the Dayton Agreement and thanks to the generous
assistance of the host countries. In this regard, we
commend the efforts being made by United Nations
agencies, the European Union, bilateral donors and others,
including non-governmental organizations that set up and
carry out projects to facilitate their freedom to return if they
so desire, to ensure their safety and to improve their future
economic prospects.

We take pleasure in noting that the Open City
initiative is continuing.

Local communities that have chosen to declare open
cities should be encouraged, and should be given financial
assistance. On behalf of my delegation, I wish to reaffirm
our commitment to the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina and to the
enjoyment by the populations of that country of their
constitutional rights.

We are concerned by the constant refusal, particularly
in the Republika Srpska, to provide services to minorities;
we believe that there must be no discrimination against
those populations and that they should have access to basic
health care. As citizens of their own country, their health
should not be subject to political considerations; all those
in need should have access to adequate care.

The international community has a role to play in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. For its part, the multinational
Stabilization Force (SFOR) has played an indispensable
role in helping to create an environment that will foster
the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement. We welcome
the good cooperation between the United Nations Mission
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF), and the way in
which they have coordinated their activities on the
ground. We note with satisfaction that UNMIBH is
considering improving the structure of the IPTF so that it
can better focus its work on other activities - as it has
done in the sphere of human rights.

We agree with the Secretary-General's analysis, as
contained in his recent report, and we agree with him
about the future role of the United Nations. That is why
we agree with and support his recommendation to extend
the mandate of UNMIBH for 12 months. An effective
United Nations presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
still necessary for consolidating peace and the other
achievements we have welcomed. In particular, we agree
that there must be a reform of the judicial and penal
system in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and that the fight
against financial crime must be encouraged. Here again,
we think there is a decisive role for UNMIBH; with
additional human and financial resources it can proceed
to the consolidation of peace and the economic
development of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We welcome the conclusions of the Peace
Implementation Conference held at Bonn on 9 and 10
December 1997, including the conclusion that there is a
need to maintain an international military presence in
Bosnia and Herzegovina after June 1998. Such a presence
is required for the consolidation of peace and the
maintenance of the security and stability that Bosnia and
Herzegovina so sorely needs. We hope that the
conclusions of the recent Bonn Conference will help in
accelerating and consolidating the peace process.

