The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
Costa Rica.

I should like to begin by thanking Assistant
Secretary-General Mulet for his briefing.

Although it is still necessary to move forward in
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in
the Sudan, particularly with regard to holding elections
and a referendum and defining the terms for the
distribution of oil revenues, my delegation welcomes
the information about the progress made in
implementing the Agreement.

With regard to the elections, we are pleased at the
news that the Government of Southern Sudan has
formally requested United Nations electoral assistance.
We believe that this is an opportunity for the
Organization to play an important role in helping the
Southern Sudan authorities to ensure that the elections
are free and fair. In that connection, we hope to receive
further information once the needs assessment mission
has been carried out.

Concerning the issue of Abyei, my delegation
notes with satisfaction the news about the progress
made in redeploying the forces that were in Abyei.
However, it is important that the parties permit the
report on Abyei to be finalized by the Ceasefire Joint
Monitoring Commission so that measures can quickly
be taken against those responsible for acts of violence
and looting, in accordance with the conclusions set out
in the report.

We agree with the Secretary-General that it is
important that disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes be successfully implemented
as a confidence-building measure. We regard as
especially important the point made by the Secretary-
General that confidence-building between the parties
should lead to a sustainable downsizing of military
capabilities to the benefit of social expenditure. As
everyone knows, that is a View that my country
supports, and it is on precisely that issue that we are
convening the high-level Security Council event on
19 November.

We welcome the news regarding the reintegration
by UNICEF and the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS) of 88 child soldiers and the pardon
granted by the Government of the Sudan to 99 children
who were arrested following the disturbances in
Omdurman. My delegation recognizes the efforts of the
Government of the Sudan with respect to the situation
of children, but we cannot fail to mention our concern
at knowing that there are still many child prisoners, a
number of whom have been condemned to death.

My delegation regrets that, as the Secretary-
General's report informs us, senior Sudanese officials
have warned of possible grave consequences for
UNMIS should an indictment against President
Al-Bashir be handed down. In that connection, Costa
Rica would like to recall that the Government of the
Sudan must respect the independence of the judicial
process and assist UNMIS in carrying out its mandate.
6

Finally, my delegation supports the Secretary-
General's recommendation that the Security Council
consider holding a thorough debate on provisions
related to the protection of civilians in imminent danger.
We have listened to and share the concerns repeatedly
raised by the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
troop-contributing countries and the humanitarian
community regarding the lack of clarity in civilian
protection mandates. We believe that it is now time that
the Council, together with the Secretariat and the
General Assembly, in particular the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, develop clear civilian
protection guidelines that can be translated into realistic
standards applicable to peacekeeping troops in combat
situations. We hope that the forthcoming debate on the
protection of civilians, to be held in December, will
serve as an opportunity to discuss that important issue.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers on my list. In
accordance with the understanding reached in the
Council's prior consultations, I now invite Council
members to interactive and action-oriented informal
consultations to continue our discussion of the subject.

The meeting rose at 10.40 am.
08-58804
