Ms. Vilakazi: Let me also add my gratitude for
this opportunity to brief the Security Council. As
already said, my name is Linda Vilakazi and I come
from Johannesburg, South Africa. I am an African and
care deeply about the equal treatment of all people, in
particular women and their inclusion at all levels of
society. I work at the Zanele Mbeki Development Trust,
where I coordinate the African Women in Dialogue
platform, which was launched in 2018.

Our collective experience gained through the
successful 16-year-long journey of the South African
Women in Dialogue platform, as already mentioned by
my colleague Ms. Naledi Maite, led to the realization
that an impressive number of African women occupy
various important positions at the local and global levels,
which we applaud and celebrate; however, we note that,
as a continent, we have not yet built a mechanism to
help us access and utilize their experience and expertise
for the benefit of all.

That has made it even more clear to us that, as a
continent, we lack a mechanism to meet as African
women on African soil. Often, we are convened by
others outside the continent, at their expense and on
their agenda. For example, we meet at the annual Davos
World Economic Forum, at the Commission on the
Status of Women and in many other forums. Although
such exposure is necessary, their outcomes do not often
translate into real value for the masses of Africans back
home, in particular marginalized women.

That realization motivated us to take the South
African Women in Dialogue model, as shared earlier
by my colleague, to the continent as a whole. From 19 to
23 November 2018, backed by many African women, we
successfully launched the African Women in Dialogue
platform, which was held over five days and attended by
1,000 women from 16 Southern African Development
Community countries and beyond. The launch was held
in Johannesburg. Bolstered by that successful inaugural
launch, we are now ready to host the 2019 Dialogue, to
be attended by another cohort of 1,000 women from all
55 African countries - an unprecedented achievement
that will set the bar for future dialogues.

Like the South African Women in Dialogue
model, the African Women in Dialogue platform is
designed to be inclusive, open to all, non-hierarchical
and non-partisan. Our inclusivity guide insists on
60 per cent attendance by grass-roots and marginalized
women - the women we often speak about and purport
to represent. Our aim is to bring them into the room,
because their experience, voice and power are among
the key ingredients necessary to help us unite to heal
our continent and move towards peaceful coexistence.

Women attend the dialogues as individuals, not
representing any specific mandate except our personal
views, which we use to find solutions to our various
struggles. All women are treated as equals by the
African Women in Dialogue, with no class distinctions;
we do not stand on ceremony but instead we recognize
the experience brought by each woman in the room.
The African Women in Dialogue week becomes a
festival of ideas, guided by an agenda for a peaceful,
just and better continent, with women connecting,
learning from each other and sharing as they showcase
the incredible work of women from villages, towns and
communities across the continent.

Our model is simple, yet it requires patience and
resourcing and appreciation of the individuality of
each woman attending. The model requires paying
conscious and deliberate attention to the support
needed to maximize the presence and contribution of
each participant. Beyond the five-day dialogue, the
platform seeks to continue an ongoing chain of women
connected throughout the years, using dialogue to
overcome barriers and find solutions.

We do that work fully aware that it is no easy
task, that it is expensive, complex and obscured by
stereotypes and requires hard work. As my colleague
Ms. Maite already alluded to, dialogue has the benefit
of helping us rise above our differences and seek that
which binds us. It has been proven that dialogue spaces
can be used as platforms for development, while acting
as preventative systems for potential conflict and can
bring about post-conflict resolution.

The agenda for the 2019 five-day African
Women in Dialogue attests to that, as we cover a
broad range of topics - from entrepreneurship and
women's economic opportunities to unpacking the
opportunities, challenges and even the inherent threats
of the fourth industrial revolution and discussing issues
of African feminism. We even train women on how to
use dialogue as a tool for mediation and include self-
mastery discussions. The African Women in Dialogue
will review resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform
for Action, among many other documents that we have
discussed over time.
As we speak now, the team back home is finalizing
logistics for the unparalleled 2019 African Women in
Dialogue to be held from 4 to 8 November. It is possible
that some of the African leaders present at this meeting
will hear ofthe group of women back home challenging
their officials to provide them with travel documents
to go join other African women in Johannesburg.
Some of those women have never travelled outside
their villages and, as such, may first have to apply for
a birth certificate and then a passport, followed by a
visa, which are issues of identity and are still central
to building peace on the continent. All of that is taxing
and expensive in terms of finances, emotions and time.
I ask that those leaders therefore please lend a hand if
they come across such requests.

In essence, the African Women in Dialogue
platform presents a unique, much-needed opportunity
for all of us to be authentic about the involvement of
African women in their diversity, as active players
in conflict prevention and preventative diplomacy. It
is a known fact that the ongoing conflicts in Africa
continue to form the bulk of the items on the agenda
of the Security Council, and we wish to change that for
the better.

We therefore seek the support of the Council to
help support and enable African Women in Dialogue
processes, as located at the village, community and
country levels, through its multilateral agreements.
The commitments made by the Council on the topic
"Peace and security in Africa: mobilizing youth
towards silencing the guns by 2020" will remain an
elusive ideal, among others, if women and youth are not
adequately engaged as core participants in the ongoing
peacebuilding process.

Chapter VI, Article 33, of the Charter of the
United Nations states that parties to a dispute shall
seek a solution through political means, including
negotiation and mediation. For that to happen, we argue
that supporting inclusive dialogue, as in the model of
the African Women in Dialogue platform, should be
the tool used to fulfil that Article. It is apparent that
preventative diplomacy is, and has been, utilized by
the United Nations system at large, and the office of
the Secretary-General in particular through its role
of good offices. However, that has not always been
regarded as a central pillar of the work of the Security
Council. As African women, we therefore hope that
through the African Women in Dialogue platform this
pillar can come to fruition, and I urge members of civil
society tojoin us and support grass-roots-level dialogue
that is led by women in all their diversity and unity. We
hope that following this briefing, the Security Council
will resolve to embrace, support and adopt the practice
of inclusive dialogue as a credible and viable tool for
preventive diplomacy and thereby inspire others to do
the same.

In conclusion, we believe that through this
platform, African countries can build and maintain
peace by engaging with all women as they operate
from their local spaces, connected with others by their
participation in the annual dialogue platform. In the
final analysis, our objective is to enable communities
to own and drive their peace processes, making this
a lasting principle that underpins engagement for
development and builds social cohesion across African
borders. That is our story, our journey and our resolve
to convene annually as African women on African soil,
driven by an African agenda for inclusive development
and the maintenance of peace in our communities.

