First of all, I would like to pay tribute to the personnel of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for their outstanding efforts to protect refugees and defend their rights. France's commitment to unconditional respect for the right to asylum is well known. As the High Commissioner reminded us, the number of people forced into exile or to become refugees has never been so high. I am thinking in particular of the Sahel, notably Burkina Faso, where the number of internally displaced persons has more than quadrupled in less than a year. The sharing of responsibilities in a spirit of solidarity must be the guiding principle of our action. Hosting refugees is not only an international obligation but also a moral duty. It is the responsibility of States to protect, on their territory, foreign nationals who have fled their country due to persecution. Only a collective global approach will allow us to improve the overall treatment of refugees, lead to a better management of migration flows and fight effectively against migrant smuggling and human trafficking. That is why the implementation of the global compact on refugees is a priority. France is actively working towards the implementation of the commitments it undertook at the Global Refugee Forum, in particular regarding the issue of resettlement, with 10,000 places for 2020-2021, legal cooperation and the inclusion of climate and environmental criteria in its humanitarian strategy. We call on all States to step up their efforts. Refugees and displaced persons are particularly vulnerable to the coronavirus disease pandemic, which has led to the suspension of asylum procedures in many countries, an accelerated rate of return even if conditions for return are not met and increased stigmatization. Refugees are also highly exposed to the socioeconomic impact of this crisis. We must be vigilant and integrate refugees and displaced persons into national and international pandemic response strategies. It is up to the Security Council to create conditions conducive to reaching lasting solutions to crises. Insecurity and massive violations of human rights are the primary causes of displacement. In Syria, Venezuela, Libya and Myanmar, only a political solution can lead to long-term stability and address the challenges arising from population displacement. Lastly, we will not compromise on the fundamental principles regarding the return of refugees, which must be voluntary and take place in safe and dignified conditions.
