Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his briefing today.

The United States remains committed to a two-
State solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that is
agreed to by the parties. We call on both parties to
return to good-faith, direct negotiations, which remain
the best path for the parties to reach a solution
resolving all issues, ending all claims and establishing
a sovereign State of Palestine alongside a secure State
of Israel as a key part of a comprehensive peace among
Israel and all of its neighbours. There is no better
alternative to reaching mutual agreement: the stakes
are too high, the sorrows too deep and the issues too
complex.
The United States policy on settlements has not
changed and will not change. We believe that
continued settlement expansion is corrosive not only to

peace efforts and the two-State solution but also to
Israel's future itself. The fate of existing settlements is
an issue that must be dealt with by the parties, along
with other permanent status issues. But like every
United States Administration for decades, we do not
accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement
activity.

The United States policy on Jerusalem also
remains unchanged. The status of Jerusalem and all
other permanent status issues should be resolved
through negotiations between the parties. The United
States recognizes that Jerusalem is a deeply important
issue for Israelis and Palestinians, as it is for Jews,
Muslims and Christians around the world. We believe
that through good-faith negotiations the parties can
agree to an outcome that realizes the aspirations of
both parties for Jerusalem and safeguards its status for
people around the world.

We are therefore very concerned by the
commencement of demolition of the Shepherd Hotel in
East Jerusalem and reports that Israel will consider
planning for 1,380 new units near Gilo. These
disturbing developments undermine peaceful efforts to
achieve the two-State solution and contradict the logic
of a reasonable and necessary agreement between the
parties. We have long urged both parties to avoid
actions, including in Jerusalem, that may undermine
trust or prejudge negotiations.

Ultimately, the lack of a resolution to this conflict
harms Israel, the Palestinians, the United Sates and the
international community. We will continue to press
ahead with the parties to resolve the core issues,
including Jerusalem, in the context of a peace
agreement.

As we have consistently said, permanent status
issues can only be resolved through negotiations
between the parties, and not by recourse to the Security
Council. We therefore consistently oppose attempts to
bring these issues to the Council and will continue to
do so because such action would move us no closer to
the goal of a negotiated final settlement; rather, we
believe, it would only complicate efforts to achieve
that goal.

We are troubled by the violence in recent weeks
involving civilians. We condemn continued and
escalating incidents of rocket fire from Gaza into
southern Israel. We must work together to stop Hamas
and other violent extremists from launching terrorist

attacks and from bringing increased misery to the
people of Gaza. We once again call on Hamas to
immediately release the Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit,
abducted by Hamas and held since 2006. We also call
upon the Government of Israel to fully investigate the
deaths of at least three Palestinian civilians in
encounters with Israeli forces in the West Bank since
1 January.

We remain concerned about the situation in Gaza.
The United States is working with the Palestinian
Authority, Israel and international partners to improve
the lives of ordinary people there and to increase the
flow of needed commercial goods and construction
supplies while taking appropriate measures to ensure
that they do not fall into the wrong hands.

We are pleased with Israel's decision to allow
exports from Gaza, which will foster legitimate
economic growth there. This is an important and
overdue step, and we look forward to seeing it
implemented soon. We also welcome the recent
approval of additional United Nations and international
reconstruction projects for Gaza.

The United States remains convinced that peace
in this troubled region is both necessary and possible.
We will persist. We will push the parties to grapple
with the core issues. As Secretary of State Clinton said
in her speech to the Saban Forum in December, in the
context of our private conversations with the parties,
we will offer our own ideas and bridging proposals
when appropriate. We will also work with the
Palestinians to continue laying the foundations for a
future Palestinian State. Israelis deserve to be able to
live in security, at peace with their neighbours and
confident in their future. And Palestinians deserve to
have the dignity and justice of a State of their own and
the freedom to chart their own destiny.

Let me now turn to Lebanon. We echo the
Secretary-General's statement of support for the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon and his call to all parties
to refrain from any interference or influence in its
work. We welcome the recent announcement by the
Prosecutor for the Tribunal that he has filed an
indictment related to the assassination of former Prime
Minister Rafiq Hariri and 22 others. This represents an
important step towards ending the era of impunity for
political murder in Lebanon and achieving justice for
the Lebanese people.

We urge that Lebanon's constitutional process be
followed in selecting its next Government and we
encourage all parties to avoid threats or actions that
could cause instability in Lebanon or the region. We
urge this Council and the international community to
remain firm in its support for Lebanon's sovereignty
and independence, resolute in its commitment to all
Security Council resolutions related to Lebanon and
vigilant to threats to international peace and security.

We commend the efforts of France, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Turkey and other key international and regional
actors working to maintain calm in Lebanon and ensure
that the Tribunal's work continues unimpeded.

We support French President Sarkozy's intention
to form a contact group to help resolve the political
crisis in Lebanon. We support a political outcome that
reduces tension and allows the Lebanese Government
to return to the business of the people without
undermining the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The
Lebanese people should not have to choose between
justice and stability. Like all nations, Lebanon deserves
both.

Finally, let me say a few words about the
situation in Tunisia, which is important to the Middle
East as a whole. The United States stands with the
entire international community in bearing witness to
this brave and determined struggle for the universal
rights that we must all uphold. We will long remember
the images of the Tunisian people seeking to make
their voices heard. We urge all parties to maintain calm
and avoid violence, and we call on the interim Tunisian
Government to respect human rights and to hold free
and fair elections that reflect the true will and
aspirations of the Tunisian people. The United States is
prepared to assist the people and the interim
Government of Tunisia as they move towards these
elections.

