Ms. Cavanagh (New Zealand): Events this year
have focused attention on our collective progress over
the past decade in combating international terrorism
and stimulated frank assessments of the challenges still
to be faced.

Since 2001, we have had success in disrupting
and dismantling international terrorist networks, and in
establishing robust legal, normative and institutional
frameworks at the national and global levels. But the
recent attack on United Nations facilities in Abuja,
Nigeria, showed the threat terrorism still poses to the
values of this Organization and to the interests of all
Member States.

Al-Qaida has been weakened globally, but its
affiliates still pose significant threats in several
regions. Moreover, terrorist networks have proved
adaptable and resilient, shifting tactics, adopting new
technologies and identifying new resources and
methods of financing to maintain their operations. All
of this makes effective international cooperation to
counter-terrorism as important now as ever.

The Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999), 1373 (2001) and 1540 (2004)
and their associated work programmes play vital roles
in combating international terrorism. The past year has
seen significant developments in the work of all three
Committees. New Zealand hopes that the decision in
June to separate the 1267 Committee's consolidated list
into separate designations for the Taliban and Al-Qaida
will provide the new Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1988 (2011) with flexibility to ensure that
de-listing decisions are consistent with realities on the
ground and can complement Afghanistan's national
reconciliation efforts.

Also important were changes to the de-listing
procedures of the 1267 and 1989 Committees,
including a significant strengthening of the
Ombudsperson's role. They make it all the more
important for the Ombudsperson to be sufficiently
resourced to carry out this enhanced role and for
Member States provide her their full support, including
through the provision of relevant information.

New Zealand hopes that the 10-year extension in
April of the 1540 Committee's mandate will facilitate a
longer-term approach to supporting national
implementation. We welcome the Committee's
increased emphasis on targeted technical assistance and
its efforts to coordinate this with assistance for other
relevant national capacity-building priorities. That
approach is particularly important for small States with
limited institutional capacities.

Capacity-building is integral to the partnership
underpinning international counter-terrorism cooperation.
New Zealand participates in a wide-ranging
programme of capacity-building focused on supporting
partners in the Pacific and South and South-East Asia.

The targeted approach taken by the Counter-
Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate (CTED) in
providing technical assistance has helped many States
to strengthen their counter-terrorism frameworks. New
Zealand has partnered with CTED on several such
initiatives, supporting workshops in the Pacific and
South-East Asia - including one held in Auckland
earlier this month - on cash couriers and preventing
terrorist abuse of the non-profit sector. We also helped
fund the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
Terrorism Prevention Branch workshops on law
enforcement cooperation.

We also support the Counter-Terrorism
Committee's emphasis on the role of regional
cooperation. A recent table-top exercise for South-East
Asian practitioners to support implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) and the Global Initiative to
Combat Nuclear Terrorism was one of a number of
practically-focused initiatives with regional partners
that we have supported in the past few years.

In May, we hosted the seventh annual meeting of
the Pacific Islands Forum working group on counter-
terrorism. As the only dedicated regional counter-
terrorism forum, the working group provides important
opportunities to coordinate activities and share best
practice. This year, it was held back-to-back with the
Pacific's second regional counter-terrorism exercise,
Ready Pasifika 11.

Two other recent developments have potential
consequences for all three Committees. New Zealand
welcomes Saudi Arabia's generosity in funding a
United Nations centre for counter-terrorism to support
international counter-terrorism cooperation. Once
established and fully integrated into the United Nations
counter-terrorism architecture, it promises to further
strengthen United Nations counter-terrorism capacities
in key areas.

New Zealand is also a founding member of the
Global Counterterrorism Forum launched in
September. The Forum should further boost
international counter-terrorism capacity-building
efforts, complementing work under way within United
Nations frameworks, particularly CTED. We are
pleased that Indonesia and Australia will chair a Global
Counterterrorism Forum South-East Asia working
group, ensuring that the Forum has a truly global focus.
We can look back over the past decade with a
degree of satisfaction at what has been achieved and,
more importantly, what has been prevented. But our
work is far from complete, and with considerable
challenges ahead, New Zealand is committed to
working with the Council, its Committees and all
Member States to strengthen our collective resilience
and to build the capacities of all States to prevent,
disrupt and bring to justice perpetrators of terrorist
acts.
