Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt): In recent years, notable
improvements have been introduced into the working
methods of the Council, including the holding of more
frequent open debates, public briefings, interactive
dialogues and wrap-up sessions. Nevertheless, there is,
in our View, always room, as well as the need, for more
transparency and efficiency in the Council's work.
Mindful of the time limitations today, I will limit my
comments to the matters that we consider to be of the
greatest priority.

First, the work of the Council is a collective
responsibility. Equal participation and contribution
on the part of all Council members, permanent
and elected, in the conduct of activities and the
formulation of outcomes is a fundamental principle.
The Council could benefit from more deliberations
and consultations among its members, as well as the
timely and transparent exchange of information. Such a
collective approach would help to further democratize
the Council's decision-making process and ensure that
it is more legitimate and effective.

Secondly, We firmly support a more robust
engagement between the Council and the wider
membership of the United Nations, including, first
and foremost, those countries particularly affected
by specific crises. The Council should also enhance
the participation of troop- and police-contributing
countries in its decision-making process. We would
like to recall, in that respect, the relevant provisions of
the President's note in document S/2010/507, and affirm
that consultations with troop- and police-contributing
countries should address the political and long-
term strategy of the relevant peacekeeping missions.
We also stress the need for practical and more
meaningful partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations. We welcome, in that regard, the calls by
the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations
and the Advisory Group of Experts on the Review of
the Peacebuilding Architecture for a stronger, more
inclusive, global and regional partnership in peace and
security.

Thirdly, it is essential to improve cooperation
between the Security Council and the other United
Nations bodies. That does not pertain only to the
General Assembly, but also to the Economic and Social
Council and the Peacebuilding Commission. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1), the ongoing reviews of
peace operations, peacebuilding and the most recently
issued global study on the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) all offer a unique opportunity to draw upon
the broad-based membership of those bodies and to
ensure a more holistic approach to sustaining peace and
to reinforcing the linkages between the three pillars
of the work of the United Nations. There is a need for
closer cooperation and interaction among those organs,
while observing a balanced respect for their respective
functions and mandates.

Speaking of transparent and effective cooperation
between the General Assembly and the Security
Council, I wish to address the most important task
that the two organs have to undertake jointly during
the coming year, which is the selection of the new
Secretary-General of the Organization. Last month, the
General Assembly adopted landmark resolution 69/321,
which paves the way for a transparent and merit-based
selection process. By doing so, the Assembly addressed
some of the multiple imperfections that have negatively
impacted the process for the past 70 years. Now,
with this resolution, the responsibility for its timely
and effective implementation falls collectively upon
us. In this connection, Egypt urges the expeditious
commencement of the process through a joint letter
from the Presidents of the General Assembly and the
Security Council.

As we have heard from various speakers today,
the demand for greater efficiency and openness is real,
improvements are overdue, and solutions exist. It is
therefore important to take stock of all the valuable
proposals that were made today by Member States
and to translate them into concrete action. I assure the
Council of Egypt's support for any measure it takes
towards this goal.

