Mr. Gombo Tchouli (Chad) (spoke in French): We
thank you, Madam President, for presiding over this
meeting.

Before I begin, allow me to add my voice to
those of previous speakers to pay heartfelt tribute to
the Government and the people of France for their
steadfastness in the light ofthe barbaric acts ofterrorism
that took place recently. We condemn those horrendous
acts. We would also like to extend our condolences to
Lebanon and the Lebanese people, who have also fallen
victim to terrorism.

I wish to convey my gratitude to Mr. Stephen
O'Brien, Ms. Zainab Bangura and Ms. Leila Zerrougui
for their briefings.

For nearly five years now, violent fighting on an
almost daily basis has marked the lives of the Syrian
people. The daily horrendous statistics of the wounded,
internally displaced persons, refugees and destruction
plunge Syrians deeper into despair. The humanitarian
situation in the country continues to deteriorate, despite
the huge efforts undertaken by United Nations staff, to
whom we pay tribute for their courage and dedication.

We condemn all attacks committed against innocent
civilians, as well as on the basic vital infrastructure
of the country, and ask all parties to immediately lift
all obstacles hindering access to humanitarian aid for
the civilian population in areas of combat, including
in besieged zones. We would like to reiterate our call
upon all the parties to the conflict to put an end to the
violence, and we wish to underscore their obligation to
respect international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, as well as all the relevant provisions
of resolution 2139 (2014). It should be remembered that
the systematic refusal to provide humanitarian access
to the civilian population, depriving them of the basic
necessities they require for their survival, such as water
and medicine, constitutes a serious violation of human
dignity and a flagrant violation of the most basic
principles of international humanitarian law.

Security Council meetings on Syria succeed one
another without any improvement in the situation
experienced by the long-suffering Syrian people. It is
high time for the Security Council to consider firmer,
more robust and concrete measures to put an end to
the human tragedy being experienced by Syria. The
unending war, with unspeakable consequences, has led
to a complete contempt for international humanitarian
law and has diminished the credibility of the Security
Council, and its role to that of a powerless observer.

We urge the donor community to respond to the
various calls and appeals for humanitarian financing,
which would enable United Nations staff and their
partners to provide the necessary assistance to the
civilian population in need, both within as well as
outside Syria. The arrival of winter will expose the
civilian population to very difficult living conditions.
For that reason, we require special mobilization by the
entire international community.

As we have always said, humanitarian action,
whatever its scale, cannot in itself be considered a
substitute for a political solution. That is why we must
intensify our efforts aimed at helping the parties to find
a negotiated solution to the conflict, such that it can put
an end to the suffering of the Syrian people and restore
an inclusive political transition. From that perspective,
it behooves States possessing any influence with the
various parties to spare no effort to prompt them to
commit themselves in good faith to direct negotiations
to implement the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex).

