Mr. De Kermabon (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Security Council for having invited us
here today.

First of all, I would like to condemn the incidents
that took place Friday morning, and in particular the
loss of human life. I also wish to extend my
condolences to the family of Dr. Dzekovie.

I would like to start by reminding the Council
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is deployed throughout the whole of
Kosovo, pursuant to the mandate entrusted to it by the
Council of the European Union within the framework
defined by the report of the Secretary-General dated
24 November 2008 (S/2008/692) and welcomed by the
Security Council in its presidential statement of
26 November 2008 (S/PRST/2008/44). This mandate
entrusts the Mission with clear operational
responsibilities, particularly in the maintenance of law
and order.

I would now like to go over the incidents that
have just unfolded in Mitrovica. Following the
decision of the Kosovo institutions to open a branch of
their Ministry of Interior and Local Affairs in the
Bosniak Mahalla neighbourhood of Mitrovica, north of
the Ibar river, the following events took place on
Friday 2 July.

Early in the morning, Kosovar Serb
demonstrators gathered near the building to express
their opposition. Local police and EULEX police units
were present. The demonstration took place peacefully,
and the demonstrators handed a petition to the
Ministry's workers, asking them to close the branch. At
about 10 a.m., an explosion was heard in a parallel
street, around 600 metres from the premises of the
Ministry office. The local police quickly went to the
site and coordinated rescue operations. Some 10 people
were injured, and an eleventh, of Bosniak-Kosovar
origin, died that afternoon after his evacuation to
Mitrovica hospital.

The EULEX Mission has firmly condemned this
act of Violence. It turned later out that the explosion
resulted from the detonation of a grenade. It will be
understood that the explosion created a certain amount
of confusion, forcing EULEX to forbid access to the
street leading to the Ministry offices. The situation
rapidly calmed down, with the crowd dispersing early
in the afternoon. The victim's funeral took place
without incident the following day, attracting a few
hundred people, who later dispersed. The situation has
been calm since then.

Unfortunately, yesterday, Monday, a Kosovar
Serb, Mr. Petar Miletic', Secretary-General of the
Independent Liberal Party and a member of the Kosovo
Parliament, sustained a bullet wound. It should also be
emphasized that the Kosovo police, who wanted to
investigate the incident, were forbidden access to
Mitrovica Hospital, in the North of Kosovo, by
Kosovar Serbs, in violation of the proper functioning
of law and order.

Lastly, I should mention that EULEX personnel
have been the target of threats from radical elements in
northern Kosovo that highlight the risks incurred by
those cooperating with the Mission. Such threats are
unacceptable, and I can only condemn them as strongly
as possible. The investigation of Friday's events is
being led by the local police force from Pristina, with
assistance from EULEX. The Serbian police have
offered to assist in conducting the investigation and the
Mission is cooperating with them.

Members of the Council should know that all
necessary steps have been and will continue to be taken
to arrest the guilty as quickly as possible. Nonetheless,
I should emphasize that the investigation is ongoing
and we therefore cannot go into detail. Certain
allegations that have appeared in the press are based
purely on speculation, and it is important that the
investigation be conducted with the calm that this kind
of situation demands. What is needed from now on is
moderation and restraint.

In conclusion, I emphasize that there has never
been any risk of a general deterioration of the security
situation in the city and even less so in the rest of
Kosovo. EULEX has acted in strict compliance with its
mandate at all times, and will continue to do so with
the support we have thus far enjoyed both from Pristina
and from Belgrade. We are aware of the prevailing
tensions, and I therefore call on the relevant authorities
in Belgrade and Pristina to continue to support us in
implementing our mandate.

