Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing and personally
presiding over today's important debate. The debate
comes at the right time, as the growing nexus between
terrorism and transnational organized crime calls for
the urgent attention of the international community. My
delegation welcomes the adoption of resolution 2195
(2014), the first stand-alone Security Council resolution
to address this multifaceted issue.

Terrorism and transnational organized crime have
long been sources of concern for the international
community. While Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and other terrorist groups
threaten international peace and security through
violence, transnational crime presents mounting
challenges to stability, particularly in Africa, hampering
socioeconomic development and jeopardizing
peacebuilding efforts. What is even worse is the
combined threats from terrorism and transnational
organized crime as seen in the cases of transnational
crimes providing terrorists with financial and other
resources to fund their terrorist activities.

Against such a troubling backdrop, it is high time
for the international community to step up its efforts to
sever the vicious links between the two scourges and
address them in a holistic manner. First, illicit trade
and criminal activities benefitting terrorists should be
effectively disrupted. We welcome the focused approach
taken in the resolution to address terrorist financing.
We take note of recent Council actions, including
resolution 2170 (2014) and the presidential statement on
terrorism (S/PRST/2014/23). At the level of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), deliberations are ongoing with a view
to adopting concrete recommendations to deal with
ISIL and Al-Nusra Front financing. However, those
efforts can be meaningful only when implemented. In
the light of that, we call for the full implementation
of such measures and other relevant United Nations
conventions to prevent and combat terrorist financing
through transnational crimes.

Secondly, we must close the structural loopholes
that terrorists are exploiting. The existence of illicit
markets allows terrorists to translate their criminal
activities into profits. Weak governance, porous borders
and rampant smuggling all enable this increasingly
dangerous union. We should step up our efforts to
strengthen legal and institutional capacity, particularly
vis-a-vis border and customs control.

While the primary responsibility lies with each
national Government, the problem cannot be tackled
by any one country alone. In that regard, we support
ongoing regional initiatives such as the Regional Action
Plan on illicit drug trafficking, related organized
crime and drug abuse in West Africa of the Economic
Community of West African States and the African
Union's Plan of Action on Drug Control. We also call
for enhanced coordination among the relevant United
Nations entities, including the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime and the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, to tackle these challenges.

Thirdly, we have to address the structural conditions
that are conducive to criminal activity and terrorism.
Countries grappling with poverty and conflict are more
susceptible to compounding threats from transnational
organized crime and terrorism. This nexus further
complicates their socioeconomic development and
conflict resolution efforts. Poverty eradication and
sustainable development are essential in that regard.

The Republic of Korea believes that the foregoing
efforts should be undertaken by the entire international
community to defeat terrorism and transnational
crime. We will continue to do our part in that common
endeavour.

