Ms. Sanders (United States of America): I wish
to thank you, Mr. President, for having convened this
meeting today and for your leadership on this issue. I
wish also to thank the Secretary-General; the Special
Representative on children and armed conflict,
Ms. Coomaraswamy; and UNICEF head Ann Veneman
for the energy they have devoted to addressing the
serious problem of children and armed conflict. It is
important that the Security Council, other relevant
United Nations entities and our Governments, as
Member States, keep the issue of children and armed
conflict in our focus.

The United States also thanks you, Mr. President,
and your Security Council team for having taken the
lead in establishing the Security Council Working
Group on children and armed conflict.

Several meetings have been held this year, and
we look forward to working on the recommendations
that the Group will provide in future. We also look
forward to the implementation of the monitoring and
reporting mechanism called for by resolution 1612
(2005).

The United States recognizes the agonizing
consequences of using children in armed conflict in all
regions of the world where this problem exists. The use
of child soldiers, in violation of applicable
international law, is contributing to violence and great
suffering. Such agonizing consequences are
particularly severe in southern Sudan and northern
Uganda, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Colombia and Burma.
Burma is thought to have the largest number of
child soldiers in the world. Human Rights Watch has
documented the widespread forced recruitment of boys
as young as 11 by Burma's national army. Children are

routinely picked off the streets, forced into the army
and never see their families again. Many are forced to
fight against armed ethnic opposition groups and carry
out human rights abuses such as rounding up villagers
for forced labour, burning houses, and even massacring
civilians. Armed opposition groups also recruit
children, though in far smaller numbers.

Although there appears to have been a significant
reduction in the unlawful recruitment and use of
children during the past 12 months, children continue
to be the victims of violence and abuse by the Lord's
Resistance Army (LRA) in northern Uganda, southern
Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
LRA has waged a civil war against the Government of
Uganda since the mid-1980s and has abducted
thousands of children from northern Uganda to serve as
soldiers. Children are forced to participate in acts of
extreme violence and are often compelled to help beat
or hack to death fellow child captives who have
attempted to escape. Girls as young as 12 are given to
commanders as "wives". Some abducted children have
managed to escape, while others have died from
disease, maltreatment or combat wounds.

Colombia's children have long been caught up in
that country's devastating conflict, including
significant numbers who are currently being used as
soldiers by armed groups, paramilitaries and militias.
Boys and girls, some as young as 8 years old, are often
recruited forcibly and used as kidnappers, guards,
cooks, sexual companions or slaves, or are used for
placing and removing bombs. Girls in armed groups
and paramilitaries are particularly at risk of sexual
abuse.

The United States supports the Secretary-
General's commitment to stop continued violations and
abuses against children, including recruiting or using
child soldiers in Violation of applicable international
law, unprovoked attacks targeting schools or hospitals,
the maiming and killing of children, child abduction,
rape and other forms of sexual violence, and
unwarranted denial of humanitarian access. As an
important element of an effort to eliminate such
activities, we welcome effective monitoring and
reporting of all such violations.
On a positive note, during 2006 two States
acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on
the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children
in armed conflict. This international instrument works
most directly to address the problem we are discussing
today. The United States ratified the Protocol on
23 December 2002, and there are now a total of 107
States parties to the Protocol. This demonstrates
important leadership on the effort to end the use of
child soldiers in violation of applicable international
law.

Again, I would like to thank you, Mr. President,
for the work that you and your team have accomplished
on this issue. My delegation looks forward to working
with you and other members here to address the
problem of children and armed conflict.

