Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russia): The work on the draft text for resolution 2436
(2018) proposed by our American partners was not easy.
At one point, frankly, we were on the verge of radical
decisions and a situation that would have deprived
the Council of unity on an issue of major importance
requiring a collective decision. We are pleased that
patient efforts ultimately enabled us to include language
that had Council members' unanimous support. This
was made possible thanks to the authors' willingness
not merely to hear but also to listen to the expectations
and concerns of a broad range of States, particularly
troop-contributing countries, that play a key role in
United Nations peacekeeping. The Russian Federation
therefore found it possible to support the resolution's
adoption. The consultations on the text confirmed that
where there is a will the Council is capable of finding a
way to take decisions on issues, however complex, and
we would be happy and ready to help to ensure that this
constructive practice can be translated to other items
on our agenda.

Issues related to optimizing peacekeeping missions'
activities are extremely important and require the closest
possible attention of all participants in peacekeeping
operations. We fully support the desire of all to
strengthen Blue Helmets' safety and make their work
of implementing Council mandates more effective, but
while the diagnosis is generally the same, the proposals
as to which methods should be applied frequently
differ. For example, we think that simplistic solutions,
such as continually strengthening missions' mandates,
cannot guarantee sustained solutions. However, these
differences are not insuperable, and the work done on
the resolution we adopted today shows that we definitely
can and should seek common approaches that enable
us to achieve the broadest possible consensus. For that
reason, we believe that so-called general peacekeeping
issues should be considered by the widest possible
range of stakeholders, or our efforts will not be very
effective. The General Assembly's Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations 4 which brings together
the members of the Council, troop-contributing
countries and host States, as well as ensuring close
cooperation with the Secretariat - was established and
operationalized in order to engage the largest possible
number of States in this process for that purpose.

We would like to point out that the logic of
collective effort is central the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative. The principal parties
implementing Council mandates, the troop-contributing
countries, should therefore, like host States, not be left
on the sidelines when key decisions are made about the
parameters for peacekeeping operations. We believe
that if collective, consensus-based approaches prevail,
as happened today, we can resolve United Nations
peacekeeping problems, however difficult they are,
thereby achieving the goals we all share and preserving
and strengthening the authority and role of the United
Nations in conflict resolution.

