Mr. Matjila (South Africa): Before I start my
intervention, I would like to pay tribute to Ambassador
Vitaly Churkin. We commemorate the second
anniversary of his death today. His tireless efforts in
the Security Council will forever be remembered.

At the outset, we join others in thanking Special
Coordinator Mladenov for his comprehensive briefing.
Likewise, we welcome the briefing by the Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ms. Ursula Mueller, on
the dire humanitarian situation in Gaza and in some
parts of the occupied Palestinian territory.

The briefing we heard today clearly indicates one
thing: peace in Palestine remains elusive. As time
goes on, we have seen the positions of the Israelis
and Palestinians growing further and further apart.
Key final-status issues that ought to be dealt with
through negotiations are rapidly being eroded as the
issue of Jerusalem is being predetermined and illegal
settlements continue to be built on Palestinian land in
flagrant violation of international humanitarian law
and numerous Security Council resolutions.

The briefing today takes place a few weeks after
the Government of Israel decided not to renew the
Temporary International Presence in Hebron, after
22 years of dedicated service to both Palestinians and
Israelis. It is appropriate that I use this opportunity to
express South Africa's deep regret at the decision taken
by Israel, which clearly undermines one of the few
confidence-building mechanisms between Palestinians
and Israelis. We have no doubt that that decision by the
Israeli Government will be yet another step that will
have negative implications on the Middle East peace
process. It is also unfortunate that we were not even able
to adopt a press statement to support the mechanism that
promoted peace and stability in Hebron. Despite that
setback, we appreciate the efforts by the President of the
Council to consult with both Palestinians and Israelis
on the matter, and we welcome the valuable feedback
that he has provided to the Council in that regard.

The Council began dealing with the issue of Israel
and Palestine almost from the beginning of its work,
more than 70 years ago. Yet as the Council, we have
regrettably done very little or, more often, nothing at all.
On almost any other issue that the Council addresses,
if there were a similar magnitude of violations or
deterioration of the situation, we would waste no time
in taking decisive action, including all other means to
enforce its decisions and resolutions.

On 21 December 2018, Belgium, Bolivia, China,
Cote d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, France, Indonesia,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, the Netherlands, Peru, Sweden
and my own country, South Africa, wrote to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council raising concern over the lack of implementation
of resolution 2334 (2016), including the need for the
Secretary-General to provide written reports every
three months on its implementation.

We wish to reiterate our call for the submission of
timely written reports by the Secretary-General to the
Security Council on its implementation of resolution
2234 (2016), every three months, in order for progress
to be adequately monitored. This Council receives
written reports on other matters that it is seized with
and the situation in Palestine should be no different. We
must not allow the decisions made by the Council to be
undermined and in some cases blatantly violated. This
selectivity undermines the credibility of the Council
and in fact erodes its legitimacy.

We express deep concern aboutthe dire humanitarian
situation of more than 2 million Palestinians living in
Gaza and some parts of occupied Palestine, of whom
about 50 per cent are children. The people of Gaza
desperately need humanitarian assistance. In that
connection, we wish to call upon the international
community to continue to support the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which continues play a pivotal role in
providing the basic services to the people of Palestine.

I wish to reiterate South Africa's position in support
of a two-State solution based on pre-1967 borders.
We, as part of the international community, support
and encourage both parties towards this endeavour.
Dialogue and negotiation remain the only way forward
to finding a lasting solution for peace between Palestine
and Israel. The guidelines for these negotiations should
be based on the already established international legal
framework, including General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, the Madrid principles, the Arab
Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, among others.

South Africa was elected to this Council with
the aspiration to work, together with other member
States represented here, for a long-lasting peace in
the Middle East. That is why we are elected to this
Council. We must, as a Council, show consistency and
act to promote peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
During our time in the Council, we will continue to
call on the Council to show consistency and act on this
matter without any favour and without any selectivity
to advance peace in the Middle East.

