Mr. Prosor (Israel): First of all, Mr. President, I
would like to thank you for convening today's important
meeting. I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
respective briefings.

I speak to you today, Sir, as a man who has seen
and experienced war - both on the battlefield and on
the diplomatic field. My experiences have taught me
that war does not begin when the first shot is fired. War
begins when hatred and intolerance go unopposed. That
idea was expressed by Martin Niemoller, a German
pastor who bravely spoke out against the Nazis, when
he wrote:

"First they came for the Communists, but I
was not a Communist so I did not speak out. Then
they came for the Socialists and the trade unionists,
but I was neither, so I did not speak out. Then they
came for the Jews, but I was not a Jew so I did not
speak out. And when they came for me, there was
no one left to speak out for me."

We see the forces of tyranny grow stronger, and we
must have the courage to take action. We must abide by
our commitment to speak out and fight until freedom
triumphs over oppression. When my father fled Berlin
in 1936, the writing was already on the wall. Boycotts
against Jewish-owned businesses were common,
graffiti was being scrawled on synagogues and Jews
were called "Untermenschen" or subhumans and were
being beaten and harassed on the streets.

Now, 70 years after the Holocaust, Jewish
communities from Cuba to Casablanca are being
threatened, and on the streets of Europe cries of"Death
to the Jews" can once again be heard. Yet the world
seems to have learned nothing. When synagogues
and Jewish-owned shops are burned and looted - is
it enough to claim that anti-Semitism is wrong? When
mobs beat Jews as they walk the streets - is it enough
to only express disgust? When heads of State and
ambassadors in this institution compare Israel to Hitler
and the Nazis - is it enough to issue a condemnation?
Did you, Mr. President, even make an effort to issue a
condemnation?

This institution was born from the ashes of the
Second World War to confront tyranny, but it is
failing. Radical extremism has touched every part
of the world from Buenos Aires to Burgas and from
Bangkok to Burkina Faso. Oppression and extremism
are not bound by borders. Nowhere is the threat more
obvious than in the Middle East. In 2004, there were
21 Islamic terrorist groups spread out over 18 countries.
Today, 41 Islamic terrorist groups are operating in
24 countries. Those groups have crippled communities
and brought entire nations to their knees. And still the
international community remains largely silent. It is
silent as Hizbullah amasses and smuggles thousands of
weapons, as Al-Qaida abuses and persecutes women,
as the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant slaughters
Christian and Yazidi communities, and as Hamas
intentionally places Gaza's men, women and children
in harm's way.
Hamas - like the Islamic State of the Levant
and Boko Haram and Al-Qaida - shares a disdain
for democracy, a contempt for modernity and a
determination to destroy our way of life. In Gaza,
Hamas sees no problem with abusing international
humanitarian centres and religious institutions for
terrorist purposes. It stores weapons in United Nations
facilities, transports terrorists in ambulances and fires
rockets indiscriminately from mosques, schools and
hospitals deep into the heart of civilian centres in Israel.
Few nations have the courage to admit that Hamas is
committing a double war crime - targeting Israeli
civilians while hiding behind Palestinian civilians.

Every nation must ask itself whether it wishes
to see a Middle East that is free, open and tolerant,
or whether it wishes to see a Middle East in which a
violent and radical minority suppresses the rights,
beliefs and aspirations of millions of people. This
problem is not hundreds of miles and decades away.
Radical extremism affects us all - right here and right
now. Make no mistake: we are locked in a battle for our
shared security. From this Chamber 1 issue a warning
to the world - do not close your eyes to the threats
around you.

War is not inevitable - it is not a force ofnature, nor
is it a part of human nature. It can and must be avoided.
We all want to live in peace and see our children grow
up in peace, but we cannot stand idly by in the face
of the threats that we face every day. To prevent the
next war, we must go to war against radical ideology.
We must declare a war on incitement, a war on bigotry
and a war on hypocrisy. Armed with our commitment
to freedom, tolerance and peace, I have no doubt that,
working together, we will emerge victorious.

This is a battle that we can win, and we must win.

