Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil) (spoke in Portuguese; English text provided by the delegation): I welcome
His Excellency President Jose Ramos-Horta and
express Brazil's pleasure at seeing him participate in
this meeting of the Security Council. I would also like
to thank Special Representative Ameerah Haq for her
briefing and congratulate her on her efforts in support
of Timor-Leste. Brazil is also grateful for the work of
South Africa as the new Coordinator of the Core Group
for Timor-Leste.
The upcoming elections in Timor-Leste will be a
particularly significant moment in the history of the
country. They will mark the third democratic elections
carried out by the Timorese people, and will occur
during the symbolically important celebration of the
tenth anniversary of Timorese independence. More
importantly, the elections and the newly elected
Government's assumption of authority will be
cornerstones for the definition of the future United
Nations presence in Timor-Leste.

Brazil trusts that the elections will take place
successfully. The fluid and democratic dialogue
between the Government and the opposition has been a
sign of the political maturity of the Timorese people
and institutions. We also congratulate the Timorese
authorities on the measures taken to prepare for the
elections. Brazil shares the Secretary-General's
satisfaction with the emphasis placed by the Policia
Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL) on operational
planning for the electoral months with the assistance of
United Nations Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNMIT).

We are convinced that the stability Timor-Leste
has achieved will be carefully maintained. We
acknowledge that, since reassuming primary
responsibilities for policing almost a year ago, the
PNTL has demonstrated its capacity to fully carry out
the task. The work of UNMIT with the PNTL,
including through the implementation of the Joint
Development Plan, has been of great importance. We
expect the Mission to continue assisting the National
Police until the final withdrawal of UNMIT's police
component.

The groundbreaking initiative of the Joint
Transition Plan sets a useful example of the importance
of the dialogue between the host country and the
United Nations to allow for the efficient transfer of
responsibilities to the Government after the departure
of a United Nations mission. As a member of the Core
Group for Timor-Leste, Brazil joins the consensual
support for the extension of UNMIT's mandate until
the end of the year and looks forward to the Secretary-
General's assessment on the political and security
situation in Timor-Leste. It is crucial that the gradual
drawdown of UNMIT take into account the wishes of
the Government of Timor-Leste, the conditions on the
ground and the successful completion of the electoral
process.
As outlined in the Joint Transition Plan, the
projects set forth by the Timorese, with the help of

UNMIT, have significantly contributed to stability in
the security sector, the strengthening of institutions and
socio-economic development. We are fully confident
that Timor-Leste will continue along that positive path.
Brazil will continue to support the Government of
Timor-Leste through bilateral and trilateral cooperation
projects in areas such as agriculture, education, justice
and security.

Timor-Leste has had an exemplary trajectory. As
we pointed out during the Council's debate in
November of last year (see S/PV.6664), it is telling that
the challenges that the country faces now are not those
of violent conflict but rather of socio-economic
development and institutional consolidation - in other
words, of fulfilling the country's great potential.

Timor-Leste's bid for accession to the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations and its
contribution to the United Nations missions in Lebanon
and South Sudan are a sign of the country's intention to
play its part in contributing to the cause of a more
peaceful and prosperous world. UNMIT's role has been
fundamental and will continue to be so until its
departure. We congratulate the Government of Timor-
Leste and UNMIT for their momentous achievements.

