Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese delegation warmly welcomes President-
elect Xanana Gusmao and Chief Minister Mari Alkatiri
to New York to participate in our meeting today. We
thank them for their statements.

We also wish to thank the Secretary-General for
his statement and Assistant Secretary-General Annabi
for his briefing and introduction of the Secretary-
General's report.

Like other colleagues, we warmly congratulate
Mr. Gusmao on his election as the first President-elect
of East Timor by an overwhelming majority in the
balloting held on 14 April. The successful holding of
the election was a landmark in East Timor's progress
towards independence and a vivid demonstration of the
fact that the East Timorese people have taken their
destiny into their own hands. We wish the East
Timorese people every success, under the leadership of
Mr. Xanana Gusmao and the East Timorese
Government, in overcoming the difficulties that lie
ahead of them, so that newly born East Timor can
embark on the path towards stability, democracy and
sustainable development.

As a fledgling State, East Timor will face
multiple challenges in terms of political, economic and
social development for an extended period of time,
even after its independence. It will require continued
attention and assistance on the part of the international
community. Therefore, the United Nations must
maintain a certain level of presence in East Timor. This
is now the common view of all members of the
Council.

In light of the development of the East Timorese
situation, the Secretary-General proposed the
establishment of the United Nations Mission of
Support in East Timor (UNMISET) as the follow-up
mechanism of the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor (UNTAET), and he has
elaborated in detail on the scale of its mandate and its
structure. He has put forward a mandate
implementation plan and specifically identified three
major tasks for UNMISET. He also sets out a very
clear exit strategy for UNMISET. Emphasis is placed
on enhancing East Timor's capacity-building, with a
view to helping East Timor undertake, as soon as
possible, nation-building in the areas of administration,
justice and security. The ideas contained in the report
of the Secretary-General are well thought out and meet
the urgent needs of post-independence Timor. We agree
with his proposal, and we hope that the Council will
adopt a relevant draft resolution as soon as possible so
as to ensure that UNMISET can carry out its work in a
timely manner.

In discussing UNMISET's mandate, we would
like to express our profound appreciation and gratitude
to UNTAET for the outstanding contribution it has
made to the independence of East Timor. We would
especially like to thank Special Representative Vieira
de Mello for his outstanding leadership and tenacious
spirit. The experience of peacekeeping and peace-
building accumulated by UNTAET in East Timor will
be a valuable asset for the United Nations. We
welcome the new assignment of Ambassador Sharma,
and we wish him success.

The Chinese people have always been friendly
towards the East Timorese people. The high-level
delegation headed by China's Foreign Minister, Tang
Jiaxuan, will participate in East Timor's independence
ceremony to share in the exuberance of the East
Timorese people. China would like to establish and
develop normal State-to-State relations with East
Timor, on the basis of the principles of mutual respect
of sovereignty and territorial integrity, mutual non-
aggression, non-interference in internal affairs,
equality, mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence.

In the process of independence for East Timor,
China has provided assistance, to the extent of its
ability, including material donations and the training of
administrative personnel. As pointed out in the
Secretary-General's report it will still be essential for
the international community to provide assistance to
East Timor even after its independence. The Chinese
Government will work in close coordination with the
United Nations and, together with the rest of the
international community, continue to work towards the
social stability and economic development of East
Timor.

