Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): Allow
me, first, to convey my delegation's sincere
appreciation to you, Mr. President, for the holding of
today's open debate on the impact of illicit trafficking
in small arms on peace and security in the Central
African region. My delegation believes that today's
debate is both timely and relevant, considering the
challenges that we face not only in Central Africa but
in all corners of the world. I would also like to express
10-28131
our gratitude for the continued interest of the Council
on this issue, as well as for the work of the Secretary-
General in raising public awareness on this matter by
publishing biennial reports, which I believe will be
circulated in the near future.

Small arms and light weapons are the weapons of
choice in many present-day conflicts. Their widespread
availability and excessive accumulation contribute to
the prolongation of violence and the aggravation of
regional conflicts. Illicit trafficking in small arms and
light weapons is often closely linked to organized
crime, terrorism and drug trafficking. Furthermore, it is
also associated with various development, human
rights and humanitarian problems, such as child
soldiers, refugees, food insecurity and the illegal
exploitation of natural resources. Preventing the illicit
flow of small arms is key to addressing those
multifaceted issues.

We greatly appreciate the efforts being made by
the Economic Community of Central African States
(ECCAS), especially its work on a legally binding
instrument on subregional monitoring of the illicit
traffic in small arms, ammunitions and related material.
That is not only necessary for the region, but it is also
in line with the global trend to regulate the illicit flow
of conventional arms. We would also like to commend
earlier initiatives by African States, such as the
Bamako Declaration, the Nairobi and Southern African
Development Community Declarations and Protocols,
and the Economic Community of West African States
Convention.

My delegation is particularly pleased with the
Council's continued interest in addressing the issue of
small arms since its first thematic debate in 1999,
considering its potential to impede the Council from
fulfilling its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international peace and security. I would especially
like to emphasize the importance of ensuring the
effectiveness of the Council's arms embargo, not only
because of its direct effects in curbing illegal arms
transfers but also because of its far-reaching impact on
the work of the Council, including its peacekeeping
activities.

Also within the framework of the United Nations,
in June we will have an opportunity to strengthen our
joint efforts to address issues concerning small arms at
the Fourth Biennial Meeting of States, as well as to
consider the national, regional and global
7

implementation of the United Nations Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. In that regard, I would like to commend the
extensive consultations being undertaken by Mexico as
the Chair of the Fourth Meeting. I would also like to
reiterate my delegation's full support for the success of
the Meeting.

My delegation would also like to point out that,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution 64/48,
the preparatory committee meetings for the United
Nations Conference on the Arms Trade Treaty will start
in July 2010, with a view to establishing a legally
binding instrument on the highest possible common
international standards for the transfer of conventional
arms. Considering the grave impact that the illicit
traffic in small arms has on peace and security in all
regions, including Central Africa, I believe that small
arms should fall within the scope of the arms trade
treaty.

Among the various aspects concerning illicit
trafficking activities, my delegation would like to point
out the importance of preventing and combating the
illicit brokering of all conventional weapons, including
small arms. From that standpoint, the Republic of
Korea, together with Australia, introduced in 2008
General Assembly resolution 63/67, entitled
"Preventing and combating illicit brokering activities",
which was adopted by consensus. Considering its
positive implications on international efforts to curb
illicit trafficking in small arms, my Government would
like to request the continued support of all Member
States for that biennial resolution, which will next be
introduced at the sixty-fifth session of the General
Assembly.

