Mr. Ndekhedehe (Nigeria): We thank you,
Madam President, for organizing this debate and for
providing my delegation with the opportunity to
participate.

The major obstacle to sustainable peace and
economic development is the international
community's inability to grapple with cases of post-
conflict national reconciliation in societies emerging
from conflict. It will be recalled that, following the
withdrawal of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia in 1997, the Security Council endorsed the
Secretary-General's recommendation and established
the United Nations Peace-building Support Office in
Liberia (UNOL) in November 1997. UNOL's primary
responsibility was to assist the then Government to
consolidate peace and stability in that country. To some
extent, UNOL facilitated the promotion of national
reconciliation and good governance and helped to
mobilize international support for the implementation
of reconstruction programmes in the country. It assisted
the Government of Liberia in addressing its capacity
needs in the areas of human rights and the holding of
elections, as well as in the development of a peace-
building strategy integrating political objectives and
assistance and human rights programmes. Those were
commendable contributions by the United Nations in a
post-conflict reconciliation effort. Unfortunately, it was
the apparent inability of the then combatants to fully
and faithfully embrace ethnic reconciliation that led to
the resumption of hostilities in Liberia. The point being
made here is that it is imperative for the leadership of
countries emerging from conflict to embark on genuine
reconciliation programmes in order to ensure durable
peace and sustainable development.

The appointment by the Secretary-General of a
Special Representative and an International Contact
Group on Liberia facilitated post-conflict reconciliation
in that country. We therefore urge the United Nations to
continue with that strategy. The United Nations should
also continue to assume the responsibility for the
coordination of the activities of its agencies and
support the emerging national arrangements. It should
also assist in the deployment of United Nations troops
and in the provision of humanitarian assistance, as
those are major ways to ensure post-conflict
reconciliation.

Another vital area worthy of mention is effective
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR),
especially the rehabilitation aspect. In our view, it was
faulty DDR that led to the collapse of the first United
Nations peace mission in Liberia. The United Nations
should therefore mobilize adequate resources to
provide for ex-combatants in order to facilitate their
reintegration into civilian life by empowering them
with basic skills. In that connection, it is important for
United Nations agencies to train ex-combatants so that
they can be gainfully employed. That way, their return
to the bush to fight will no longer be attractive.
Donors, for their part, should provide official
development assistance to supplement United Nations
efforts.

Pervasive poverty and the generally weak
economic situations in most developing countries are
often responsible for the exacerbation of conflicts.
Most countries emerging from conflict are still
characterized by massive unemployment, high
mortality rates and low levels of infrastructure
development. Thus, for any meaningful reconciliation
to endure, particular efforts must be made to address
not only political problems, but also economic and
social problems, thereby encouraging such countries to
engender political and economic stability.

In that regard, while we recognize the active
involvement of United Nations bodies in the areas of
national reconciliation, capacity-building, economic
management, health, education, agriculture, food
security and poverty strategies in countries emerging
from conflict, we believe that much can still be done.
The positive role played by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) in Afghanistan in
addressing those issues is quite commendable. We
therefore call for the application of that role in other
countries emerging from conflict. In doing so, UNDP
should, inter alia, develop assistance programmes in
collaboration with the International Monetary Fund, the
World Bank and other providers of financial and
technical assistance. We should identify the needs of
such countries and ensure the delivery of such
assistance.

The conflict in Liberia resulted in serious
violations and abuses of human rights and
humanitarian law and in deliberate and habitual
killings, torture, abuse and violence against women and
children. Since the interim administrations in most
post-conflict situations lack the capacity to address the
needs of the victims of such atrocities, the United
Nations should provide them with assistance. Such
assistance should include the provision of security
during the election process to ensure the free
movement and participation of people before and
during elections. That is crucial, given the known
neutrality of United Nations peace missions in such
contexts. We are all aware of circumstances in which
the suspicion of rigged elections eventually led to
violence and war. The United Nations and the rest of
the international community should therefore avoid any
repetition of such a situation.

Since most infrastructure of the State is usually
destroyed during conflicts, reconciliation efforts should
also focus on rehabilitating the health sector, on
providing food and assistance and on reactivating the
judiciary to ensure the rule of law. Efforts should also
be made to ensure the establishment of a reliable and
integrated army, which should be representative of all
the ethnic populations in the country. In that regard, it
is important for the United Nations and the rest of the
international community to assist countries emerging
from conflict by providing technical assistance for the
reactivation of the judiciary, the rule of law and the
infrastructure.

The proliferation of small arms and light weapons
constitutes a major impediment to the peace, stability,
security and economic development of most
developing countries, especially in Africa. Such arms
continue to have devastating consequences on the
African continent, given their capacity to fuel, intensify
and prolong conflicts. We therefore welcome the
establishment of an open-ended working group to
develop an international instrument that will enable
States to identify and trace, in a timely and reliable
manner, illicit small arms and light weapons. In our
View, that will facilitate post-conflict reconciliation
through the reduction and control of small arms, which
in turn will ensure that unauthorized persons no longer
have easy access to such arms.

On the issue of the appropriate time to withdraw
United Nations forces after the cessation of conflict, it
is our view that such withdrawal should be gradual and
staggered. The case of Sierra Leone is a good example
of the wisdom of ensuring the presence of United
Nations troops for a reasonable length of time until
relative peace and stability can be established. That
would help in the reconciliation process.

The United Nations has a formidable role to play
in post-conflict reconciliation, given its neutrality and
its resources. The world body has indeed shown a
creditable determination to succeed in containing this
situation. We have urged the United Nations to do more
and to live up to its responsibility of maintaining
international peace and security and ensuring the
economic and social development of Member States,
especially those emerging from conflicts.

In conclusion, my delegation takes this
opportunity to express its appreciation to the United
Nations for its efforts towards national reconciliation
after conflicts. Nigeria will continue to support the
United Nations in this endeavour.

