Mr. Toyberg-Frandzen: I would like to thank
you, Sir, for the opportunity to provide a briefing on
the latest developments in Sierra Leone, pursuant
to the ninth report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL) (S/20l2/679), which has been
submitted for the Council's consideration.

As detailed in the report, Sierra Leone continues to
make steady progress in consolidating its achievements
of the past decade. As Council members are aware,
the joint Government and Peacebuilding Commission
progress report on the Agenda for Change has been
issued. It highlights the country's success in the
implementation of the Government's priorities, in
particular in the areas of infrastructure development,
the provision of health services, and the energy and
agriculturesectors.Planningforasuccessordevelopment
strategy, known as the Agenda for Prosperity, is under
way. At the same time, the challenges of unemployment,
especially among the youth, high living costs and
related economic difficulties still persist, requiring a
more long-term approach and sustained investment.

With regard to political developments, the main
focus during the past six months has continued to be
on the preparations for the 17 November presidential,
parliamentary and local council elections. With
technical assistance from the United Nations, major
electoral arrangements, particularly the biometric voter
registration exercise, were successfully concluded.
Others, including the procurement of sensitive
materials and communication links between regional
tallying centres and the Commission's head offices in
Freetown are ongoing. The nomination of candidates
for the various elective positions will commence on
12 September, to be followed by a political campaign
period from 17 October to 15 November.

Overall, preparations for the elections have
proceeded satisfactorily, albeit with some challenges.
In recognition of the complexity of conducting
four elections - presidential, parliamentary, local
council and mayoral * on the same date throughout
the country, the National Electoral Commission has
planned an extensive voter education programme
using ward electoral and education committees that
are comprised of local community representatives. The
programme, which will also be supplemented by civil
society organizations, is crucial to ensuring greater
participation in the electoral process.

Since the completion of the report before the
Council, on 6 September Parliament endorsed the
revised nomination fees, which require presidential
candidates to pay 100 million leones, equivalent to
$23,250; parliamentary candidates to pay 10 million
leones, equivalent to $2,325; local council chairs to pay
5 million leones, equivalent to $1,167; and local council
councilors to pay 2 million leones. The previous rates
for the 2002 and 2007 elections were 1 million leones
for presidential candidates and 100,000 leones for other
elective positions.

Almost all political parties, as well as civil society
groups and the National Human Rights Commission,
strongly criticized the proposals for the substantial
increase in nomination fees. Women's groups in
particular have pointed out that the increased fees Will
prevent women from participating in the elections.
Throughout that process, and given the importance of
the concerns raised, I have encouraged all the political
parties and the National Electoral Commission to
engage in dialogue and to use the democratic processes
to resolve their differences.

Although the official campaign date is now set
to begin on 17 October, the country is already in an
election mode, with political parties, in particular the
two major parties - the All People's Congress (APC)
and the Sierra Leone People's Party (SLPP) - engaged
in extensive tours of the country to mobilize support.
All those political activities are so far proceeding in
an orderly manner and without incident. We welcome
that positive trend and at the same time believe that
continued attention should be given to the following
four areas: promoting constructive dialogue and mutual
trust among the political actors, in particular the two
major political parties, the APC and the SLPP; ensuring
confidence in the security sector, especially in the
Sierra Leone Police; improving communication and
dialogue between the National Electoral Commission
and the political parties; and managing the role of the
media.

With regard to political dialogue, I am pleased to
report that as a manifestation of national ownership of
the political process, and in response to the Security
Council's call made in its last presidential statement
on Sierra Leone (S/PRST/20l2/11), all 10 registered
political parties and other major stakeholders have
signed the Declaration of 18 May 2012, committing
themselves to free, fair and peaceful elections. The
Declaration outlines the roles and responsibilities of
all the key players, including the political parties, the
media, security agencies, civil society and relevant
national institutions, such as the National Electoral
Commission, in the upcoming elections. At present,
UNIPSIL, in collaboration with the Political Parties
Registration Commission and the National Commission
for Democracy, is supporting the wider dissemination
of the Declaration and monitoring its implementation.
We continue to urge Sierra Leone's political parties
and all major stakeholders to fully implement the
commitments they have made under the Declaration.

Providing an enabling security environment at all
stages of the electoral process and in the immediate
post-election period will be equally indispensible. In
that regard, the role of Sierra Leone's security agencies,
in particular the Sierra Leone Police, remains critical.
The training ofthe police and provision of the necessary
logistics are well under way. However, recent incidents
involving the use of force by the police in response
to disturbances and other situations in various parts
of the country have caused concern. We welcome the
measures taken by the Government of Sierra Leone
to investigate the circumstances that led to the use of
lethal force, and stress the need to ensure respect for
the rule of law and professional conduct by all during
the electoral period and beyond. The establishment
of the independent police complaints mechanism, as
envisaged in the 2009 joint communique, would also
contribute to that end.

Notwithstanding the authority vested in the
National Electoral Commission by Sierra Leone's
Constitution, the Commission and the political parties
should continue to collaborate and address any concerns
through open dialogue and in a constructive spirit. In
that regard, efforts are under way, with the support of
UNIPSIL, to strengthen the Political Parties Liaison
Committee, comprised of representatives from all the
political parties, the Commission, the Political Parties
Registration Commission and other major actors, to
serve as a fonun for consultations and dialogue in order
to resolve any matters regarding the electoral process.

The Sierra Leone media has an important
contribution to make in ensuring free, fair and
peaceful elections by providing objective and balanced
information to the population. In that regard, the
Independent Media Commission should play a more
active role in working with the media to discourage
divisive and inflammatory reporting that could lead
to political tension and violence. Others, in particular
the Sierra Leone Association of Journalists and the
Guild of Editors, should also educate and guide their
memberships on their roles and responsibilities. As to
the Serra Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC), I
am pleased to report the recent adoption of guidelines,
which were signed by all political parties and the SLBC.
The guidelines provide for equitable airtime and access
for all political parties to SLBC programmes.

We are pleased to note that, during the past six
months and since the adoption of the Declaration of
18 May 2012, there have been no incidents of political
violence in the country. The political parties and other
stakeholders continue to uphold their commitment
to credible and peaceful elections. However, as
the elections draw closer, the intensity of political
competition, in particular between the two major
political parties - the APC and the SLPP - is expected
to increase and tensions are expected to rise. However,
with the prevailing spirit of dialogue and constructive
engagement among Sierra Leone's political actors, we
are confident that such tensions will be managed and
violence prevented. In that regard, we are encouraged
by the level of commitment and active engagement of
all segments of Sierra Leone society in the electoral
process. The non-State actors project implemented by
UNIPSIL, with the assistance of the United Nations
Peacebuilding Fund, supports the efforts of key
stakeholders, such as political parties, youth and women
groups, tradition leaders and media, in promoting
non-violence and political participation.

The successful conduct of elections will
demonstrate the maturity of Sierra Leone's political
leadership and institutions, as well as the consolidation
of the democratic process in the country. Once the
elections are concluded, the immediate focus should
be on addressing any potential post-elections issues
through dialogue and on ensuring a smooth transition
of the elected Government. UNIPSIL stands ready
to continue providing the necessary assistance in
that respect, working with all stakeholders towards
promoting national cohesion and reconciliation.
However, consolidating and sustaining Sierra Leone's
achievements would require continued progress in
tackling the root causes, including those identified in
the report of Sierra Leone's Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. In that regard, with Sierra Leoneans taking
the lead, the continued support of the international
community, including the United Nations, will still
be needed for some time to come. With that in mind,
UNIPSIL and the United Nations country team will
continue to assist the Government of Sierra Leone as
long as it is deemed appropriate.

In concluding, I Wish to take this opportunity to
thank President Koroma and his Government for the
continued cooperation and support for the work of the
United Nations in Sierra Leone. I would also like to
thank the Council for its sustained interest in Sierra
Leone, as demonstrated in its recent mission to the
country. Last but not least, I wish to acknowledge the
very important role that the Sierra Leone configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission continues to play
under the able chairmanship of Ambassador Gullerimo
Rischynski in supporting peace consolidation efforts in
the country, including the work of UNIPSIL.

