Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank the Chairs
of the Committees for their briefings this morning. As
they have set out clearly today, the Committees perform
a crucial role in our continuing fight against terrorism.
That work is intricate and vital, and I thank them for
their service to the Security Council.

The threat is one that so many countries around
this table know only too well. The United Kingdom
witnessed it less than two months ago in the horrific
attack in Westminster, which claimed the lives of
five people and injured more than 50 more. It speaks
volumes of the threat we now face that the senseless
actions of one man on one day could affect the lives of
innocent men and women from 12 countries, including
the United States, France, China and Italy, as well as
peoples from my own country. That is just one example
of many.

We share a common threat, one that demands a
shared response and is continually evolving. Just as
terrorists pursue every means possible to carry out
their hateful acts, so too must we pursue every available
avenue to stop them. The three Committees are an
important part of that effort, so let me take up each,
briefly, in turn.

First, I welcome the work that the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) and Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate are doing to galvanize our efforts
to tackle terrorists on every front - whether combating
illicit trafficking, the financing of terrorism or the abuse
of the Internet and other forms of communication.

Secondly, thanks to the Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals,
groups, undertakings and entities, and its Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to
resolutions 1526 (2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning
ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, we have a clear, up-to-date
understanding of the evolving threat posed by Da'esh
and Al-Qaida. I welcome the Committee's work in
keeping the sanctions list up to date, ensuring that
individuals, groups and entities joining or affiliating
with those groups are listed.

Thirdly, thanks to the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
are taking tangible steps to prevent weapons of mass
destruction from falling in to the hands ofterrorists and
non-State actors. Sadly, as the Joint Implementation
Mechanism has confirmed, this is no longer a
hypothetical nightmare scenario. To adapt to this new
reality, it is important that the Committee take account
of new and emerging challenges from the terrorist
threat, and advances in science and technology. And
we must all do more, as others have said, to encourage
Member States to submit their reports on the national
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

To defeat terrorism, we all need to play our part.
The Committees cannot do it alone. That is why the
United Kingdom has been such a champion, in the
Council, for aviation security - including through
resolution 2309 (2016). Protecting civil aviation should
be high on everyone's counter-terrorism agenda. We
all need to follow the international standards and
recommended practices for aviation security developed
by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), which are designed to keep pace with the
evolving nature of the threat. Member States should
recognize, support and draw on the cooperation
between the United Nations and ICAO and take steps
to strengthen that work. The CTC's upcoming meeting
on aviation security in July is an important opportunity
to focus on that issue, to share best practices and to
explore how the United Nations and ICAO can best
support Member States.

Finally, it is not enough to simply counter terrorism.
We must also ensure that we put the prevention of
Violent extremism, in all of its forms, at the heart of
our collective efforts. We have made good progress
over the past year. The prevention of Violent extremism
was recognized in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy and was presented in the Secretary-
General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism
in January 2016. As we go forward, it is essential that
we keep preventing violent extremism at the heart of all
of our work.

