Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): As
in the past, we see positive trends in Kosovo in the
context of mixed and even troubling developments. We
are pleased to note the continued leadership of
Mr. Kouchner, the effective working relationship
between the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the Kosovo Force
(KFOR), and the responsiveness of the Mission to the
many difficult problems on the ground.

The level of violence remains unacceptable. We
regret it; we want it stopped. But we should not be
surprised. As we have all come to understand, there are
no quick and easy fixes, just the continued requirement
to seek progress. The progress that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) is
making to find qualified international judges, the
cooperation between UNMIK police and the Kosovo
Force (KFOR), and agreements such as the one with
Bishop Artemije on security are all reassuring.
However, as the Council's own mission to Kosovo
stressed, we must be realistic in how we evaluate the
situation on the ground and how we look at the efforts
of UNMIK and KFOR.

We applaud KFOR's recent success in identifying
arms caches and the ongoing efforts to strengthen
control of the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC). We are
heartened by UNMIK's determined efforts to find the
difficult balance between freedom of the press and
security for individuals.

We continue to believe that in addition to
strengthening the rule of law, the solution to the
violence lies in the political process and the determined
support of the international community.

Elections and a responsible governing structure
are the best way to temper passions. We applaud the
decision of the Kosovo Serbs to rejoin the joint interim
administration. We are also encouraged that UNMIK
and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) have registered over 800,000 people
for the upcoming municipal elections in the fall. They
continue to look for ways to encourage Serbs and other
minorities to participate in this process. This is
important, and we should all join them in doing so.

Finally, we note that the United States has
forwarded some 50 resumes of qualified candidates for
staff positions in UNMIK in response to the appeal
from the Secretariat. We will continue to support this
process, and we encourage others to do so as well so
that UNMIK has the staff and resources it needs to
accomplish its difficult mandate.

I would also like to second Mr. Annabi's call for
personnel and political support for the developing
police force, and for our condemnation of violence no
matter where it originates.

