Mr. Lucas (Angola): Angola would like to start
by condemning in the strongest terms today's heinous
terrorist attack on the Parliament of Afghanistan,
which reflects the terrorists' hatred of the country's
institutions. We thank the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General in Afghanistan and Head of the
United Nations United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA), Mr. Nicholas Haysom,
for presenting the quarterly report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (S/2015/422). We also thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan for his insights into his
country's situation.

We commend the work of UNAMA as it discharges
its mandate in very difficult conditions, at a time when
Afghanistan is struggling to establish a society based
on the fundamental values of peace, human rights and
social equity. In the most recent debate on UNAMA
and the situation in Afghanistan (see S/PV.7403),
held in March, the Angolan delegation expressed a
comprehensive View of the issue. In today's statement,
we will limit ourselves to touching on some of the most
pressing issues mentioned in the Secretary-General's
report.

The report highlights relevant developments in the
past three months. The near-completion of the National
Unity Government and the confirmation by the
legislative body of Government nominations * which
include four women, and we commend that - was a
decisive development in the country's political life and
a step towards closing the complex presidential electoral
process. Other developments include President Ghani
and Chief Executive Abdullah Abdullah's reinvigorated
efforts to advance the realization of the reliance
agenda; the establishment of a social contract between
Government and citizens promoting transparency and
accountability in implementing socioeconomic reforms
and policies in priority areas to advance economic
growth; and the establishment ofa Special Commission
on Electoral Reform, which we expect to get to work in
earnest in order to complete the electoral process, since
comprehensive electoral reforms are perceived to be
crucial to restoration of the people's trust in the Afghan
democratic process.

Also notable are the Government's continued
efforts to launch a process of peace and reconciliation;
its stated commitment to bringing about peace through
dialogue, translating Afghans' deeply felt desire for
peace, despite a missing element, that is, the willingness
of the armed opposition to meet the Government in
direct talks; the mobilization of backing from regional
partners for the peace and reconciliation process;
and the steps taken by Afghanistan towards building
regional confidence and cooperation through its full
commitment, together with the Government of Pakistan,
to work for peace; the reintegration of a relatively large
number of anti-Government elements; the efforts of the
High Peace Council to counter fundamentalism, which
fuels Violence; the call by the countries of the region
to the Taliban to join the peace process; and President
Ghani's pledge to focus on establishing peace. Those
and other important political initiatives give us hope
that Afghanistan may be entering a new and decisive
phase.

However, the political progress I just outlined is
taking place against the backdrop of a deteriorating
security situation, with increased violence related to
the conflict, as the Afghan National Security Forces
have sought to contain the insurgent activity that has
resulted in an increasing number of civilian casualties,
the vast majority of them caused by the Taliban and
anti- Government groups. Inthatregard, we share the View
that long-term stability and prosperity in Afghanistan
depend on an inclusive internal reconciliation process
and regional cooperation against the insurgents, and
on curbing the flow of foreign terrorist fighters into
Afghanistan. Afghanistan's neighbours should be
aware that Afghanistan is the battlefront and that peace
in Afghanistan is fundamental if they are to keep peace
in the region.

We praise the efforts of the Afghan authorities
to engage actively with regional partners and, above
all, with Pakistan. Additionally, President Ghani
Ahmadzai's Visit to Iran in April, the meetings held
with the country's hierarchy and mutual pledges
to enhance cooperation in the areas of security,
information-sharing, counter-narcotics, water resources
and refugees and migrants are encouraging signals of
an emerging regional cooperation between Afghanistan
and the countries of the region.

Furthermore, President Ghani Ahmadzai's visit
to India and India's reiterated readiness to join the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement are
positive developments with respect to Afghanistan's
external standing. We believe that implementation
of those agreements will contribute to the social and
economic development of Afghanistan and its full
integration within the subregion.

We are deeply concerned over Violence against
women in Afghanistan. We urge an end to impunity
for crimes committed against women and call
for accountability on the part of the country's
criminal-justice system. Furthermore, we condemn
the public murder of a woman by a crowd of men on
19 March, in broad daylight, in the capital, which
illustrates the continuing threat of violence against
women. We believe that it is essential, with respect to
the credibility of the justice system, that allegations of
abuse and ill treatment are thoroughly investigated and
properly prosecuted so that those responsible are held
accountable for their crimes.

On 19 April, UNAMA and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
released a report, entitled "Justice through the eyes
of Afghan women: cases of violence against women
addressed through mediation and court adjudication".
We hope that the recommendations contained therein
will contribute to improving women's access to justice
and a change in the mindset of Afghan men towards
women.

Finally, we express our hope that the international
community will maintain its commitment towards
Afghanistan and that the long-suffering Afghan
people will be able to find a way to peace, national
reconciliation and economic and social development
and that Afghanistan's Transformation Decade will
become a reality.

