Mr. Llanos (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the
Australian presidency of the Council for the initiative
to organize this debate on peace and security in Africa
with respect to Ebola, and to the briefers, the Special
Envoy, Mr. Nabarro; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response (UNMEER),
Mr. Banbury; and Mr. Mauget.

We deplore the deaths caused by Ebola and reiterate
our solidarity and condolences to the families of the
victims and the Governments of the affected countries.
We share the priorities laid out in the presidential
statement adopted today (S/PRST/2014/24), and we
would mention a few issues that we would like to
highlight.

Through resolution 2177 (2014), the Council laid
out its work on non-traditional threats and determined
that "the unprecedented extent of the Ebola outbreak
in Africa constitutes a threat to international peace
and security". The crisis continues to have an impact
on peace and security, given its direct effect on people
and post-conflict societies committed to transitional
and peacebuilding processes. Situations such as this
generate risks and uncertainties and lead to destabilizing
situations to which the Council must pay attention so
as - together with other bodies of the United Nations
system, UNMEER and other relevant stakeholders - to
provide solutions and be on alert comprehensively to the
emergency, providing the conditions for the recovery
of social fabric and overcoming the insecurity of the
population.

We commend the resilience of Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone - post-conflict countries that are
focusing all oftheir developing institutional capabilities
on tackling this challenge. We hold up in particular the
efforts being undertaken by Mali, and we hope that the
UNMEER visit to Bamako and its establishment in
the country will help ensure Mali has comprehensive
support to face the emergency, including in border
areas. The successful experiences of countries in the
subregion could be instructive.

Together with the valuable efforts and achievements
to date, we single out the work of UNMEER and of the
specialized agencies, and express our gratitude to their
staff on the ground. Regional cooperation deserves
special recognition, including that ofthe African Union,
the Economic Community of West African States,
the Peacebuilding Commission through its respective
configurations, and the World Bank. At our own
regional level, Chile is working with the Community
of Latin American and Caribbean States and the Union
of South American Nations in developing plans and
updated protocols to face this pandemic by supporting
the activities of the Pan American Health Organization
and the World Health Organization. We also reiterate
our gratitude for the work being done by the Cuban
professionals on the ground.

As the Secretary-General has noted, the longer the
epidemic goes on, the higher the risk that it will spread
to other countries. We underscore the importance
of not letting down our guard and of keeping up
international support, stepping up our responses
and making them more flexible as needs evolve. We
support the strengthening of national capacities,
greater geographical distribution in interventions and
preparedness support for countries in the region. The
urgent efforts under way to meet immediate needs must
be supported by adequate resources and planning so as
not to jeopardize the long-term recovery of the countries
affected, which which must be considered when the
respective mandates of United Nations operations come
up for renewal.

We reiterate our call on all stakeholders to strictly
adhere to the protocols for persons who have had
contact with or who have contracted the disease, as
well as for the training of health-care teams deployed
on the ground. If our efforts are to be effective, they
must incorporate the human rights dimension so as to
avoid new forms of marginalization and exclusion. That
is a moral and a political imperative.

In conclusion, my country underscores the need for
commitment on the part of the stakeholders involved
not to isolate the countries affected. We believe that
any such action would undermine their prospects for
recovery. We therefore urge continued efforts to avoid
discrimination against countries or persons.

