Mr. Takasu (Japan): I would like to express our
gratitude to the Secretary-General, Under-Secretary-
General John Holmes and High Commissioner for
Human Rights Pillay for their statements. I pay special
tribute to John Holmes for his service to the cause of
humanity at the helm of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs for the past three and a half
years.

The protection of civilians in conflict is a
critically important item on the Council's agenda. Last
year, the Security Council adopted resolution 1894
(2009) after a comprehensive review of this issue. The
Secretariat also took measures to improve protection
on the ground in response to criticism against the
performance of some peacekeeping missions.

Yet, as the three briefings today testify, we still
face many challenges, and further concerted action is
essential. First of all, in consolidating the protection of
civilians, standard-setting and the universalization of
norms are important, of course, but strict compliance
with all international humanitarian, human rights and
refugee law is equally important, and enforcement is at
the heart of any such action. This means that the
Government authorities of a country in which a
conflict occurs should act in accordance with
international norms and humanitarian law, and respect
the provisions of resolutions adopted by the Security
Council on this subject.

We simply cannot allow Government troops or
police forces to disregard the protection of civilians or
even to become a threat to civilians. To that end, the
rule of law should be established through security
sector reform, and judicial reform should bring an end
to impunity. A policy of zero tolerance has very little
value unless it is enforced throughout the security
establishment without regard to rank or position.

Another serious challenge is how to address
violence against civilians and hindrances to
humanitarian work committed by non-State armed
groups. Calling for non-State armed groups to comply
with humanitarian law, as we customarily do in
Security Council resolutions, is clearly inadequate.

Effective ways should be found to cope with the
tactics of non-State armed groups, such as the Lord's
Resistance Army. Peacekeeping missions may be able
to provide logistical support, upon request, for
Government forces fighting non-State armed groups,
but such support should be provided only when clear
and strict conditions are met so that it will not lead to
violence against civilians.

The most effective step we can take is to promote
the political process among the parties concerned
through engaging non-State groups so as to achieve
ceaseflres and eventually peace agreements. If a
political solution cannot be achieved, appropriate
measures should be taken to keep the violence
committed by non-State armed groups to a minimum.
One way is targeted sanctions against those violators of
humanitarian law. That method should be considered
more strategically. Sanction regimes could also be
utilized to prevent weapons from flowing in from
outside the country. Controls over small arms should
be strengthened at the regional level.

But, obviously, military or coercive measures
alone cannot resolve conflicts. We should address root
causes such as protection of minorities and access to
natural resources, food and water. Comprehensive but
also country-specific strategies should be developed to
promote civilian protection and should involve all
actors, including regional organizations.

Half of the peacekeeping operations now in the
field have protection of civilians as a main mandate
from the Security Council. Despite some improvement
in the last 18 months, there remains a noticeable gap
between mandate and expectation, on the one hand,
and implementation and action on the ground, on the
other hand. I would like to stress three steps that
should be taken so that peacekeeping missions can
implement the mandate more effectively.

First, in country-specific protection strategies that
are designed to translate the Council's mandate into
concrete actions, the mandate to protect civilians
should be reflected in more specific terms by
identifying targets and means of protecting local
populations, humanitarian workers, refugees and
internally displaced persons. Also, the strategies and
means of achieving the objective should be shared with
the Council so that there is a common understanding as
to how the mandate is to be implemented. There should
therefore be no gap between expectation and
implementation.

Secondly, it is essential to ensure that there are
adequate resources and capacity for effective
implementation. To that end, information on resource
implications should be provided to the Council at the
launch of a new mission or a revised mission. Two key
issues in the protection of civilians are, first, the
mobility and training of units and, secondly,
intelligence capacity, since troops often have to operate
in vast and geographically diverse areas.

In particular, I would like to stress the shortage of
utility helicopters, which has been emphasized so many
times by the Secretary-General and his senior
colleagues in the Secretariat. But a solution that meets
that Challenge has not yet been found. I have
personally tried to address the issue through the
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations, which is
a subsidiary organ of the Security Council and thus
supports the Council's work, in connection with its
consideration of the capacity gap in mandate
implementation. However, regrettably, there is no
consensus on what to do with this issue in the Working
Group.

I believe that addressing this issue is the single
most specific and concrete step the Council can take to
contribute to protection of civilians. I appeal therefore
to members of the Council to demonstrate strong
leadership by cooperating with the General Assembly
on this issue. Indeed, because responsibility is
overlapping, it is difficult to find a solution. In order to
address and find a solution on this chronic and very
critical issue as soon as possible, it would helpful if the
Secretary-General could submit a proposal to serve as a
basis for the work of the Security Council and the
General Assembly on this matter.
The third point is that strategies and guidance on
the implementation of protection of civilians should be
shared at different levels: the policy level, the
operational level and the tactical level.

The operational guideline, which has been
developed by the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, is useful as common guidance across
missions. Any change in mandates decided by the
Council should be kept updated on a mission-by-
mission basis so that the concept of operations can be
immediately adjusted by the troops on the ground.

I would like to emphasize the importance of close
consultation in this connection among the Security
Council, the troop-contributing countries, police-
contributing countries and the Secretariat. It is also
important to share best practices among the missions.
For example, what happened at the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo with the establishment of the joint
protection team and a temporary base and the
strengthening of communication with local populations
are all useful and could usefully be followed by the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan.

I am pleased with the recent progress regarding
women and children in conflict, the appointment of
Ms. Wallstrom as the Special Representative of
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, and
the adoption of the presidential statement last month to
strengthen measures against persistent perpetrators of
violence against children (S/PRST/2010/10).

In closing, I would like to reiterate how relevant
the human security approach can be as the basic
rationale for efforts to protect and empower those
civilians who are most vulnerable. This multisectoral
and human-centred approach focuses on both
protection and empowerment at the individual and
community levels. It is for this reason that Japan has
been providing support, including through the United
Nations Trust Fund for Human Security. Japan is
committed to extend every possible support to
protection and empowerment of civilians.

