The Secretary-General (spoke in French): On this International Day against the Use of Child Soldiers, I am pleased to join the members of the Security Council to present the United Nations guidance for mediators, aimed at better protecting children in armed conflict. Simply put, children should never be involved in conflict. And yet, as Graga Machel stated in her landmark 1996 report, [m]illions of children are caught up in conflicts in which they are not merely bystanders, but targets. (A/51/306, para. 1) Children under the age of 18 make up more than half of the population in countries affected by war. Unable to protect themselves against its impact, those children are among the most vulnerable people. Approximately 250 million children live in countries impacted by a conflict. In 2018, more than 12,000 children were killed or maimed in conflict, the highest number since 1996, when the General Assembly created the post of Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict. More than 24,000 cases of violence have been documented and verified, compared to 21,000 in 2017. Attacks on hospitals and schools deprive children of vital education, treatment and emergency care and force families to leave their homes. In war zones, children are often subjected to atrocities, including sexual violence and abduction. Some are trained to handle deadly weapons or are used as cooks or messengers. Such violence has long-lasting traumatic effects on children and the communities and societies of which they are a part. It fuels the resentment and frustrations that lead to extremism, creating a vicious cycle of tension and violence. (spoke in English) I thank the Council for its systematic engagement on this issue in several resolutions over the past 21 years. We have made some progress in raising awareness of violations, partly due to the monitoring and reporting mechanism established by the Council in 2005. The statistics that the mechanism has yielded are incomplete, but they paint a damning picture and raise questions of responsibility and compliance. Over time, they have the power to change behaviours, prevent grave violations and protect children. My Special Representative is working to improve the protection of children, from the Central African Republic to Myanmar and Yemen and everywhere else in the world. South Sudan is an example of how the protection of children can bring parties to conflict together and build confidence and peace. Parties to the peace agreement signed the Comprehensive Action Plan to End and Prevent All Grave Violations Against Children with the United Nations, in the presence of my Special Representative in Juba last week. It comes at a crucial moment for South Sudan and has the potential to build confidence between the parties in the context of a peace process that, as members know, is facing many obstacles. Elsewhere, 12 parties to conflict have been removed from the list of those responsible for violations after complying with their commitments under an action plan. Sustained advocacy has led to changes in the law and better cooperation with Government departments and the military. In Afghanistan, for example, child protection units have been established in every province and the recruitment and use of children has been made a criminal offence. Campaigns, including Children, Not Soldiers and the new ACT to Protect Children Affected by Conflict, have helped to bring about a global consensus that children should never be used in conflict. However, despite those efforts, the figures on grave violations against children in conflict continue to rise. Greater awareness and better monitoring do not account for that increase. It is the result of ongoing and worsening hostilities and the shameful disregard for civilian lives. We must all do more. The practical guidance for mediators that we are launching today is the next step in our strategy to put children at the heart of protection, peacebuilding and prevention efforts. It recognizes that the children's needs and rights must be considered in all phases of conflict, from prevention efforts to mediation and recovery, through sustainable inclusive development. The guidance is based on principles that outlaw discrimination and put children's interests first. It provides the means for mediators and negotiators to conduct a children's rights-based analysis of conflict and welcomes the involvement and participation of children with the appropriate support. By integratingspecific measures to protect children in peace processes, we can achieve concrete results for children and for peace. When the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejercito del Pueblo ended the recruitment and use of children, it helped to build confidence and create momentum to move the peace process forward. I thank all those who were involved in developing the guidance, especially my Special Representative, Ms. Virginia Gamba, the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, the Department of Peace Operations, UNICEF and other stakeholders that have direct experience in the fields of mediation and child protection in civil society. I strongly encourage all Member States, regional and subregional organizations, mediators and other actors involved in peace processes to make full use of the guidance and to circulate it widely to achieve the greatest possible impacts. However, as important as this guidance is, it is not enough. I urge all Member States to take concrete actions to prioritize the protection of children affected by conflict at the national, regional and global levels, and my Special Representative stands ready to support all Member States in those efforts and, in particular, is doing so at the present moment in Mali, Syria and Yemen. Last September, I stood on the north lawn of the United Nations complex and looked around at 3,758 backpacks that had been laid out by UNICEF colleagues to resemble a graveyard. Each backpack represented a child killed in conflict in 2018. Standing in the cemetery of dreams was devastating, and I am sure that many here experienced it for themselves. It is our fundamental duty as leaders to do everything in our power to protect children - our future - from the chaos and madness of wars that have nothing to do with them. Together we are beginning to make progress, but we need to continue on that path, and I urge members to make it a priority for the Council.
