Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): I express my appreciation to your
delegation, Sir, for the convening of this meeting,
which allows us once again to emphasize the need to
act against extremism and its impact in the Sahelo-
Saharan region. We welcome and thank Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations; Mr. Maman Sidikou, Permanent Secretary
of the Group of Five for Sahel (G-5 Sahel); Mr. Pierre
Buyoya, African Union High Representative for
Mali and the Sahel; and Mr. Pedro Serrano, Deputy-
Secretary-General for Common Security and Defence
Policy and Crisis Response at the European External
Action Service.

We are at a crucial and critical juncture in our
fight against terrorism, criminality and - I would
add - mercenaries in the Sahel region. The increasing
mobility and sophistication of terrorist armed groups
operating in the region have become a real threat to
international peace and security. The Republic of
Equatorial Guinea is following very closely and is
concerned about the increase in extremism in the Sahel.
Recent asymmetrical and cross-border attacks on local
defence and security forces, on the one hand, and
against the Joint Force ofthe Group ofFive for the Sahel,
its personnel and facilities, on the other, underscore
the need to act swiftly to halt increasing levels of
terrorism. To that end, the response of the international
community must consist in the constant promotion
and implementation of joint initiatives, as High
Representative Buyoya underscored, by prioritizing
multi-sectoral and multi-stakeholder approaches. In
that regard, a joint military partnership for transborder
cooperation is the appropriate means for responding to
the multiple threats to the region's security.

In parallel with those joint efforts, it is necessary
to ensure joint funding and support to achieve the
full operational capability of the Joint Force. We
firmly believe that the needs of the Joint Force would
be largely met if pledges made to support it were
fulfilled. Funding is needed to train soldiers, achieve
standardization among the five States' armies, acquire
optimal security facilities and equipment, build and
fortify operational bases and to meet any other need
to counter terrorists and prevent attacks. We also
commend the commitment of contributors and donors
and urgently call for hastening the establishment of
a trust fund in accordance with the provisions of the
extraordinary summit of Heads of State of the G-5
countries held on the margins of the thirty-first Summit
of the African Union, held on 2 July in Nouakchott.

As the Permanent Secretary of the G-5 Sahel just
announced, the five States have decided to finance the
Joint Force beginning next year and provide it with
an annual budget of $13 million, which we commend.
However, we must be aware of the complex problems
facing the Sahel countries and the possibility that that
decision may affect other development priorities, such
as in the health and education sectors, which largely
justifies the need to combine synergies to achieve
sustained financing.

The close collaboration of the G-5 Sahel with
partners, such as the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) and INTERPOL, should be
underlined. The joint assessment missions held from
July to October by the Permanent Secretariat and
UNODC will undoubtedly create a legal framework for
the standing up of the police component so as to ensure
that the Joint Force can adequately fulfil its mission
to combat terrorism and organized crime by ensuring
transparent judicial follow-up. Moreover, we commend
the strategic partnership with INTERPOL, which
is critical to information-sharing and ensuring that
relevant criminal information generated by Joint Force
operations and investigations can be cross-checked and
recorded in INTERPOL global databases.

As highlighted by the United Nations Integrated
Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations Support
Plan for the Sahel, we must not forget that political
and security considerations are inextricably linked
to humanitarian and development issues, if we are to
succeed in consolidating and sustaining peace in the
Sahel. Regional development initiatives - such as the
signing, on 30 October in Niamey, of a partnership
protocol between the Permanent Secretariat of the
G-5 Sahel and the Alliance for the Sahel to establish
a framework for cooperation and operational
modalities for implementing joint projects in a rapid
and flexible manner; the emergency plan for the Sahel
of the Government of Burkina Faso, which foresees
investments in infrastructure, energy and public
services; the official launching of the disarmament,
demobilization and socioeconomic reintegration
process for former combatants in State structures
in Mali; and electrification projects in Malian cities,
such as in Me'naka - are all measures heading in the
right direction.

Extremism in the Sahel is spreading. It is a fact.
That spread, which threatens not only the West African
region but also Central Africa, in which Equatorial
Guinea is located, is the result of the current situation
in Libya. We must not forget that. The main problem
is not the emergence here and there of local armed
groups that are remotely controlled by recent jihadist
movements in North Africa, the Middle East, the Gulf
countries, Afghanistan or elsewhere. The problem
involves the extraordinary ease with which terrorist
groups are able to penetrate new territories, while
provoking conflicts among ethnocultural communities
over access to resources. It should be noted that, as
a result of that situation, the Republic of Equatorial
Guinea was the victim in December 2017 of an
attempt at its destabilization, which was orchestrated
by mercenaries from countries of the subregion. That
incident undoubtedly underscores the need for even
the Central African States to join international efforts
by providing specific and meaningful support to our
brothers in the Sahel. At the bipartite summit held in
Lome on 30 July, the Heads of State and Government
of the member States of the Economic Community of
West African States and of the Economic Community
of Central African States expressed their desire for
intercommunity solidarity. It should therefore be
implemented without further delay, by means of
logistical and financial support, or through the use of
the intelligence services of the various States, in the
fight against terrorism and mercenaries in all its forms
and manifestations.

Furthermore, we hope that the forthcoming G-5
Sahel donors and partners coordination conference
will make it possible to adopt concrete mechanisms
for financing the priority investment programme in
order to translate into action the efforts of the relevant
Member States to guarantee the security of the people
and assets needed for sustainable development.

In conclusion, I recall the what the Senegalese
President said in Paris on the sidelines of the celebration
of the centenary of the 1918 armistice:

"The Sahel issue requires a concerted effort equal
in strength and scope to that in Syria to combat
terrorism in the Sahelo-Saharan region."

Lastly, Equatorial Guinea supports the French
delegation's proposed statement to the press on the
proceedings of this meeting.

