Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): We convey our
appreciation to the Russian presidency for having
convened today's open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statements
made, respectively, by the representative of Venezuela
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries
and by the representative of the State of Kuwait on
behalf of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.

The open debates in the Council Chamber on the
Palestinian question reverberate with a deepening sense
of frustration, given the Council's persistent failure and
inability to live up to its obligations to end the nearly
five decades'-long Israeli occupation of the Palestinian
territories, and thus pave the way for a peaceful, just
and durable solution to the crisis.
We agree with most delegations that the immediate
priority for the Council is to send out an unqualified
message condemning the illegal Israeli settlements,
including the recent expansion plans. Such plans
have emerged as the symbol of the protracted illegal
occupation and have been identified as the main
obstacle to pursuing the final status negotiations, and
thereby a viable two-State solution.

We cannot agree more with the Ambassador and
Permanent Observer of the State of Palestine when
he underscored the need for restoring the "political
horizon" in order for the Council to act in a decisive
manner on this seminal issue of concern, and doing
so while drawing on its own resolutions, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Madrid
land-for-peace principle. We urge that the Palestinian
delegation's current initiative to hold dialogues with
all Council members on the possibility of a Council
draft resolution to address the illegality of the Israeli
settlement regime, including the construction of the
wall in the occupied Palestinian territory, lead to its
much-anticipated and logical conclusion.

The Arria Formula meeting held last week was
unequivocal about how the illegal Israeli settlements
continue to undermine the prospects for reviving
the Middle East peace process. They deserve to
be accounted for pursuant to the provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention and the Rome Statute.
The international conference held in Geneva in June,
the French initiative and the Quartet report issued in
July (S/2016/595, annex) also sounded unmistakable
concerns about continued Israeli settlement activities,
which have potentially irreversible implications for
the character, status and demography of the occupied
Palestinian territories.

The dire humanitarian and socioeconomic
situation - particularly in the Gaza Strip, which
is under an Israeli blockade that is entering its tenth
year - was eloquently highlighted by the briefers this
morning. We call upon the international community to
impress upon Israel, the occupying Power, to put an end

to its systematic violation of international humanitarian
law and human rights principles and its unjustified acts
of collective punishment unleashed on the 2 million
people in Gaza.

It is perhaps an irony that the Palestinian authorities
are often called upon to take action against incitement
of so-called terrorist acts, when the most fundamental
root causes of the generational challenges of terrorism
and radicalization sweeping through our world have
been left unaddressed for decades. At the risk of
its own peril, the international community must do
something besides ignoring that stark truth. To that
effect, my delegation would support the proposal to
mark the fiftieth year of the unlawful Israeli occupation
of the Palestinian territories by declaring 2017 as the
international year to end the occupation.

We appreciate the Palestinian delegation's interest
in playing an enhanced role in the United Nations
within stipulated rules and procedures. We pledge them
our continued support in realizing their unalienable
right to self-determination and independent and viable
statehood.

