Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, my delegation expresses our deepest
condolences to you, to your Government and to the
families of the victims for the loss of two Russian
passenger aeroplanes.

We are grateful to you for organizing this public
meeting to consider the situation in Afghanistan and its
consequences for international peace and security,
which is the subject of a complete report (S/2004/634)
submitted by the Secretary-General for the Council's
consideration. We should like to express our great
appreciation to Mr. Arnault, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for Afghanistan, for having
briefly presented to us its broad outlines.

In the past few years, Afghanistan has made
significant progress on the path of normalization. That
progress is unquestionably to the credit of the Afghan
Government, which is guiding the country's destiny
against all obstacles on the path laid out by the Bonn
and Berlin international conferences. We also attribute
that progress to the international community, which has
assisted the peace process begun in the country in
December 2001. The important stages that have been
successfully completed would not have been possible
without the constant mobilization of bilateral and
multilateral partners for the restoration of the rule of
law and for national reconciliation and reconstruction
in Afghanistan.

The Secretary-General refers in his report to the
many constraints preventing the Government from
moving forward at the desired pace in building the
foundations of a democratic State resolutely committed
to promoting sustainable development. In the report, he
highlights the steps that must be taken to overcome
those obstacles. We believe that the question of
strengthening the Government's legitimacy is crucial,
because a cause-and-effect relationship is established
between that legitimacy and eliminating resistance by
the informal actors and networks that characterize the
nature of power in Afghanistan.

For our part, we link the question of legitimacy
directly to the holding of the elections, whose
preparations are under way in the Joint Election
Management Body. We welcome the remarkable
progress made in establishing voter lists, which proves
that the Afghan people truly aspire to democracy. We
understand the objective reasons that compelled the
Joint Election Management Body to revise the electoral
calendar. We believe that the Afghan Government
should do its utmost to create optimum conditions for
the holding of free, transparent and truly democratic
elections. In that regard, only the happy outcome of the
process could validate the Government's many efforts
to put the legal and institutional framework in place
and to register the electoral body.

Quite rightly, it is essential to guarantee
appropriate security conditions. That is a demand that
challenges the international community, because it
requires a marked increase in international security
assistance. From that perspective, the assessment of the
situation in terms of security in the country is very
disquieting with regard to the resurgence of violence
throughout the country - particularly violence
directed against the electoral process and against
humanitarian assistance personnel, which we condemn.

The many incidents cited in the report show the
gravity of the situation. That raises questions about the
possibility of holding the elections in the current
conditions, and it directly affects the increase in human
rights violations. We believe that the international
community must find ways to help Afghanistan to
consistently carry out the programme of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration to limit the clashes
among the factions, which are reaching unprecedented
intensity. We welcome the efforts made in that area,
and we particularly welcome the end of registration
and the beginning of the cantonment of heavy
weapons. Special attention should be devoted to
problems related to guarding the cantonment sites.

Similarly, we welcome the success of the
international conference on Afghanistan and its efforts
to restore the police force in Afghanistan, as well as the
commitment by 26 donor countries to mobilize the
necessary resources for that purpose.

We agree with the Secretary-General's positive
assessment of the decision taken by the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) summit in Istanbul, which
met at the end of June 2004, to deploy new troops in
order to allow the elections to proceed smoothly.

Here we would like to repeat the appeal made by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) for assistance to registered political parties
that do not have the necessary resources to conduct
electoral campaigns. For this purpose, we should also
guarantee them equitable access to the State-run
television and radio stations outside Kabul.

We welcome the arrangements made to facilitate
the return of refugees and allow those who are still
abroad to exercise their right to vote. We cannot fail to
mention here our concern regarding the resistance to
the campaign against drugs, which must be continued
in order to reduce the negative impact drug trade has
on the situation in the country. We would like here to
repeat the appeal made by the Secretary-General for
increased assistance to Afghanistan in order to
continue this campaign in close cooperation with
countries in the region.

In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Jean Arnault, for his activities at the head of
UNAMA under, as we all know, difficult conditions.

