Mr. Mawe (Ireland): Ireland commends the
United Kingdom for its initiative in scheduling today's
discussion, and the Secretary-General and the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for their
insightful briefings on this topic.

Ireland associates itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

Every day in this Chamber, we bear witness to
the costs of the failure to prevent conflict. Too often,
the United Nations finds itself scrambling to respond
to crises, including some that could have and should
have been forestalled. The scale of the crises and their
duration mean that we cannot continue with business
as usual. A paradigm shift is needed to rebalance the
current trend. We have to get ahead of the curve.

As the concept note (S/2014/572, annex) points
out, the Security Council has a range of preventive
tools under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations that can prevent the escalation of disputes
into full-blown crises. We need to think now about
how to enhance the Council's ability to make better
use of those tools. Otherwise, we will continue to
measure the results in the form of the increased loss
of life, growing insecurity and greater human misery.
In addition, almost by default, we will continue to
saddle costly peacekeeping missions with more and
more responsibilities. Let me touch upon some of the
preventive measures at the disposal of the Council.

First, central to an effective system of conflict
prevention is awareness of the situation, the ability to
analyse the relevant information and the political will
to take action when needed. In this day and age, there
is generally no shortage of information - sometimes
quite the opposite. However, we need to analyse it
better, draw conclusions sooner and then take the right
decisions.

Early warning, as the Secretary-General said, is
effective only when acted upon, and that is the collective
challenge before us all here today. There are too many
unfolding tragedies where we can no longer say "but we
didn't know".

Secondly, we need vigorous, sustained diplomacy
where conflict is brewing. Intensive diplomatic efforts
using the good offices of the Secretary-General, his
senior envoys and United Nations staff in the field have
been and can continue to be effective in bringing parties
back from the brink of conflict. That is most effective
when backed by the wider international community.

Thirdly, there has been a concerted effort by the
United Nations to optimize the use of mediation as a
tool to prevent conflict, which we strongly welcome.
The recent adoption of General Assembly resolution
68/303 paved the way for closer partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations. We
have long seen merit in the active role that regional
organizations, with their proximate understanding of
conflict in their own geographical area, can play in
mediating or facilitating dialogue between parties.

Fourthly, special political missions, while often
deployed after a conflict has erupted, play a key role
in advancing political dialogue and other peacebuilding
tasks. A Council that can act more quickly might deploy
special political missions much earlier.

Fifthly, parties who refuse to comply with their
international commitments need to be made fully
aware of the consequences. Where that is not evident
or understood, entrenchment and stalemate can ensue,
leading to the types of frustration that Council members
expressed during their visit to South Sudan last week.

At the institutional level, the successful operation
of the International Criminal Court offers a vital tool
for accountability that bolsters conflict prevention
because of its deterrent effect. The Court was set up
to ensure accountability, but, while the Council has an
inescapable responsibility in that regard, too often we
find it unable or unwilling to act. A sense of impunity
can lead to prolonged conflicts and result in the loss of
more innocent lives.

Looking more locally, I would like to briefly
mention aspects of the Council's working methods.
There is a need for more efficiency and effectiveness in
how the Council operates. The resolution adopted last
week (resolution 2170 (2014)) on the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant and the Al-Nusra Front shows that
measures can be taken more quickly, but it should not
take a crisis of that nature to provoke rapid action.

In some ways, when issues reach the Council
agenda, it is already too late. We therefore need
to get out in front of emerging issues. To that end,
we encourage more informal exchanges among
Council members on emerging threats and more
horizon-scanning. More fundamentally, the unfettered
use of veto rights by permanent Council members also
inhibits the effectiveness of the Council and needs to
be reconsidered.

On the positive side, as underlined by High
Commissioner Pillay this morning, we welcome the
increasing recognition of the correlation between severe
human rights violations and threats to international
peace and security. In that regard, the Secretary-
General's Rights Up Front Action Plan, which puts the
focus on human rights, is particularly welcome.

If we look ahead, 2015 will be an important year
for the United Nations system. It marks the tenth
anniversary of the 2005 World Summit, when the
international community renewed its commitment
to promote a culture of conflict prevention. The year
2015 will also be a watershed, with the negotiation ofa
successor framework for the Millennium Development
Goals and a stronger linkage between good governance,
the rule of law and sustainable development. Those
milestones present opportunities for the United Nations
system to get its act more together and strengthen its
resolve to prevent conflict. Ireland looks forward to
actively contributing to those processes.

There is broad consensus on the merits and utility
of a culture of prevention that allows us to identify
crises before they transform into armed conflict, with
the resulting human and material costs. The challenge
before us is to translate that consensus into effective
actions. At a minimum, what the world needs is strong
leadership from a united Council behind the preventive
instruments at its disposal. That requires a common
resolve on the part of those seated around this table and
the full support of all United Nations Members.

