Mr. Deng (South Sudan): It is an honour and a
privilege to once again address the Security Council on
the situation in my country. As this is the first time that
my delegation is addressing the Security Council during
your presidency, Sir, let me begin by congratulating you
on your already successful presidency and extending
my best wishes to you and your delegation as you
continue to carry the mantle of leadership this month.

The Republic of South Sudan welcomes this
opportunity to contribute to the Security Council's
discussion of the situation in our country. We would
like to reiterate once again our appreciation to the
members of the Council for their continued interest in
the process of peace consolidation and State-building
in South Sudan. We thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive report (S/2013/651) and welcome
the briefing provided by Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Hilde Johnson, whose commitment
and dedication to the cause of peace, security, stability
and good governance in our country go deep and are
much appreciated.

The Republic of South Sudan recognizes that it
faces continuing challenges in building its institutions,
consolidating progress towards democracy and
protecting civilians, among many other pressing issues.
Our vision is nonetheless clear; we seek a stable,
peaceful, economically vibrant and democratic South
Sudan that is committed to the promotion of human
rights and humanitarian principles. No one should
doubt our ambitions in that regard, although we fully
accept that we lack the capabilities we need to achieve
our vision as quickly as we would all like.

Both our aspirations and our limitations are
embedded in our long struggle, which lasted for
over half a century and beyond. Ours was a struggle
for human dignity, justice and equality for all - the
normative foundations of universal human rights. By
the same token, that war devastated our country and
shattered our society. It has left a legacy of violence,
fuelled by the spread of small arms and, paradoxically,
the violation of rights. We are not in denial about
those ills. On the contrary, we acknowledge them as
challenges we are committed to addressing. However,
we also recognize that they are challenges for which
our capacity for effective response is unfortunately
limited, for reasons that are well known. That is despite
the large size of our Government, which was brought
about by the quest for peace and inclusiveness.

We have now recognized that this is untenable. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, President
Salva Kiir downsized and restructured the Government
in July in order to ensure better delivery of services
to our citizens. He reduced the national ministries by
one-third and appointed a new Cabinet after extensive
consultation with other political parties. This leaner
and stronger Government will focus on tangible results
in the areas of social services, agriculture, transport,
mineral resources, energy and security.

On the development front, the Government produced
a South Sudan development plan in 2011. Later, we
realized that the New Deal compact would be a way for
us to articulate and implement our development plan.
We are about to conclude the widespread consultations
we have been holding across the country, working
closely with civil society, state Governments and
development partners. We look forward to signing the
New Deal compact with our partners in December. In
that connection, I would like to thank all of our partners
for their support of the endeavour.

The people of South Sudan are firmly committed
to democracy as one of the lofty objectives of our long
struggle. That is why we agree with the Secretary-
General about the importance of holding elections in
2015 and strengthening the processes leading up to
those elections. The importance that the Government
and people of South Sudan attach to democracy and
elections is evident in the fact that the political climate
in the country is already vibrant in anticipation of the
2015 elections.

The situation in J onglei is obviously of great concern
to us, as it is, understandably, to members ofthe Council.
The background to the present situation is complex.
We are dealing with cycles of intercommunal violence
that go back many years - well before the advent of
the United Nations peace consolidation mission. The
situation is compounded by an armed insurgency, in
an environment that has almost no infrastructure and
is very difficult to control. It is a situation that clearly
presents a challenge to our Government's ability to
take the primary responsibility for the protection of its
citizens, a responsibility we take seriously.

The repeated cycles of violence between
communities, including senseless killings, the
kidnapping of women and children, the destruction
of property and cattle rustling, clearly need to be
stopped. We continue negotiations with David Yau Yau,
the leader of the insurgency, so that intercommunal
violence can be brought to an end as soon as possible.
The Government, in collaboration with the Church, has
been in dialogue with Yau Yau and his followers.

As all Council members know, President Kiir has
repeatedly extended offers of amnesty to various militia
groups operating in South Sudan. Many groups have
responded positively to the offers. This year, the South
Sudan Liberation Army and other groups operating in
Upper Nile state have accepted the President's offer.
As the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
has noted, President Salva Kiir has pardoned opposition
leaders, some of whom have returned to Juba from exile.

We should not see the situation in Jonglei as one
of villains and victims. The legacy of over 50 years
of war has been a vicious cycle of violence, whether
it is between Anuak and Nuer, or Murle and Dinka.
There are victims and perpetrators on all sides and
in all communities. We must stop those cycles. Our
Government recognizes that to do that and to ensure
the safety of all of our civilians we must assist them
to address the root causes of conflict and discontent.
That is precisely why the President launched a national
reconciliation process.

The long-term work needed to address
intercommunal violence will involve the provision of
services such as schools and health centres, all-weather
roads and stronger Government. Progress in those
areas has been hampered by the presence of the armed
insurgency in Jonglei, which we believe has been
fuelled - at least in part - by external forces and by
the difficult terrain and climatic conditions.

It is encouraging to see civilians return to Pibor
town. We are working with the humanitarian community
to support those returns and welcome cooperation with
concerned agencies in that endeavour. We note that the
challenges of humanitarian access appear to have been
largely addressed, an objective to which we are deeply
committed.

Our Government remains committed to a policy of
zero tolerance for crimes against civilians, especially
by the army, and those who commit such abuses will be
held fully accountable. The Government has arrested
a general who was in charge of the Sudan People's
Liberation Army in Pibor during the 2012 civilian
disarmament exercise. The Government has court-
martialed those soldiers who committed abuses and
has opened new investigations into such abuse. The
Government is planning to publish the list of the cases
that are presently under investigation or prosecution.
It is my belief that we have responded as fast as was
possible in difficult circumstances to the need for
justice and accountability

We deeply regret any violations against the
United Nations status-of-forces agreement and other
international personnel. The Government is seriously
committed to ending those violations. Orders have
indeed been given to that end and to hold those
responsible accountable. Longer term measures will,
however, require increased sensitization and training of
security forces, including security sector reform, which
has begun.

We also recognize the role that the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) is playing, not
least in Jonglei, where its increased presence and
enhanced patrolling are desperately needed. On that
basis, we fully accept the requirement that UNMISS
is to have unhindered access across the territory in
order to undertake its important work and support
my Government in the consolidation of peace as a
prerequisite to sustainable development.

With regard to the fulfillment of our obligations
under the status of forces agreement, we deeply regret
both the character and the number of incidents that
have occurred. We would, however, like to reiterate that
those incidents are by no means a reflection of either
our policies or our aspirations. Our recent actions in
Jonglei speak to that. In the interest of constructive
dialogue towards greater mutual understanding
between UNMISS and our Government's authorities,
I believe there is a need for greater communication
between UNMISS and the relevant national authorities.
During my last visit to Juba, I heard complaints about
the conduct of some UNMISS and other international
personnel associated with the status-of-forces
agreement. I was briefed extensively by the national
aliens committee on those complaints. The committee
consists of high-level Government officials from
the Ministries for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation, National Security, Defence and Veterans
Affairs and the Inspector General of Police.

I briefed the Special Representative about that and
recommended to her and the chair of the committee that
they meet, to enable our Government, together with
UNMISS, to seek ways of reducing misunderstandings
and managing the response to the incidents more
effectively. Some of the incidents highlighted as
violations may have simply resulted from a lack of
communication and coordination on both sides, but that
is not withstanding the unacceptable occurrences for
which we are responsible and continue to reiterate our
deep regret.

We fully realize that UNMISS presents the goodwill
and the strong desire of the international community,
and the United Nations in particular, to support South
Sudan in a wide range of areas. South Sudan has
nothing to gain, but much to lose, in jeopardizing that
support. However, there can be no doubt that mutual
understanding and close cooperation are necessary,
including the full implementation of Security Council
resolutions relating to other challenges in our region,
especially those concerning our relations with the
Sudan.

We are of course encouraged by the renewed spirit
of cooperation with the Republic of the Sudan. South
Sudan was pleased to welcome President Al-Bashir
to Juba, in late October, for the third presidential
summit to be held this year between the two leaders.
I should mention that our Government continues to
meet its financial obligations to transfer the fees for oil
processing and the funds for the transitional financial
arrangement, as stipulated in the 27 September 2012
cooperation agreements, a contribution worth several
hundred million dollars this year alone.

In conclusion, we echo the Secretary-General's
cautious optimism about the months ahead. That there
is still much work to be done, we recognize. That we
must improve the performance of our security services,
we acknowledge. That it will take some time before we
solve some of the problems mentioned heretofore, is
widely understood. All that having been said, our will
to remove the obstacles we face and become a peaceful
member of the community of nations is undiminished.
But we need the understanding and the support of
the international community for us to achieve that
objective.

Finally, on behalf of the Government and the
people of the Republic of South Sudan, I would like
to express our deep appreciation to Ms. Hilde Johnson,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and to the
entire UNMISS team, for their support and their continued
engagement in promoting international cooperation with
our Government. We would like also to express our deepest
gratitude to all the troop-contributing countries for their
participation in the Mission.

