The President (interpretation from French): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the letter
dated 12 January 1998 from the Executive Chairman of the
Special Commission established by the Secretary-General
pursuant to paragraph 9 (b) (i) of Security Council
resolution 687 (1991) addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document 8/1998/27; and the letter dated
13 January 1998 from the Permanent Representative of Iraq
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council, document S/1998/28.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/1998/26, which contains the text
of a letter dated 12 January 1998 from the Permanent
Representative of Iraq to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council deplores the statement of
the Iraqi official spokesman of 12 January 1998 and
Iraq's subsequent failure to fulfil its obligations to
provide the Special Commission with full,
unconditional and immediate access to all sites. The
Council determines that this failure is unacceptable
and a clear violation of the relevant resolutions.
"The Security Council recalls the statement of
its President of 29 October 1997 in which the
Council condemned the decision of the Government
of Iraq to try to dictate the terms of its compliance
with its obligations to cooperate with the Special
Commission.

"The Security Council reiterates its demand,
contained in resolution 1137 (1997), that Iraq
cooperate fully and immediately and without
conditions or restrictions with the Special
Commission in accordance with the relevant
resolutions, which constitute the governing standard
of Iraqi compliance.

"The Security Council expresses its full support
for the Special Commission and its Executive
Chairman, including in his forthcoming travel to Iraq
to continue his discussions with officials of the
Government of Iraq aimed at the full implementation
of the relevant resolutions and at increasing the
effectiveness and efficiency of the operations of the
Special Commission to this end. In this context, the
Council recalls the statements of its President of 3
December 1997 and 22 December 1997 and
encourages the efforts reported to it by the Executive
Chairman.

"The Security Council requests a full briefing
by the Executive Chairman on these discussions as
soon as possible after they have taken place, so that
it can decide as necessary on an appropriate
response on the basis of the relevant resolutions.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/1998/1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter.

The meeting rose at 1.10 pm.
