Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
voted in favour of resolution 2375 (2017), based on its
unwavering principled commitment to the credibility
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT) regime and the credibility and role
of the Security Council in maintaining international
peace and security. Egypt wishes to set an example on
how to seriously deal with any threat to the NPT regime
without double standards.

Egypt, once again, calls upon the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to put an end to its continued
violations of Security Council resolutions. We call upon
it to return to the NPT as a non-nuclear State. We call
upon it to heed the repeated calls to return to dialogue
and negotiations on the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula with a view to sustainable peace between
the two Koreas. Egypt urges the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea to immediately cease any action
that would undermine regional security in north-east
Asia or international peace and security. We do this
out of our understanding of the nature of North Korea's
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions
as they threaten international and regional peace and
security. They are a serious threat to regional security
in North-East Asia.

Egypt reaffirms its condemnation in the strongest
possible terms of all violations by North Korea. We
support a continued role for the Security Council
in assuming its responsibility. Egypt again calls on
all stakeholders to seek a peaceful settlement of the
situation in the Korean peninsula, in accordance
with the provisions of Security Council resolutions,
including a revitalization of the Six-Party Talks. This
would break the current impasse which fuels tension and
escalates the conflict. Egypt reaffirms the need to bear
in mind the humanitarian considerations and needs, as
we implement the stringent measures adopted today.

In conclusion, Egypt welcomes all constructive
ideas and initiatives aimed at resolving this crisis,
whose negative repercussions are far reaching and
extend beyond the region of North-East Asia, through
negotiations. Egypt supports a key role for the United
Nations in these efforts in promoting diplomacy and a
political path and calls for unity among the international
community and the Security Council as we address this
crisis with the wisdom it requires.

