Mr. Cardi (Italy): At the outset, I would like to
thank the Secretary-General for his briefing and the
Japanese presidency for organizing this important,

lively and timely meeting.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
later by the observer of the European Union.

Today's open debate lets us reflect on how the
Security Council has been addressing contemporary
challenges to international peace and security,
especially this year, from terrorism, extremism,
transnational organized crime and trafficking in
persons to grave violations of human rights, mass
displacements, humanitarian crises and the increasingly
adverse effects of climate change. In many instances
the Council has recognized their interconnected nature
and their role as drivers and multipliers of conflicts.
It has also concurred on the need to address them in a
comprehensive and integrated manner.

As the Secretary-General called for in his first
address to the Council in January (see S/PV.7857), a
shift from reacting to conflicts to their prevention,
based on the concept of the peace continuum, should be
at the core of our efforts to make United Nations action
more consistent and effective. Italy fully shares and
supports that approach, along three main directions.

First, we must continue to analyse the interconnected
nature of contemporary challenges and their impact on
international peace and stability. During its term on the
Council, Italy focused its attention on trafficking in
persons and on its link with terrorism, organized crime,
mass displacement and serious violations of human
rights. We also addressed the issue of the protection
of cultural heritage from destruction and trafficking
by terrorist groups, in order to counter the financing
of their activities, but also to protect communities'
cultural identity. Through its unanimous adoption of
resolutions 2388 (2017) and 2347 (2017), the Council
demonstrated its united will to counter these scourges,
recognizing in them a threat to international peace
and security. Similarly, last week Italy organized an
Arria Formula meeting on the security implications of
climate change. Addressing the root causes of conflicts
must also continue to be one of our priorities if we are
to prevent them from emerging or recurring. During
our presidency, the meeting on security challenges in
the Mediterranean region (see S/PV.8106) highlighted
the nexus between peace, security, socioeconomic
development and human rights, as well as the urgent
need to put people's needs and rights at the centre of our
action. The protection and empowerment of people are
key to building resilient and inclusive societies, in line
with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the sustaining peace agenda.

Secondly, a broader and more preventive use of the
entire toolbox at the disposal of the United Nations is
essential to enable the Council to engage at an early
stage in situations that may escalate or relapse into
conflict, and to define preventive actions by the United
Nations system as a whole. In that regard, I would like
to recall two recent important initiatives undertaken
by the Secretary-General in line with Article 99 of
the Charter of the United Nations - his letters on the
four famines and on the situation in Rakhine state.
We encourage him to fully exercise that prerogative
whenever it is needed.

In addition, it is important, in our View, to develop
more effective early-warning systems. As an example,
the Framework of Analysis for Atrocity Crimes should
be more widely used. The Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General should brief the Council more
regularly. The Council should make full use of informal
meeting formats to discuss issues that may not be
formally on its agenda but that deserve its attention.
Security Council missions, as we have seen, are also a
very important tool for improving our understanding
of specific security contexts and adjusting our action
accordingly, as this year's Visits to the Lake Chad region,
Colombia and the Sahel, among others, demonstrated
very clearly.

The capacity of the United Nations is unparalleled
and must be fully exploited by improving synergy
and coordination among all United Nations actors
at Headquarters and on the ground. The role that
peacekeeping operations, special political missions,
country teams and specialized agencies, funds and
programmes play in building and sustaining peace must
be further strengthened by better integrating and fully
implementing the concept of the peace continuum. The
Council must uphold the principle of peacekeeping
reform when addressing country-specific situations,
while bearing in mind the need for clear entry,
transition and exit strategies. The primary goal is to
support inclusive political processes to foster resilient
societies and national ownership.

In Haiti, for example, the establishment of the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
has provided a model case of transition. Equally,
peacekeeping missions must be equipped to focus
on capacity-building. In that regard, resolution 2382
(2017), which Italy promoted along with the other
members of the Council, has recognized and enhanced
the importance of the police component in bridging
the work of the United Nations from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding.

Thirdly, we must focus on the way forward. The
Secretary-General's proposals on the reform of the
United Nations system are coherent with the Council's
work on those topics. The Council should continue
to provide its full and united support for the efforts
of the Secretary-General as we look forward to a
more effective, flexible, transparent, efficient and
accountable Organization - one in which the various
bodies of the Organization work and act together.

As underscored by the Secretary-General, the
United Nations is not alone in its efforts for peace.
Partnerships with regional organizations and civil
society are also fundamental to improve the coherency
of our actions across the three pillars and along the
conflict cycle, in line with the principle of subsidiarity.

In conclusion, we think that it is imperative to
break the silo approach and build on broad consensus.
We agree on the substance, as today's debate has also
confirmed. The Council is capable ofbeing effective in
living up to its responsibilities and in standing united
to confront contemporary challenges to peace and
security, through innovative thinking and bold actions.

Finally, since this is my last statement in the Security
Council, as Italy nears the end of its mandate as a
non-permanent member, allow me to first congratulate
you, Mr. President, and your delegation for your work
and excellent presidency for the month of December,
and to extend to all delegations around the table my
personal thanks and that of my team's for all of their
cooperation during this intense year in the Council.

