Mrs. Pinto Lopes D'Alva (Guinea-Bissau): I thank you, Mr. President, for inviting my delegation to the Security Council and for giving me the floor. First of all, I would like to congratulate Belgium on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February 2020. We wish the Council success in its deliberations. My delegation would like to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary General for Guinea- Bissau, Ms. Rosine Sori-Coulibaly, for her briefing on the developments in the country, for the activities of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS) and for all her dedication since her arrival in Guinea-Bissau last September. Iwouldlikealsotothank His Excellency Ambassador Ronaldo Costa Filho, Permanent Representative of Brazil and Chair of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing on the developments in the situation in Guinea-Bissau. I would also like to express my country's sincere appreciation for the personal engagement of his predecessor, former Permanent Representative of Brazil, Ambassador Mauro Vieira, whose strong advocacy in favour of consolidating peace in Guinea-Bissau over the past few years was crucial. As we just heard in the very comprehensive briefing just delivered by the Special Representative, since the previous meeting of the Security Council on Guinea-Bissau (see S/PV.8656), a lot has happened in the country, and many challenges remain for the consolidation of peace. However, with the continued work of the United Nations on the ground and the fundamental role of the Peacebuilding Commission in bringing together the efforts of the international community in support and assistance to Guinea- Bissau, we cherish the hope that sustainable peace in the country is achievable. We appreciate the important role of the Peacebuilding Fund and its funded projects, which allowed for the participation of women and youth in major political processes, including in the elections and all other relevant peacebuilding efforts in the country. After the general elections of 2014, when hopes were high for Guinea-Bissau, the country entered into another period of political and institutional instability in 2015, with a consequent blockade of institutions that has caused the normal functioning of the State apparatus to deteriorate. With the important and unique role played by Guinea-Bissau's_ civil society, including women and youth, with the support of the international community in the process, an understanding among national political actors was finally reached and the Government was formed, which allowed the legislative elections to be held on 10 March 2019 and presidential elections on 24 November, with the second round held on 29 December 2019. Despite all the political tensions and difficulties in 2019, following the March legislative elections a Government led by Prime Minister Aristides Gomes of the African Party for the Independence of Guinea and Cabo Verde, the party with the largest number of seats in Parliament, was formed, and despite the Government programme already adopted by the National People's Assembly, the country is still experiencing a series of challenges that require special attention and a dedicated presence by the United Nations. As all present are aware, elections in Guinea-Bissau always take place in a peaceful environment, and this time was no different. As usual, the people went to the polls in an orderly and peaceful manner. Although the results of the second round have been challenged and the process is still pending before the Supreme Court of Justice, the population nevertheless has remained calm and is patiently awaiting the final ruling of the Court, an organ of national sovereignty. The people of Guinea-Bissau deserve a clear and positive closure to the process so that they can see the light of hope for the future of their children. In that regard, the Government of Guinea- Bissau welcomes the positions of the United Nations, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the African Union on the need for a pronouncement from the country's competent judicial office on the post-election crisis, because we believe that only with free, fair and transparent elections will we be able to strengthen the democratic rule of law in our country so that the sovereign will of the people can prevail. We are sure that by 15 February - the date recommended by the ECOWAS |. extraordinary conference on the political situation in Guinea- Bissau - the Supreme Court of Justice will issue its final decision on the election in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic, so that the country can return to constitutional normality. We are convinced that the international community and our development partners will continue patiently to monitor the political situation in our country. In that connection, allow me to reiterate our thanks to the members of the group of five international partners in Guinea-Bissau, in particular the United Nations and our subregional organization, ECOWAS, which has provided unceasing support in the process of consolidating peace and social and economic development in Guinea-Bissau, including through the presence of the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea-Bissau. We thank the United Nations, the African Union, ECOWAS, the European Union, the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the International Organization of la Francophonie and our bilateral and multilateral partners and friends for their financial and technical support for the realization of the elections. Their engagement in the preparations for and the holding of the elections is very much appreciated by our Government. We ask that they remain attentive to ensuring a peaceful conclusion of the process by the relevant national organs of sovereignty. We are aware of the structural changes, the drawdown and the new configuration of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea- Bissau (UNIOGBIS), as well as the planned withdrawal. However, we believe that the continued involvement of the United Nations, through the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the Organization's agencies, funds and programmes, remains necessary for the strengthening the institutions of the Republic, implementing the necessary reforms and promoting sustainable development so as to assure the people of Guinea-Bissau that the United Nations is there to help us consolidate our democracy and strengthen our State institutions. Let us remain positive that after the electoral process has finally been settled, there will be a new beginning for Guinea-Bissau and that the United Nations, with a new, reconfigured mandate, will have a chance to focus more closely on helping us with the development agenda. Only with sustainable peace and strong institutions can we achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Guinea-Bissau and its people deserve a new beginning and a new chapter. We are counting on the Council's continued support and that of the international community as a whole.
