Ms. Beckett (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): Today, after three years of war
and with the signing of the Darfur peace agreement at
the African Union-led peace talks in Abuja, the people
of Darfur at last have a chance for peace. Our meeting
today enables us to respond to that opportunity and to
ensure that the African Union (AU), the United
Nations and others are equipped to meet the challenge
it involves.

Like the Secretary-General, may I venture to pay
tribute to the efforts of President Sassou-Nguesso,
President Obasanjo, AU Chairman Konare and AU
Special Envoy Salim Ahmed Salim for their tireless
work in bringing the talks to a conclusion. I would like
to give the agreement they delivered the United
Kingdom's full support.

I urge the parties to respect their commitments
and to implement the agreement without delay. Again
like the Secretary-General, I urge the remaining rebel
groups to sign up to the agreement, which does
represent the only hope for the peace, security and
development of the region and the Sudan as a whole.

But the agreement is only the start of rebuilding
Darfur. This Council and the wider international
community face three challenges. The first is to sustain
the African Union Mission in Darfur (AMIS). The AU,
in its first-ever peacekeeping mission, has done a
remarkable job, and that in exceptionally difficult
circumstances. We must urgently strengthen AMIS to
ensure that the ceasefire prevails. As you said, Sir, I
hope that a pledging conference will be convened
without delay, and I call on States and international
organizations to provide assistance. The United
Kingdom will do its part and has just contributed an
additional £20 million.

Our second challenge is to speed up transition to
a United Nations force in Darfur. We need detailed
planning proposals from the United Nations,
intensified consultations with potential troop-
contributing countries and, above all, the immediate
dispatch of a military assessment mission to Darfur.
The Government of the Sudan said that it would allow
that once a peace deal was signed. I look forward to the
Sudanese representative confirming his Government's
agreement to transition and to the immediate arrival of
the assessment mission.

Our final - and, sadly, our continuing -
challenge is to prevent a humanitarian catastrophe. The
humanitarian situation in Darfur is getting worse. Yet
despite that the amount of humanitarian aid has
decreased as compared to last year. Here again, the
United Kingdom has just pledged and additional £9
million. I urge others to do the same.

The United Kingdom also stands ready to play its
part in the wider reconstruction of Darfur, so that its
people may return home and live in peace -
something that we around this table may take for
granted but which for millions of people in Darfur
remains a distant hope.

What was agreed on paper at Abuja must now be
implemented on the ground. It is time for the
international community to rally to Darfur's security
and humanitarian needs. Since its inception, the
Security Council has stood at many moments of
history. Now is such a moment. For the first time in
three long, hard years of war, the people of Darfur have
some hope. Let us resolve today not to let them down.
Today the Council supports the Darfur peace
agreement. It supports the African Union. It supports
transition to a United Nations force. It supports the
people of Darfur. By doing so it honours the values on
which the United Nations itself was founded.

