Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I would like to start by
paying special tribute to Mr. Alain le Roy. Faced with
demanding and difficult tasks, he has done an
extraordinary job. Brazil greatly appreciates his work
in general, but I would like to make particular
reference to his constant and very constructive
interaction with troop-contributing countries, as well as
the launch, along with Ms. Malcorra, of the New
Horizon initiative. My Government thanks him for his
service and wishes him well in his future endeavours.

I would like to join in welcoming the heads of
military components to the Council, and to express my
country's heartfelt appreciation for the excellent work
that they are doing in very challenging circumstances. I
thank the Force Commanders of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations Mission in Liberia for the reflections that they
have shared with us today. Having troops and
observers in most of those missions, Brazil knows first-
hand the high quality of their leadership and
commitment.

The briefings that we have heard today help us to
gain a better understanding of how the decisions we
take affect the situation on the ground. Here in New
York, we must strive to ensure that we give
peacekeepers the political guidance and support they
need to carry out their mandates. However, we must
also take care not to micromanage them or curb the
space for the creative thinking of the mission
leadership, which are just as crucial to success.
I wish to focus my remarks on the capability-
driven approach to peacekeeping, proposed by the New
Horizon initiative. We are right to demand results from
mission leaders, but we must also give them the tools
they need to do their job. On the whole, although
important progress has been made, we should continue
to strive to get the necessary skills and capacity onto
the ground.

The military are usually the largest component of
missions. For the local population, they are often the
face of the mission. Therefore, it is important to ensure
that they receive the necessary training in areas such as
civil-military cooperation, cultural sensitivity, conduct
and discipline. Peacekeepers will be more effective if
they are capable of relating to the local population.

In the civilian area of peacekeeping, the
harmonization of service conditions will have a
significant long-term impact on a mission's ability to
attract and retain civilian staff of the highest calibre.
The civilian capacity review was a major contribution
to our thinking on the issue. Discussions on
implementing the recommendations should begin as
soon as possible.

To achieve sustainable peace, the Council, the
Secretariat, troop- and police-contributing countries
and other stakeholders must all work together to give
commanders on the ground the support they need. I
wish to assure all the Force Commanders present here
today that Brazil remains committed to that goal.

