Mr. Singh Puri (India): At the outset, let me
thank you, Sir, for scheduling today's debate. We are
addressing a topic that we believe is very relevant to
the raison d'etre of the United Nations. I also welcome
the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in
the immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304),
which underpins today's discussion.

The report collates several significant findings
and recommendations. Key among these is the need for
a more coherent and effective international engagement
during the brief window between the cessation of
conflict and the establishment of a peace process, and
the more complex process of ensuring that such
processes remain on track. There are clearly two levels
of intervention in support of a peace process. The first
is at the national and local level, and the second is at
the regional and international level. Both processes
must move in lockstep.

However, that said, there are several elements of
detail that require attention. These include the need to
ensure that the supporting external interventions focus
on delivering a peace dividend, expanding national
capacity and ensuring the expansion of basic economic
capacity so that surplus labour - especially young
people - can be gainfully employed.

Such efforts need to be based on recognition of
the complexity of post-conflict scenarios. Not all peace
processes and agreements address the underlying
causes of conflict. Similarly, not all local actors are
untarnished by the rigours of conflict. Yet we need to
work pragmatically with the actors and circumstances
as we find them, not as we would wish them to be.
From that standpoint, it is important to ensure that
priority-setting be a local endeavour. It is both
politically unworkable and strategically perilous for the
international community to involve itself in
determining national priorities. Sustainable peace
requires genuine national ownership of the process, not
a process that is nationally owned only in times of
difficulty.

It is therefore essential that from the outset peace
consolidation efforts be focused upon expanding the
capacity and competence of the local Government to
deliver services. Without this, there can be no national
ownership or development, and without either there
will be no sustainable peace. There is a particular
contribution that the nations of the South can make in
this context, both with regard to providing training and
services and with regard to providing appropriate
technologies. These potentialities need to be explored
further.

At the same time, there is also a need for greater
efforts to align national and international efforts in
multilateral forums. Through better alignment and
coordination, we can conceivably achieve more
coherent interventions and inputs on the ground. This
requires better horizontal and vertical coherence. That
is to say, we need more coherent efforts by the
international community to integrate sometimes
disparate efforts in dealing with cross-cutting themes in
a peacebuilding context. Too often, the well-meaning
efforts of the international community tend to be at
cross purposes, thereby undermining the collective
effort.

Similarly, vertical coordination is also required,
in particular within the United Nations and its agencies
and programmes, to ensure that a common objective is
matched by a clear road map to that objective.
Coordination and consultation between the United
Nations and the international financial institutions,
especially the World Bank, must also be expanded.

The report clearly recognizes that if the United
Nations is to be a lead actor in the process of
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
more must be done to improve its efficiency. It is of
course positive that the report recognizes such lacunae.
It is also important that the report implicitly recognizes
that of itself; the significant convening power that the
United Nations brings to the table is not enough. Thus,
section V of the report dwells at length on the means
by which the United Nations and its funds and
programmes may be able to contribute more effectively
to the process. Naturally, as practitioners on the ground
will be better able to assess the potential efficacy of
such measures, perhaps in time more deep-rooted
reform will be required.

I would like to conclude by highlighting the need
for further consideration and discussion of the complex
issue of post-conflict peacebuilding. We need to be
able to frame this debate within a conceptual
framework that tries to answer certain larger questions
regarding the purposes and principles of international
involvement in post-conflict peace consolidation.
These include the question of where early recovery fits
within the larger continuum of peacekeeping and
peacebuilding, and where the transition from
peacekeeping to peacebuilding, and from
peacebuilding to peace consolidation and development,
begins.

We also need to ask ourselves how international
investment, both in money and political will, can be
expanded in support of peacebuilding. In that context,
there is clearly a need to expand the role of the
Peacebuilding Commission and to deepen its strategic
relationship with the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Social and Economic Council.

I look forward to a continuing dialogue on this
subject in this and other forums within the United
Nations.

