Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (spoke in Spanish): It is an
honour for me to address the members of the Security
Council on behalf of the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015), concerning South Sudan. In accordance with
sub-paragraph 16 (f) of that resolution, and based on
the Council's decision that the Committee should report
on its work within a period of 60 days and whenever
subsequently necessary in the View of the Committee,
I would like to give a brief overview of the work that
has been undertaken since the resolution was adopted,
on 3 March.

On 20 March, one day after the President of the
Security Council issued a note announcing the election
of the Chair of the 2206 Committee and the election
of the representatives of Malaysia and New Zealand as
Vice-Chairs, the presidency distributed a copy of draft
guidelines, a draft note verbale and a draft press release
for feedback from delegations in accordance with
sub-paragraph 16 (e) and paragraph 17 of resolution
2206 (2015).

In those paragraphs, respectively, the Council
decided that the Committee would establish the
necessary guidelines to facilitate the application of the
measures imposed and called on all Member States to
inform the Committee within 90 days following the
adoption of the resolution with respect to the measures
they had implemented in compliance with the provisions
of paragraphs 9 and 12 of the resolution, namely, the
travel ban and the freeze on assets.
The draft guidelines, the draft note verbale and
the draft press release were considered in an informal
meeting held at the Permanent Mission of Chile on
24 March. The draft note verbale and the draft press
release were officially approved at the first official
meeting, held on 1 April. The Committee guidelines
were approved on 20 April following a no-objection
procedure.

With regard to the appointment of the Group of
Experts, I wish to report that,, on 15 April the Committee
distributed a letter from the Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs that contained a list of
five candidates, including experts on humanitarian
affairs, finance and human resources, weapons, armed
groups and regional affairs. On 22 April, a letter was
sent to the Assistant Secretary-General indicating
that the Committee had no objection to the proposed
candidates. The appointment letter from the Secretary-
General was published on 27 April as a document of the
Security Council (S/2015/287). It is expected that the
Group will be in New York between 18 and 22 May to
conduct consultations and to meet with the Committee
on 22 May, before travelling to the region to begin
gathering, considering and analysing information in
accordance with its mandate.

With respect to other meetings, on 28 April the
Committee attended an information session held
by the International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL) and the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), after which it issued a press
statement. On 8 May, the Committee was briefed by
Ms. Leila Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict,
and Mrs. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict. Following that meeting, a press statement
was issued in which the members of the Committee
acknowledged that, in accordance with the provisions
of sub-paragraphs 7 (d) and 7 (e) of resolution 2206
(2015), persons and entities could be subject to possible
economic sanctions and travel prohibitions for actions
such as attacks on civilians, including women and
children; acts of violence, including assassination,
rape or other forms of sexual violence; and the use
or recruitment of children by armed groups or armed
forces. The Committee looks forward to ongoing
cooperation with INTERPOL, UNMAS and both
Special Representatives as it carries out its tasks.

At the right time, the Committee also intends to
meet with the representatives of South Sudan and other
States in the region in order to exchange views on the
sanctions that might be imposed in compliance with
sub-paragraph 16 (g) of resolution 2206 (2015).

I also wish to take this opportunity to remind
Member States that, in compliance with paragraph 17
of resolution 2206 (2015), the Committee looks forward
to receiving, within the 90-day limit and no later than
3 June, reports regarding the travel ban and asset
freeze. In that regard, I ask the members of the Council
to practice what they preach.

Before concluding, I wish to indicate that although
in recent weeks significant progress has been made
regarding the establishment of the Committee and
the Panel of Experts, the Committee is fully aware
of the grave humanitarian and security situation in
South Sudan. I note that in resolution 2206 (2015) the
Security Council reiterates its intention to impose
the appropriate sanctions to respond to this situation,
which may include an arms embargo and the listing
of senior officials responsible for acts or policies that
threaten the peace, security or stability of South Sudan.
This, in order to encourage the Government of South
Sudan and Opposition forces to form a transitional
Government of national unity, take effective and
comprehensive measures to compel the forces under
their control, directly or indirectly, to put an end to
military operations, acts of Violence and violations of
human rights and to allow full access to humanitarian
assistance.

The Chair recalls that, on 24 March, the Peace
and Security Council of the African Union noted the
adoption of resolution 2206 (2015). At the same time,
it recalled its earlier pronouncements on the issue of
sanctions against those undermining the quest for
peace, violating international humanitarian law and
obstructing the efforts of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan. The Chair also notes the statement of
the Chairperson of the African Union of 12 May, which
highlights the importance of the

"effective implementation of sanctions against all
those undermining the quest for peace, Violating
international humanitarian law and obstructing the
efforts of peacekeepers on the ground, in line with
the United Nations Security Council resolution of
3 March 2015."

In that regard, paragraph 5 of resolution 2206
(2015) emphasizes the willingness of the Council to
impose targeted sanctions in order to contribute to
achieving an inclusive and sustainable peace in South
Sudan. The Council entrusted to the Committee the
task of gathering and reviewing information on persons
and entities who may be responsible for, or complicit
in, or who may have participated, either directly or
indirectly, in acts or policies that threaten the peace,
security or stability of South Sudan, in accordance with
the provisions of paragraph 7 of resolution 2206 (2015).

In that regard, I wish to echo the call the Council
makes in paragraph 19 of the same resolution, which
urges all parties and all Member States, as well as
international, regional and subregional organizations,
to cooperate with the Panel of Experts. It also urges
all Member States to guarantee the security of the
members of Panel of Experts and their unhindered
access, in particular to persons, documents and sites,
so that the Panel of Experts can properly perform its
mandate.

