Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I believe
it goes without saying that first and foremost I would
like to thank the Governments of Bangladesh and of
Myanmar for their assistance and logistical support
throughout our visit. The visit was short - somewhat
of a whirlwind. Without the assistance provided with
both Governments, the Visit would never have been as
successful as it was. I would therefore like to thank all
the members that facilitated our mission, as well as my
fellow co-leads. I will focus on the visit to Bangladesh.

On behalf of the Security Council, I would like to
thank Sheikh Hasina, Prime Minister of Bangladesh,
who went to great pains to meet with us despite the
fact that she had just returned from travelling abroad on
the very morning of our meeting with her. In fact, the
protocol services organized a meeting with her before
she began her very busy day of work following her travel,
That gave us an opportunity to hear Bangladesh's keen
determination to find a solution to the Rohingya crisis.

On 28 April, the members of the Security Council
arrived in Cox's Bazar to assess for themselves the tragic
plight of the more than 1.2 million persons who are in
need ofhumanitarian assistance. This is the most rapidly
growing crisis of its kind in the world. Approximately
677,000 refugees from the Rohingya minority had
joined the 300,000 others already displaced before the
mass displacement of 25 August 2017.

We held two major talks: first with United Nations
working group in Cox's Bazar and, secondly, with
representatives of the Government of Bangladesh,
represented by Mr. Mohammed Shahriar Alam, MP,
Minister for Affairs of Bangladesh, and the personal
representative of the Prime Minister. During that latter
meeting, it became abundantly clear that the conditions
for the safe, dignified and voluntary return of displaced
persons and refugees were not yet in place.

The working group called for more international
support in the Rohynga crisis. While the humanitarian
response plan has been established, calling for funding
in the amount of $950 million, only 25 per cent of it
is funded.

The Council mission expressed its concern about
potential regional repercussions caused by the refugee
crisis and the sheer size and magnitude of the refugee
camps. It was made abundantly clear to us that the issue
of citizenship needed to be addressed before refugees
and displaced persons could return to Rakhine.

Our meeting with the Foreign Minister and other
senior officials of the Bangladeshi Government made
it clear that they stood ready to continue to provide
humanitarian assistance where they could and to do all
they could to prepare the refugee camps to withstand
the forthcoming monsoon season.

The members of the Security Council then held a
meeting with the Prime Minister to take stock of the
tragedy from the Bangladeshi perspective. We heard
that the international community will continue to assist
Bangladesh in its efforts to try to aid the refugees. On
her part, the Prime minister of Bangladesh expressed
her gratitude to the members of the Security Council,
who throughout their visit voiced their support for
Bangladesh. The Prime Minister underscored once
again that she and her Government would continue to
provide assistance to the refugees and displaced persons
and do all they could to ensure that they could return
in a voluntary and dignified manner when appropriate
and safe.

We then visited a refugee camp, where Council
members were able to see at first hand the scale of the
tragedy besetting the refugees and displaced persons
upon arrival at the border. We met with refugees and
saw their conditions along the zero line demarcating
the two countries. We saw many thousands of refugees
and were able to see and hear for ourselves the sorry
state of affairs of those who had lost their homes and, in
the most tragic cases, members of their families.

The border guards of Bangladesh reported the
arrival of a group of refugees, many of whom were
injured, in recent days. The also shared with us images
of victims who had obviously been injured by bombing
and shelling before fleeing to the refugee camps. We
also met local people who said that they were refugees
from Myanmar having arrived earlier but with no
national identity cards. They also reported that the
Myanmar authorities were not upholding their rights,
including those to freedom of movement, education,
access to health care and employment - all of that, in
addition to a national identity card, was being denied
to them.

We then travelled to the largest refugee camp in
the world - the Kutupalong camp, which hosts more
than 600,000 refugees, half of them children. Council
members met with victims of sexual violence, with
orphans and with those who had fled scenes of their
families being massacred and the razed remains of
their villages. We heard first-hand accounts of the
atrocities suffered by those people, and the horrors they
had witnessed.

We also met with civil society and non-governmental
organizations. Council members held two press
conferences during our time in Bangladesh, in Cox's
Bazar and Dhaka, where we answered questions from
local and international journalists.

In my national capacity, I should now like to
share a few observations and comments on the visit
to Bangladesh and Myanmar. I promise to be brief,
and will make further comments during the informal
consultations scheduled to follow the present meeting.

First, we appreciate the cooperation provided by the
Governments of Bangladesh and of Myanmar and all
that they did to ensure that the Council's mission was
a success. We look forward to enhanced cooperation
between those two neighbouring countries to address
and resolve the issue of Rohingya refugees.

We agree with the findings of the United Nations
working group with regard to the potential widespread
repercussions if the conditions in the camp deteriorate
further. The Security Council must take measures to
prevent the further exacerbation of the crisis and a
deterioration of conditions, as they pose a direct threat
to international peace and security. That is not only our
own assessment but also that of the working group.

We encountered many women and children at the
border. What made a true impression on me were the
cries of those children who were still seeking their
parents, having fled the violence in Rakhine state.
Their sobs and cries will stay with me.

The Rohingya refugees shared with us that they
had been refused national identity cards. We support
their legitimate call for citizenship and recognition,
and we call on the Government of Myanmar to address
the issue beginning first of all with the question of
citizenship being denied the Rohingya people.

The sheer scale of the destruction of villages in
the north of Rakhine state shows that there were clear
acts of organized and systematic Violence targeting a
minority that has committed no other crime than to be
Muslim and a minority. We saw destruction, not just of
a single house or three or four houses here and there,
but large-scale destruction - the razing of houses and
buildings. We think that, given the scale, it could very
well amount to ethnic cleansing.

Those are the comments I wanted to make
for the time being. As I said, I will make further
comments and recommendations when we move to the
informal consultations.

