Mr. Elaraby (spoke in Arabic): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for inviting the League of
Arab States to present its views on the current situation
in the Middle East.

The Security Council is the organ primarily
responsible for the maintenance of international peace
and security. It is regrettable that the Council has not
upheld its responsibilities in the Arab world. Terrorism
continues to threaten the countries of the region. We
must definitively eradicate terrorism at its roots.

I have heard more than a few speakers today mention
the eradication of terrorism. But we must not forget
that there is another type of terrorism: State terrorism,
as practiced by the State of Israel. Palestine has been
occupied since 1967. I myself was in the Security
Council during the unanimous adoption of resolution
242 (1967), and also for the adoption of resolution 338
(1973), which established the urgency of implementing
the earlier resolution. Resolution 338 (1973) was drafted
in Moscow during a visit by the representative of the
United States to that city.

The two resolutions called for the withdrawal of
Israel from the occupied territories. Israel withdrew
from Egypt and Jordan, and partially withdrew from
Syria within the framework of another agreement.
But Israel did not withdraw from Palestine and some
Lebanese and Syrian territories. Israel continues to
stall for time in order to avoid compliance with those
resolutions. Israel has tried to further appropriate
Palestinian territory through actions considered illegal
by the Council and the International Court of Justice.

The questions that we now ask are the following:
Where does the Security Council stand and why does
it not act? On our television screens, we see the attacks
committed by Israel against Muslim and Christian holy
sites and the Al-Aqsa Mosque. Israel's actions pose a
challenge not only for Arab countries, but also to the
principles, the pillars, of the international community.
The Security Council must immediately take measures
to ensure the effective implementation of those
resolutions and the establishment of a Palestinian State
with Jerusalem as its capital.

With regard to Syria, a murderous conflict is
taking place that has produced countless victims and
has caused untold destruction. That is the gravest
humanitarian crisis of the century, and I wonder, once
again, what has the Security Council done? In its
capacity as a regional organization that cooperates with
the United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations, the League of Arab States seized
the Organization ofthis matter in 2012. But our call was
not heeded by the Security Council. We again call on the
Security Council to fully support the implementation
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) in
order to ensure peace and stability in Syria. We must
fully support the efforts of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for Syria, Mr. Staffan de Mistura,
as well as those of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of Mission in Lybia,
Mr. Bernardino Leon, aimed at ensuring stability in
Libya under international law.

Those situations threaten the integrity of other
countries and international peace and security in the
Middle East, as well as throughout the rest of the world.
The current predicament is rooted in the fact that States
have not complied with the text of agreements and with

international law. Terrorism, in turn, gains from the
absence of solutions to the conflict.

In conclusion, I would ask once again whether
the Security Council has made adequate use of its
prerogatives aimed at protecting and saving people
from the scourge of war. That applies to all countries.
Permit me to say that one of the main reasons for the
current state of affairs is the exercise of the right of
the veto. The Council started its work in 1946 and
maintains the same provisional rules of procedure to
this day. We do not have a permanent standing set of
rules of procedure. The international community needs
to face the challenges of the twenty-first century. We
must strengthen the Security Council so that it can
shoulder its responsibilities with regard to international
peace and security.

