Mr. Mufioz (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, I should like to thank Ambassador Andrey
Denisov, Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation, for the detailed information he provided us
in his capacity as Chairman of the Security Council's
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), by relating the
activities carried out by the Committee during the past
quarter and presenting the thirteenth programme of
work, for the period October through December. I
should also like to thank Javier Ruperez, Executive
Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED), for his briefing. We assure them
of our strong support for the CTC programme
presented.

Among the relevant activities carried out by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee this year, its efforts to
make its revitalization process a reality, in conformity
with the provisions of resolution 1535 (2004), stand
out. That process is moving forward in keeping with
the guidelines set out in past quarterly programmes: the
Executive Director has already been appointed; the
Executive Directorate's organizational plan has been
adopted; and, during the current quarter, it is
anticipated that the transition to the new structure will
be completed. We hope that the new structure will
become operational as soon as possible.

Moreover, we have noted the activities carried
out by the Executive Director, Ambassador Ruperez,
with regard to utilizing the structure of the Executive
Directorate as soon as possible, as well as the meetings
he has held with various international or regional
bodies to establish cooperation and ties that will make
it possible to implement various formulas aimed at
increasing the counter-terrorism efforts of the
international community.

We thank Ambassador Ruperez once again for the
information he provided us, and we reaffirm our
support for his leadership and for the body under his
guidance. We also appreciate the efforts of the CTC's
team of experts to expedite the study, evaluation and
processing of the reports submitted by Member States
in compliance with resolution 1373 (2001) and the
preparation of responses. These make it possible to
maintain a dialogue between Member States and the
Committee, which gives them the support they need to
adequately meet their obligations with regard to
cooperating in the fight against terror.

Despite the work and dedication of the team of
experts, and despite the efforts of the Committee, we
must regret - as Ambassador Denisov said - that 78
States did not meet the deadline for submitting reports.
That figure reflects an increase of practically 10 per
cent compared with the previous quarter. We urge those
States that have not yet done so to meet their
obligations as soon as possible. We urge countries that
are encountering difficulties in meeting the obligations
of resolution 1373 (2001) to request the technical
assistance that the Committee, international
organizations and donor countries stand ready to
provide. The Al Qaeda/Taliban sanctions committee
received various requests from Member States during
the visits that I, as its Chairman, made with the other
members, and we are bringing those requests to the
attention of the CTC.

We should like to reiterate that the fight against
terrorism requires perseverance, dedication and
persistence in the coordination and integration of
efforts, since terrorism continues to be one of the
gravest threats to international peace and security.
Regrettably, the terrorist attacks perpetrated in the past
two months increasingly confirm this. The world has
witnessed the horrific scenes from the reprehensible
attacks in the Moscow subway and in an educational
facility in Beslan, in the downing of two aircraft in the
Russian Federation and in the attacks on a mosque in
Pakistan and on a tourist centre in Taba, Egypt. In all
of those cases, tens or hundreds of people suffered the
tragic consequences of such criminal acts: children, the
faithful or tourists were innocent victims. That is why
such criminal acts oblige us to redouble our efforts, to
persist in our objective and to fight tirelessly against
this grave threat.

We must maintain the Security Council's resolve
to act in unison against terrorism. We can do that only
with the necessary cooperation of States and competent
organizations. We must therefore reiterate and
emphasize the appeal to States that are not yet parties
to international treaties on counter-terrorism to become
parties to them and to implement legislation relevant to
their effective application.
United in cooperation in the fight against
terrorism has also been reflected in the cooperative
work carried out between the CTC and the Al
Qaeda/Taliban sanctions committee, which I chair. In
addition to compliance with the provisions of Security
Council resolutions aimed at increasing cooperation,
we know the value of being able to share information
when working in our respective areas. Therefore, we
have held meetings between the Chairmen and with the
expert teams of both Committees. In addition, we have
studied ways in which to share information from the
databases being developed, and we have coordinated
the holding of monthly meetings among the experts.
Moreover, as Ambassador Denisov informed us, both
Chairmen have planned to hold an informational
meeting with Member States to inform them of the
work being done by the Committees.

In conclusion, I should like briefly to refer to
resolution 1566 (2004), adopted recently by the
Security Council, which is a new step in the fight
against terrorism. In that connection, our delegation
would like to emphasize the following: first, our
reaffirmation of the imperative of combating terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations; secondly, the
Council's concern for the victims of terrorist acts; and
thirdly, the appeal to cooperate with the work of the
Security Council Committees established pursuant to
resolutions 1267 (1999) and 1540 (2004) - which are
acting in coordination, albeit with different mandates
and objectives - and to study new measures to be
adopted in the fight against terror. Such measures must
conform to international law, particularly the norms of
due respect for human rights, the rights of refugees and
humanitarian law.

In sum, in shouldering our responsibilities under
the relevant resolutions we have adopted, we must
deny any possibility of cooperation and support to
those who seek, through terror, to make their intolerant
or extremist views prevail over the individual rights of
persons and the collective rights of States to live in
peace and security.

