Ms. Tsikata: I thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to participate in this debate on Haiti. I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Annabi, for his comprehensive
briefing on the security situation in Haiti. As requested,
I will briefly outline the World Bank's programme in
Haiti and will also touch on our collaboration with the
United Nations system.

The World Bank Group's current engagement
with Haiti is governed by an interim strategy for 2007
and 2008. This interim strategy is based on twin pillars,
which touch on many of the issues that speakers have
alluded to: first, delivering hope to the population by
helping the Government deliver quick wins in basic
service provision and job creation; and secondly,
restoring credibility to Haitian institutions by
deepening reforms that promote long-term good
governance and institutional development.
The interim strategy envisioned a $68 million
programme of five International Development
Association (IDA) grants for 2007, which were all
approved as planned, in the areas of electricity,
economic governance, rural water and sanitation,
education and disaster risk reduction.

In 2008, the World Bank increased its support
beyond the projections of the strategy by a factor of
three, in response to the food and climatic shocks.
Specifically, IDA approvals for the year increased to
$39 million, through four projects in the areas of
emergency recovery, teacher training, urban
community development and budget support and
response to the food crisis.

Looking forward, we are currently in the process
of preparing a new country assistance strategy for the
period 2009 to 2012, and this will go to our Board in
June. The proposed strategy has three areas of focus:
first, promoting growth and local development;
secondly, investing in human capital; and thirdly,
reducing vulnerability to disasters. Cutting across the
strategy is a two-pronged approach, combining longer-
term institution-building with support for the
Government in the delivery of quick, visible results.

Even while we prepare the strategy, we have
provided support to respond to the extraordinarily
devastating impact of the tropical storms and
hurricanes of this past August. Specifically, we have
prepared and had approved a $20 million emergency
bridge reconstruction and vulnerability project,
$5 million in additional financing for emergency
school reconstruction and an additional $5 million for
rural drinking water supply and sanitation.

Our private sector wing, the International Finance
Corporation, which has previously made investments
totalling over $50 million in Haiti, will foster private
sector development through both direct lending and
technical assistance. They will focus on three main
sectors: the financial markets, where they will look at
trade financing, microfinance lending and small and
medium-sized enterprises; manufacturing; and
infrastructure. They will also provide technical
assistance looking at business skills for small and
medium-sized enterprises, free trade zones, investment
promotion and improving the Doing Business
indicators.

With respect to collaboration with the United
Nations, we have worked closely with the United
Nations and with other development partners in Haiti,
both at the level of general donor coordination and at
the specific level of individual projects that we partner
on. I would like to mention four specific examples with
respect to the United Nations.
The first is a joint initiative between the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the World Bank to rehabilitate infrastructure in the
volatile Martissant neighbourhood of Port-au-Prince.

We also have a strong partnership with the World
Food Programme in the area of reducing malnutrition.
We have held a number of joint missions and are
working with other partners, such as UNICEF, the Pan-
American Health Organization, the Inter-American
Development Bank and the United States Agency for
International Development. As a result of those
meetings, participants and agencies have identified
several specific actions for the coming months.

We continue to work closely with the United
Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the
International Fund for Agricultural Development on
food and agriculture issues following our joint mission
last year after the food crisis.

Finally, we supported the Government of Haiti
through a joint mission with the United Nations and the
European Union on the post-damage needs assessment
following the four tropical storms and hurricanes. As
noted by other speakers, the devastation arising from
those natural disasters was unprecedented. The
situation is compounded by the global financial crisis,
working primarily through the channel of remittances.

At the same time, there are opportunities for Haiti
right now. As President Bob Zoellick noted during his
visit to Haiti last October, MINUSTAH's success in
stabilizing the situation must be accompanied by
economic development gains, with strong bilateral and
multilateral support. The upcoming donor conference,
to be hosted by the Inter-American Development Bank
in Washington on 14 April, offers an important
opportunity for such international support and for the
international community to demonstrate concretely its
support for the Government and people of Haiti. We
urge strong, consistent and comprehensive support
through the donor conference.

