Mr. Brevik (Norway): Norway welcomes the
report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict (S/2009/304). We fully
agree with the report's emphasis on national ownership
and on the need to meet countries' demand for
strengthening of national and local capacities.

The role of the United Nations should be to
coordinate international efforts. To fulfil this role, the
United Nations country team must be able to draw on
staff quickly and assign them to appropriate positions
without having to engage in time-consuming
administrative rules and regulations. Norway therefore
supports the recommendation of the Secretary-General
to Member States to approve reform packages on
human resources.

We also welcome the initiative of the Secretary-
General to create a senior-level mechanism at United
Nations Headquarters to ensure that the right
leadership and support teams are in place as early as
possible.

Despite the comprehensiveness of the report,
Norway would have liked to see the roles of the
various sectors described more fully in the report. We
believe that undefined responsibility leads to a lack of
accountability. We trust that the work in this area will
continue in the time ahead.

Although significant progress has been made in
comprehensive strategic planning, there remain serious
challenges in trying to coordinate security, political,
humanitarian and development efforts in post-conflict
situations. The report addresses this fundamental
dilemma by stating that the senior United Nations
leadership team has the responsibility to ensure
strategic coordination and linkages between the
relevant frameworks. All parts of the United Nations
system need to improve dialogue and coordination and
should be provided with incentives to avoid
duplication, inefficiency and delays in the
commencement of operations. Member States need to
take a lead role in requesting and supporting these
improvements.

In that regard, Norway commends the steps taken
to improve the working relationship between the
United Nations and the World Bank with the
Partnership Framework Agreement. This is of vital
importance and will hopefully improve both the
strategic coordination and the collective impact of the
United Nations and the World Bank's efforts on the
ground.

The Peacebuilding Commission should play a
more central role in ensuring that the international
community is a more reliable partner to Governments
of post-conflict countries. The role of the
Peacebuilding Commission in promoting greater
coherence and synergies between the different parts of
the United Nations system and other partners should be
strengthened. It is essential that adequate resources be
made available to the Peacebuilding Support Office in
order to support the Peacebuilding Commission and
administer the Peacebuilding Fund in an efficient
manner.

As stated in the report, the Peacebuilding Fund
should strengthen its focus on core peacebuilding
activities. Thus far, the Peacebuilding Fund has largely
supported later-stage peacebuilding activities rather
than providing a rapid, flexible and risk-tolerant
approach directed at the immediate aftermath of
conflict.

The report of the Secretary-General sets out an
agenda to strengthen the United Nations response in
the immediate aftermath of conflict and the facilitation
of an earlier, more coherent response from the wider
international community. Successful implementation of
the agenda requires political will, prioritization and the
alignment of funding from Member States. Let me
reiterate Norway's commitment to the reinforcement of
the existing peacebuilding mechanisms and our support
for the recommendations stated in the report.

