The President: As this is the last appearance in the
Security Council of Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno in his
capacity as Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, I wish, on behalf of the members of the
Council, to take this opportunity to thank Mr. Gue'henno
for his outstanding and dedicated service to the work of
the United Nations, in particular as regards peacekeeping
and related matters. Throughout both times of relative
stability and times of change and crisis on the ground,
the knowledge and insights Mr. Guehenno has shared
with the members of the Council have been invaluable.
For that we are immensely grateful. In saying farewell to
him, we wish Mr. Guehenno all the best for his
professional and personal well-being.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan

The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Rwanda and Uganda, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ndabarasa
(Rwanda) and Mr. Batagira (Uganda) took seats
at the Council table.


The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council condemns in the
strongest possible terms the attack on 8 July 2008
on an African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) military and
police convoy in Um Hakibah by 200 fighters on
horses and in 40 vehicles, using sophisticated
weaponry and tactics, which resulted in the
deaths of 7 peacekeepers and a further 22 United
Nations/African Union personnel being wounded.
This unacceptable act of extreme violence is the
largest attack on UNAMID since the transfer of
authority from the African Union Mission in
Sudan on 31 December 2007. The Council is
particularly concerned that the attack was
premeditated, deliberate and intended to inflict
casualties.

"The Security Council welcomes the United
Nations investigation under way and the
Government of the Sudan's statement to assist the
United Nations investigation. It calls on the
Government of the Sudan to do its utmost to
ensure that the perpetrators of the attack are
swiftly identified and brought to justice. The
Council underlines its determination to take
action against those responsible after hearing the
outcome of UNAMID's investigation.

"The Security Council expresses its
condolences to the Governments of Rwanda,
Ghana and Uganda for the deaths of their
peacekeepers and to the victims' families. It
commends the dedication of UNAMID personnel.
The Council stresses that any attack or threat
against UNAMID is unacceptable, and demands
that there be no reoccurrence. It underlines that
attacks on United Nations peacekeepers during an
armed conflict can constitute war crimes under
applicable international law and calls upon all
parties to comply with their obligations under
international humanitarian law.

"The Security Council calls on all parties to
agree to a cessation of hostilities, to engage fully
and constructively in the political process under
the leadership of the new United Nations/African
Union joint Chief Mediator, Mr. Djibrill Yipene
Bassole, and to cooperate fully with the
deployment of UNAMID and respect its security
and freedom of movement.
08-42604

"The Security Council further calls on the
United Nations and all parties to facilitate the
rapid and complete deployment of UNAMID and
on capable Member States to contribute the
helicopter and transportation units necessary to
ensure the successful implementation of
UNAMID's mandate."
08-42604

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2008/27.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

