The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2001/ll94, which contains the text of the
progress report of the Secretary-General on Ethiopia
and Eritrea.

After consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council, recalling all
previous resolutions and statements of its
President regarding the situation in Ethiopia and
Eritrea, welcomes the Secretary-General's
progress report of 13 December 2001
(S/2001/ll94).

"The Security Council reaffirms the
commitment of all Member States to the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity
of Ethiopia and Eritrea. The Council further
reaffirms its strong support for the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement between the
Government of the State of Eritrea and the
Government of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia, signed in Algiers on 12 December
2000 (S/2000/1183), and the preceding
Agreement of Cessation of Hostilities
(8/2000/601), signed in Algiers on 18 June 2000
(hereafter referred to collectively as the Algiers Agreements). The Council reaffirms its
unwavering commitment to contribute to the
completion of the peace process.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
border delimitation determination by the
Boundary Commission, which is final and
binding. The Council stresses that in accordance
with article 4.15 of the Comprehensive Peace

Agreement (S/2000/ll83), which has the full
support of the international community, the
Parties have committed themselves to accepting
fully the determination of the Boundary
Commission.

"The Security Council notes that,
notwithstanding the outstanding issues, the
situation in the Temporary Security Zone (TSZ)
has remained calm with the considerable progress
made to date under the peace process preserved.

"The Security Council reiterates its strong
support for the United Nations Mission in
Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and calls on the
parties to cooperate fully with UNMEE.

"The Security Council notes that UNMEE
has proved allegations made in the recent past by
the parties, including concerning military
build-up in the TSZ and adjacent areas north of
the zone, to be unfounded. The Council welcomes
the recent reduction in the use of rhetoric by the
parties and encourages them to continue to defuse
tension and exercise greater degrees of flexibility
in their approaches to the peace process.

"The Security Council notes that Eritrea has
begun to allow UNMEE to visit some locations in
the adjacent area north of the TSZ upon 24 hours'
notification and calls again on Eritrea to grant
UNMEE the full freedom of movement it requires
in this area to allow, in particular, for monitoring
of Eritrea's redeployed forces and hence facilitate
expeditious responses to any allegations, thereby
facilitating mutual confidence.

"The Security Council reiterates its call on
Eritrea to disclose the number, strength and
disposition of its militia and police inside the
TSZ and to refrain from deployment close to the
southern boundary of the TSZ, thereby
facilitating mutual confidence.

"The Security Council further reiterates its
call on Eritrea to conclude the status-of-forces
agreement with the Secretary-General. The
Council notes, in this regard, that the model
status-of-forces agreement, as set out in
resolution 1320 (2000) of 15 December 2000, is
in effect.

"The Security Council notes the information

provided by Ethiopia regarding mines and calls
on Ethiopia to provide UNMEE with further
details on the types of mines used in the TSZ and
adjacent areas, as well as more specific
information on minefields already cleared by
Ethiopian Armed Forces, with the view to
facilitate the return to home of internally
displaced persons and the forthcoming border
demarcation work.

"The Security Council expresses its regret
that there has been no progress regarding the
establishment of a direct high-altitude flight route
for UNMEE between Asmara and Addis Ababa.
It notes with deep concern that the current
extended flight route for UNMEE between the
two capitals has significant security, logistical
and financial implications. The Council calls on
the parties once again to work with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in a spirit
of compromise to settle the issue for the mutual
benefit of all.

"The Security Council, underlining the need
for confidence-building measures, calls on the
parties to release and return unconditionally and
without further delay, under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC), all the remaining prisoners of war and
release all other persons detained as a result of
the armed conflict, in accordance with
international humanitarian law and the Algiers
Agreement. In this regard, the Council welcomes
the repatriation yesterday of 25 Ethiopian
prisoners of war from Eritrea under the auspices
of the ICRC. The Council encourages authorities
and civil society in both Ethiopia and Eritrea to
afford humane treatment, without discrimination,
to each other's nationals and persons of each
other's origin within their respective territories.

"The Security Council, inviting the parties
to make further contributions to fulfil their
financial responsibilities regarding the Boundary
Commission, expresses its determination to
support the practical demarcation of the border. It
looks forward to the forthcoming
recommendations by the Secretary-General in this
regard.

"The Security Council, expressing
appreciation to those Member States that have
already provided voluntary contributions, calls on
Member States in a position to do so to provide
further support to the peace process and to
alleviate the difficult humanitarian situation and,
where conditions allow, help facilitate
reconstruction and development in both countries,
including by making contributions through the
following channels:
(a) United Nations Consolidated Appeals
process for 2002;

(b) United Nations Trust Fund to Support
the Peace Process in Ethiopia-Eritrea; and, in
light of paragraph 13 above,

(c) United Nations Trust Fund for the
Delimitation and Demarcation of the Border
established pursuant to resolution 1177 (1998).

"The Security Council confirms its intention
to send a mission to the two countries in February
2002."

This statement will be issued as a document of

the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2002/1.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.15 pm.
