Mr. Aguilar Zinser (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I join the expressions of congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your convening of this meeting on
Somalia. On behalf of my country, I should also like to
thank the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Somalia,
Mr. Yusuf Hassan Ibrahim, for presenting his statement
to the Council in a frank and precise manner.

At this meeting, we return once again to the issue
of Somalia, which has been a source of concern to the
United Nations and the Security Council for more than
10 years. During this period, the initiatives presented
have not taken hold or achieved their fundamental
purpose: peace, development, harmony and
understanding in the country. However, this must not
be a reason for the Security Council and the United
Nations to excuse themselves from their
responsibilities and commitments in Somalia.

The evaluation undertaken by the inter-agency
security assessment mission that went to Somalia is not
promising. Quite simply, the analysis of the conflict
situation that the country is living through underlines
the necessity that this issue remain a matter for the
Council's attention.

Last week, in the private consultations held by
the Council, Assistant Secretary-General Ibrahim Fall
reiterated the feeling of the Secretary-General,
expressed in his letter of November 2001, that so long
as security conditions do not permit the return of the
United Nations Political Office for Somalia, it will
have to continue performing its functions from Nairobi.
Thus, Mr. Winston Tubman, recently appointed by the
Secretary-General as his Representative to direct that
Office, will have to begin its work from another
country. I should like to add here that we wish
Mr. Tubman every success in the difficult task for
which the Secretary-General has singled him out. We
also give him our vote of confidence.

Upon arriving in the region, Mr. Tubman will
confront a very complicated situation in which, in
Mexico's View, what is most urgent is to concentrate
efforts on humanitarian assistance, supplying ample aid
to the Somali population, who need it for distinct
reasons. This population faces, in addition to inter-
ethnic problems and the armed conflict between
opposing groups, grave conditions of malnutrition and
endemic diseases that require medical attention. Above
all, an economic recovery that would enable
improvement in the welfare of the Somali population is
needed.

Our attention must be immediate and, of course,
include the assessment of how various United Nations
programmes in Somalia can be reinforced, how we can
establish a fund to support the process of peace that
may be achieved in that country, and how to coordinate
peacemaking and humanitarian efforts. There is a close
link between security conditions in the country and
food security for the Somalis, and this is a priority that
the United Nations must address.

The context in which humanitarian and
development activities must be undertaken is precisely
that of improving security. We must confront the
prevailing conditions of insecurity that caused the
withdrawal of United Nations personnel and that today
put at risk the safety and security of locally hired
personnel in the areas where the United Nations carries
out its sorely needed and urgent tasks.

Closely connected to the problem of security is
that of worsening humanitarian and food security
conditions and, in its turn, the trafficking in and
proliferation of small arms and light weapons. We
recall that there is a United Nations sanctions regime
imposed by the Security Council that includes an
embargo on small arms and light weapons.
Nevertheless, the conflict continues and the sanctions
regime has been unable to operate effectively.
Therefore, we welcome and firmly support the
Bulgarian delegation in its efforts to restructure that
regime.

We also note once again the Secretariat's
affirmation that this is one of the most dangerous
environments in which the United Nations operates,
and thus we welcome all the efforts that the
Organization can undertake to control arms and the
financing of arms trafficking and to deal with the
possible links between these and terrorist groups as one
of the central tasks of the Organization.

We support the Transitional National Government
and believe, as said earlier today, that it is the starting
point for achieving peace and reconciliation in
Somalia. We wish the Government every success in its
efforts to bring about peace in the country and to
establish the basis for reconciliation and conditions of
governance that would include the participation of all
groups and factions in the country.

We are aware that, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his report, the security situation in
Somalia is highly fragile and that the Transitional
National Government does not enjoy full recognition
throughout the territory. Therefore, we hope that the
reconciliation efforts carried out by the Government
and promoted by the international community will be
successful and that they benefit all domestic groups.

We believe that the Security Council, the
international community and international agencies as
a whole must coordinate their efforts to see to it that
the parties give up violence and achieve a national
reconciliation in which the various actors and groups
accept the need to share power. We will therefore pay
close attention to developments related to, and the
results that will emanate from, the upcoming National
Reconciliation Conference set for April, which is to be
convened under the auspices of the lntergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD). We also invite all
Somali groups to participate in that meeting in a
constructive spirit.

We trust that at that Conference solutions will be
found that are based on the principle of respect for the
national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Somalia
and that will create conditions conducive to governance
and to the sharing of authority and power in the
country.

We support the decision taken at the IGAD
Summit recognizing that consensus among Somalia's
neighbours is essential for progress to be made in the
quest for a peaceful settlement and an orderly
transition. This is an opportunity for the countries
involved to demonstrate their commitment to peace and
stability in the region while respecting the will of the
Somali people themselves.

In this sense, we endorse the support voiced here
for the initiative to create two groups of friends of
Somalia - within the region itself and here in New
York, at United Nations Headquarters.

In conclusion, I should like to place on record the
fact that Mexico has all along maintained that the
United Nations must play an active and direct role in
efforts to keep the peace in Somalia. Though we agree
with the Secretary-General's assertion that peace
cannot be imposed on the parties to a given conflict if
they do not seek it actively and do not in fact want it,
we maintain that, wherever a process is required for
achieving peace, it is the duty of the United Nations to
guarantee that this is done and that, wherever obstacles
are encountered to progress in this respect, it is our
duty, as members of the Security Council, to work
tirelessly to help ensure that such obstacles are
overcome.

