Mr. Thomson (United Kingdom): I would like
first of all the thank Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno for his briefing and to express gratitude to
the Secretary-General for the report on which it was
based. We think that it is right for the Secretariat to
sound a warning bell, as Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno put it, when it judges that to be necessary.
Whether or not we agree with the conclusions is a
different matter, but it is quite right to express concern
about the situation when the Secretariat judges it to be
necessary.

I should like to concentrate my remarks on the
country of Timor-Leste, specifically the
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report for
the military and police configuration there. But before I
do so, I should like to join others in expressing
condolences to the Government and the people of the
Republic of Korea.
Like previous speakers, the United Kingdom fully
recognizes the importance of ensuring that the
investments that the international community has made
and the achievements that the Timorese people and
Government have accomplished are not undermined.
We agree with the Secretary-General's report that
recent security problems in Timor-Leste, and the way
in which they were handled, have lent weight to the
argument in favour of adjustments to the United
Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), and we agree that changes should be
made. We therefore broadly support the measures
outlined in paragraph 22 of the Secretary-General's
report (S/2003/243).

I listened carefully to Under-Secretary-General
Guehenno's description of the current security
situation, but we continue to be unconvinced that the
security problems in Timor-Leste, as they stand at
present, warrant maintaining peacekeeping force troops
at the present level all the way to December 2003. We
feel that under current downsizing plans there would
still be sizeable numbers of troops to deal with the acts
of the small armed gangs. Nevertheless, we would be
willing to explore the feasibility of rescheduling the
downsizing of the peacekeeping force in a less radical
manner than is proposed in the Secretary-General's
report, and we look forward to exploring that further.

On the proposals for a revised policing strategy,
we agree that improving the capability of the Timorese
police should be the priority. We are willing to consider
favourably the Secretary-General's recommendations
for rescheduling the downsizing of the United Nations
police operation, subject to some clarifications of some
of the recommendations. We will pursue those
clarifications with the Secretariat.

In the same framework, we would also like to
pursue further information on the budgetary
implications of the Secretary-General's proposals.

