Mr. Corr (Ireland): May I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this wrap-up discussion on the
work of the Security Council over the past year. We
find this a very valuable exercise, and today it
especially offers departing members of the Council a
chance to give our views and assessment on the work
of the Council.

I would also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
the work of the Colombian presidency over the past
month, and everyone in your delegation for a month of
real achievement, commitment and effectiveness in the
work of the Council.

There is a phrase of TS. Eliot - "liberation from
the future as well as the past" - that seems to me in
many ways, perhaps with undue scepticism, to sum up
the work of the Security Council. The Council stands at
the very centre of the multilateral and international
system, supporting cooperation by nations, anticipating
and averting threats to peace, but also building peace,
and enforcing peace where that is called for, conscious
always of risks, whatever their shape - but, as is the
duty of the Council, conscious also of hopes. This is as
it should be. Internationalism is about action, not just
ideals.

To serve in the Security Council, therefore, is a
great honour for any country. The Council is the
property of all United Nations Member States. It is the
property of the world, not of its members, permanent or
elected, and not of any combination of them.

What are the standards the Council must meet?
How do we meet these tests, how effectively does the
Council operate? Where do we stand, looking back and
looking forward? Those are issues I want to address in
my remarks today.

On how the Council performs its work, it seems
to me there are four central tests that must be met. The
Council is about, above all else, the safeguarding of
international peace and security. This is the place that
intersects with power and the views of capitals, some
that are powerful, some less so. But collective security
is about power and about the willingness to use power
for the wider good if necessary.

If the Security Council is just a talking shop, its
role has ended. There is always a balance there
between multilateralism and the individual role of
States, between national interests and the global public
good. This tension meets often in this Chamber. But the
Security Council is also about law. In a world where
bipolar deterrence or balanced equilibrium are gone
and where market forces shape much of the world in a
rather Darwinian fashion at times, this is a place that
says, on behalf of the international community, "It is
so; let it be done". Even though the Council is
intensely political, it needs to always value this special
and austere role in international law.

The Security Council must also value its
legitimacy; this is a political test. People around the
world, as we have seen in recent months, look to the
Council as a test of the legitimacy of major actions
affecting international peace and security. Therefore, a
sense of honour and fairness needs to be embedded in
our work. We must honour our decisions when taken
and our word when given. We must also honour the
expectations that the international community has in
us. And we must show fairness. We should not have
double standards on decisions we take. It is surely
wrong if war can flow from some decisions of the
Council While only shrugs and indifference flow from
others.

The Security Council must also be about
partnership. The Council cannot do everything and yet
specific decisions and issues have implications often
involving the economic and social as well as the
political dimensions. We need to see the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council as
partners and they need to View the Security Council as
a partner. We need stronger partnership throughout the
intergovernmental system in the United Nations. Too
much light in the United Nations, perhaps, shines on
this Chamber, and too little elsewhere.

How have we done in the light of these tests? In
the main, in the View of my delegation, we have done
well. In Africa, the United Nations Organization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo is at
work. Support has been given to the Burundi peace
process. Peace has been broadly achieved in Sierra
Leone and Angola. Regional instability in many parts
of Africa still remains a problem. The United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan is at work in the
service of the people of Afghanistan.

Each month the Council looks at many issues on
its agenda. We take decisions, rightly, when we view
the time is right. That is the way it should be. But in an
increasingly untidy world, where events create
enormous pressure, we must stand further back from
time to time and look at the wider canvas and the wider
forces at work.
In Africa, as Ambassador Koonjul has just said,
new and important forces are at work: the African
Union, the New Partnership for Africa's Development,
regional cooperation and an increasing sense of African
ownership of African issues. We need to support all of
this in the work of the Council, including in relation to
specific decisions on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi, the Great Lakes region, Somalia and
the Central African Republic. We need to remember
that collective security and international peace and
security are concepts. Our decisions on issues
operationally are part of a wider matrix. Terrorism in a
failed State can be terrorism anywhere in the world.
Profound alienation, bitterness and failure to respect
human rights do not end at borders.

Specifically, we need more strategic focus on the
situation in the Middle East. It is a profound and
growing threat to international peace and security. The
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories is
intolerable and unacceptable. That this situation still
prevails is an affront to the international community
and reveals our lack of political will in a place of
deadly danger and injustice.

We also need more strategic focus on conceptual
and thematic issues. There is deep and unacceptable
poverty in Africa. There is alienation among many in
the Arab world. There is alienation in many parts of the
world because of exclusion from the benefits of
globalization.

We also need more strategic focus on conflict
prevention and on peace-building when conflict is over.
We need the capacity to think boldly, and not just on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).
But there are operational implications, such as how
effectively DDR operates in the Great Lakes and so
forth.

How do we operate? On our working methods, it
has been the view of my delegation, and I repeat today,
that there is too much on our agenda. There is too
much of "this issue, this morning, this month". We
need a more focused approach, perhaps involving
setting aside one or two days a month to look at issues
that have to appear on our agenda, but in such a way as
to deal with them speedily and effectively instead of
devoting a full morning to each of them.

We need more committees of the Council. The Ad
Hoc Working Group on Africa and the sanctions
Committees are examples of how effectively
committees can operate. We need committees that
could filter and look at in more depth the issues on the
Council agenda.

We need more structured dialogue with the
Secretary-General and with the Secretariat. Apart from
the very valuable monthly lunch, perhaps the
Secretary-General could set aside part of the day once
a month for a background look at issues on the
Council's agenda and at the canvas against which we
must consider them.

The relationship between the permanent five and
the elected 10 has been an issue of some contention
over the past months and years. In my view, there has
been a growing and welcome level of cooperation
among the elected 10. This is the way it should be. In
terms of the permanent five, my delegation has never
seen any plots or conspiracy. These are the members of
the Council which are permanent; they have a veto.
That is the world we live in, and the Security Council
reflects this.

But perception can be as important as reality. We
need to address perceptions. Those perceptions can
include, and at times have included, a sense that the
permanent five may not always show the sensitivity to
the elected 10 that is required. This is a matter of
perception, not necessarily substance, but we do think
it needs to be addressed in the period ahead. One way
of doing this might be a monthly meeting involving all
Council members away from the United Nations
building, where we would look at issues in a free and
flexible way.

Finally, where do we stand? In the view of my
delegation, the Security Council works well. It could
work better. It has come a long way in becoming more
open and more transparent. It should focus more on
main items on its agenda rather than necessarily
dealing with all items on its agenda in a routine way. It
needs to strengthen its partnership with other United
Nations bodies and they need to strengthen their
partnership with the Security Council. Here I am
thinking of the General Assembly, the Economic and
Social Council and the Commission on Human Rights,
for example.

Ireland finishes our Security Council with a
strong sense of pride at having served. We are proud
too that we have tried to highlight issues we think
matter: Africa, the Middle East, human rights and
conflict prevention. We leave with great admiration for
all the other members of the Council and for their work
in the service of peace. We leave also with a deep sense
of admiration and respect for the Secretary-General, for
his commitment, his integrity and his willingness to
show leadership at all times. We have appreciated that
very much.

In conclusion, it is right to express our
appreciation to everyone from the Secretariat involved
in the work of the Council, but also to the Secretariat
generally for the work that is done for the people of the
world with great idealism and effectiveness. This work
is often not appreciated around the world as it should
be.

This is a place that matters. It is, therefore, to be
guarded and cherished. That was the approach we tried
to bring to our period on the Security Council, and it is
the strong conviction that we have as we end it.

