Mr. Pamir (Turkey): At the outset, Sir, I would
like to congratulate you on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I wish you every success as you carry out this
important responsibility. I would also like to heartily
thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative
of our good neighbour Bulgaria, for the way he
conducted the challenging work ofthe Council over the
past month. Last, but not least, I also wish to thank the
Permanent Representative of South Africa, who, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), invited
the Security Council to discuss this issue during an
open debate. As such, this meeting allows all of us,
members of the Council and non-members alike, to
really see where the feelings and views of the
international community really stand today on an issue
that is of primary importance to world peace and
stability. We do not doubt that the deliberations of the
Security Council on the matter of Iraqi compliance
with its resolutions, and the exchanges among the
permanent members in particular, will be enriched and
duly inspired by what they hear in this session from so
many speakers.

I also wish to commend the untiring efforts of the
Secretary-General to persuade the Iraqi Government of
the necessity of full compliance with the Security
Council resolutions.

Turkey has aligned itself with the statement just
made on behalf of the European Union by my
colleague, the Permanent Representative of Denmark.
The statement of the European Union is to be seen and
understood for what it is: a dispassionate description of
a longstanding issue, on the one hand, and on the other,
a judicious assessment of the road ahead. I wish to
expound on a number of points that are already
included in that statement.

First, the Iraqi issue is indeed a long-standing
one. Before we lament this critical moment and abhor
the dangers it poses, we must remember how we
arrived at this unenviable juncture. The Iraqi issue has
continued to exist in its various aspects - such as
sanctions, disarmament, humanitarian matters like the
repatriation of all Kuwaiti and third-country nationals
and the return of Kuwaiti property - for no less than
12 years. Throughout those years, the Iraqi people have
suffered the debilitating, and at times gruesome, effects
of the unintended consequences of measures taken
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.

As we longed for stability in the southern part of
our country during that time, Turkey received a raw
deal. Northern Iraq was turned into a no-man's land,
and quickly thereafter into a safe haven for terrorists
from where they could conduct their operations into
Turkey, gather strength and find rest in order to
regroup and start again. We had to bury thousands of
souls in our hearts as we determinedly fought this
organized evil. At that time world public opinion was
still in its infancy and was therefore selfishly equivocal
with regard to the ways of combating terrorism.

Turkey's trading routes were also disrupted
during those years, which caused widespread
unemployment and an awesome loss of revenue. At a
time when people everywhere were talking about the
so-called benefits of globalization and about a
shrinking world, Turkey found itself unable to trade
with the southern part of its country.

Obviously, this issue is neither a lurking danger
nor a distant event for Turkey. We have been living
with the manifold consequences of the deterioration in
stability in neighbouring Iraq. Therefore, in our sincere
desire for a restoration of normalcy, we have tried for
years to explain to our neighbour the dangers inherent
in non-compliance with Security Council resolutions.
We tried to impress upon the Iraqi leadership that its
continued failure to cooperate with the international
community in the elimination of its weapons of mass
destruction and of its capabilities to produce those
weapons would unleash dangers of all sorts.

At long last, after four years, the Iraqi
Government last month decided to allow the
unconditional return of United Nations weapons
inspectors. We very much hope that this signals more
than preparedness, and that the international
community will choose to test the veracity of the Iraqi
position.

It was in that hope that we welcomed the results
of the Vienna talks between Iraqi officials and officials
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
concerning practical arrangements regarding
inspections. We note that a number of ranking Iraqi
officials now assure the international community of
Iraq's full cooperation, including the provision of
unhindered access to wherever the inspectors deem
appropriate to inspect and investigate. However, we
also note that the letters sent to the Executive
Chairman of UNMOVIC and the Director General of
IAEA fell short of total clarity, as they lacked a vocal
and unambiguous "yes" to unconditional and
unrestricted inspections.

We are passing through the final hours before the
Iraqi Government fully understands the gravity of the
situation. They should adhere fully to all the relevant
resolutions without vainly trying to set forth any
preconditions. A new draft resolution should help the
Iraqi Government to do precisely that. Not that the
previous resolutions are incomplete or legally deficient
in any way. Rather, the ongoing quest for a new
resolution stems from the actual need to show the
world, and large segments of public opinion practically
everywhere, that the means available to the Security
Council to peacefully dispose of this matter are well
and truly exhausted.

In other words, a new draft resolution should help
the Iraqi Government to fully understand that the
international community is not divided on the
straightforward and urgent need for speedy and
unhindered inspections to take place in that country,
and that it is equally united on the need to hold the
Iraqi Government accountable in the event of its failure
to keep its word. We hope that the text of such a
resolution will display the unanimity of the Security
Council, empower the inspectors with an effective
mandate and, at the same time, incorporate clear
provisions in case of both compliance and non-
compliance.

The time for hardening rhetoric has indeed came
to an end. It is time to match words with deeds. No one
in the Chamber doubts the seriousness of the stage we
are passing through. This is not one more critical stage
in this long episode; it is a seriously critical stage.

As part of that already problematic geography, as
a traditional Power in that part of the world and, more
importantly, as people who have special historic and
cultural relations and links to the people of Iraq and the
region, we have serious concerns regarding any
miscalculations that might destabilize the region. After
all, no military action has brought a lasting and viable
solution in the Middle East. On the contrary, military
action has further complicated already difficult
problems, perpetuating them for future generations of
innocent victims who have, sadly, borne witness to the
futility of prolonging conflicts.

We also fear that further destabilization in the
Middle East may well trigger the inherent propensity to
disrupt the fight against new forms of terrorism. Today
the single most important task is to harness the full
support of the Security Council and the international
community. To repeat, we need a Security Council that
speaks the same language and that employs the same
pitch inside and outside this Chamber.

Turkey spares no effort to ensure that peace and
security prevail in the region, and will continue to do
so. We know full well that we have historic
responsibilities in securing the reign of hope and
dignity in our region. We work towards enlightened
ends, and we will never waver when the defence of
those goals is called for. Respect for the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of our
neighbours, as well as other principles of good-
neighbourliness, will continue to guide us.

The destiny of the Iraqi people lies solely in the
hands of the Iraqis as a whole. The same should apply
to the use they want to make of their natural resources.
In that context, the single most important principle is to
maintain Iraq's territorial integrity and national unity.
Any scenario that questions these basic principles
should be discarded. Turkey will deploy every effort to
uphold these principles.

