Mr. Sidorov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The delegation of the Russian Federation will
vote in favour of the draft resolution submitted to the
Security Council by a group of sponsors. Its orientation
reflects our serious concern over the escalation of the
Bosnian conflict that has occurred in recent days. The
Violation of the agreement on the cease-fire and the
cessation of hostilities, the military activities undertaken
earlier by the Government forces and the harsh retaliatory
strikes of the Bosnian Serbs have brought their inevitable
result. The logic of force has prevailed, resulting in new
suffering for the civilian population, new casualties and tens
of thousands of new refugees. This is precisely the scenario
which is unfolding in Srebrenica.

Russia, like other members of the Security Council,
strongly condemns the actions of the Bosnian Serb army in
Srebrenica in violation of Security Council decisions on
safe areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We regard as
absolutely inadmissible any attacks against the United
Nations Protection Force (UNPROFOR) and any hostage
taking from among the peace-keepers, and we demand their
immediate release. We concur with the View on the need to
restore the demilitarized status of the safe area of
Srebrenica, which was also violated by the other side in the
conflict.

Unquestionably, this task is extremely complex and
should be resolved in a serious fashion. We must again note
that the use of air power is not the road to a solution. Nor
do not see a solution in the withdrawal of United Nations
forces from Bosnia or a build-up of pressure by force,
which would have serious adverse consequences, but rather
in ensuring the secure and effective functioning of
UNPROFOR.

We note that the draft resolution mandates the
Secretary-General to use all resources available to him to
restore the status as defined by the Agreement of 18 April
1993 of the safe area of Srebrenica in accordance with the
mandate of UNPROFOR. It is clear that this provision
precludes the option of using force which would exceed
the context of the present mandate of a peace-keeping
operation.

It is extremely important that any efforts to restore
the safe area status not violate the impartiality of
UNPROFOR and that they be fully consistent with
present decision-making procedures and rules for
conducting operations. We reaffirm that United Nations
forces neither can nor should undertake actions which
would convert them into a party to the conflict. This
would jeopardize not only the operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but all United Nations peace-keeping
activities.

The lesson of Srebrenica in our View is that the
Security Council must finally and thoroughly deal with
the problem of the very concept of safe areas and the
modalities for their establishment. We fully concur with
the View of the Secretary-General set out in his report of
30 May 1995 (S/1995/444) that unprovoked attacks
launched from safe areas are inconsistent with the whole
concept. They precipitate a disproportionate response
from the Bosnian Serbs which in turn compels the
Security Council time and again to extinguish one fire
after another.

We concur with the conclusion of the Secretary-
General that the only effective way to make safe areas
truly safe is to define a regime acceptable to both parties
and to promote mutual respect for the arrangements to
which the parties have agreed. It is clear that the use of
force will not help. The time is more than ripe to carry
out the mutually agreed demilitarization of the safe areas
as called for in resolution 998 (1995). We would like to
hope that the Security Council will finally be able to take
the right decision which should make it possible to avoid
a repetition of such crises around the safe areas.

Developments in the region of Srebrenica are
extremely alarming. But they must not conceal the greater
overall picture of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The current trends and their development prompt serious
concern because there is a clear threat of slipping into
military solutions. That is why we consider it extremely
important that the draft resolution stresses the importance
of renewed efforts to achieve an overall peaceful
settlement and the unacceptability of any attempt to
resolve the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina by
military means.

 

We continue to believe that the only solution is a
political settlement, however difficult that may be, on the
basis of the proposals of the Contact Group, whose
potential is far from having been exhausted.

