Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation is pleased to congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. We also welcome this opportunity to take up
the item of small arms and light weapons. We thank the
Secretary-General for his report on this item.

The presence of more small arms and light
weapons than are necessary for defence and security in
various parts of the world, particularly the illicit
trafficking in small arms, often associated with
instability, is an age-old problem and complex in
nature. To resolve this matter, we must have an
integrated and proportionate approach, based on
security and development.

Fortunately, valuable proposals and processes are
under way at various levels, but what we need now is
cooperation at all levels. This will be a key element in
efforts to combat illicit trafficking, and also to prevent
and curb the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons.

The Programme of Action to Prevent, Combat
and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms and Light
Weapons in All Its Aspects, adopted last July,
crystallized the political will of the international
community to tackle this item. It also laid the basis for
dealing with the humanitarian and economic
dimensions of the problems caused by small arms and
light weapons. Member States thereby undertook to
cooperate with the United Nations system to actually
implement the arms embargoes imposed by the
Security Council under the Charter.

At the same time, the Council was urged to look,
in each individual case, at the possibility of including
in the mandates and budgets of peacekeeping
operations, where necessary, relevant provisions on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
of ex-combatants.

We welcome the innovative steps taken by the
Security Council to enhance compliance with arms
embargoes - for example, the monitoring mechanisms
and the panels of experts.

Turning to the observations and recommendations
in the Secretary-General's report, I would like to offer
the following comments: we support the idea of
drafting an international instrument to enable States to
identify and trace small arms and light weapons in a
timely and responsible way, and we think it appropriate
that States, as required, use the Interpol weapons and
explosives tracking system and to provide technical
and financial support to it.

I would take the opportunity of asking for more
details about the small arms advisory service that the
Secretariat is considering setting up using
extrabudgetary resources. We would be interested in
knowing what exactly this advisory service would be.

We definitely believe the Security Council and
the General Assembly should study ways of improving
interaction on matters relating to small arms, so as to
promote the preparation of long-term strategies within
the context of conflict prevention and peace-building,
and also within the context of the Programme of
Action.

We believe that Recommendation 5 is
fundamental in the sense that it would call on Member
States to apply all the Security Council resolutions on
sanctions. We also welcome the request for regular
reports by some of the sanctions Committees to
Member States on the measures adopted to implement
the resolutions.

We agree that the Security Council should
continue its efforts to determine existing links between
illicit small arms and light weapons trafficking, the
illicit exploitation of natural resources, among others,
drug trafficking and armed conflict. We also believe
the Council could prepare innovative strategies to
tackle this phenomenon, and we think it appropriate
that the Council help in detecting the manufacture of
and illicit trafficking in such weapons. We would draw
attention to the work done by the panels of experts on
Angola, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Sierra Leone in this connection.

Recommendations on disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants should, in our
opinion, be complemented with conflict-prevention
measures, and also measures to prevent the recurrence
of conflict. For, after all, weapons are only the tools
that exacerbate it. We would reiterate the advisability
of using authenticated end-user certificates. This is a
commitment that Member States have already
undertaken to provide under the Programme of Action.
It would be one of the measures for action at the
national level.

Swift and strict implementation of embargoes by
the Security Council, and adoption of coercive
measures against Member States that violate these
embargoes, would be a significant contribution to
combating the scourge of small arms and light
weapons. Argentina strongly favours transparency in
armaments as a way of promoting stability and
reducing tensions. In our view, the concept of
transparency also applies to small arms and light
weapons.

We fully agree with those that maintain that
States themselves have the primary responsibility for
handling the problems caused by small arms and light
weapons. Therefore, we believe that emphasis should
be placed on the responsibility and cooperation
dimension between Member States and the various
bodies of the United Nations system, within the context
of their respective fields, to strengthen any action
aimed at controlling and eradicating the illicit arms
traffic in those weapons at the global level.

