Ms. Mudallali (Lebanon): Thank you, Mr. President,
for having convened this open debate. I want to thank
Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo for her statement as
well as the briefers from EcoPeace.

The Book of Books tells us:

"To everything there is a season, and a time for
every purpose under heaven. There is a time of war,
and a time of peace".

I am sure that all present have noticed that the time
for peace is not upon us yet and that, if one looks at the
region, there is no sign of its coming soon, as we heard
this morning.

The question of Palestine is still a source of
concern for the region and for the world. On this
question, the parties are gridlocked on every issue
that could lead to peace. The situation on the ground
is deteriorating, and instead of the talk of a two-
State solution and land swaps that had characterized
negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis and was
enshrined in agreements and resolutions, we hear talk
of annexation of the West Bank or parts of it and of the
possible collapse of the whole peace process and the
peace paradigm and its basis.

The road to negotiations is blocked, and the main
negotiating partner, the Palestinian people, are under
tremendous political and economic pressure born of the
new political reality that is being imposed on them and
a debilitating financial situation coupled with a fragile
security one. The Palestinian Prime Minister says
that there is nothing left to negotiate about and asks
a legitimate question: where are we going to have the
Palestinian State?

The Palestinian Prime Minister calls the withholding
of Palestinian tax revenues by the Israelis a "financial
war" to push the Palestinians to surrender. There is fear
on the part of the international community that this is
bringing the Palestinian Authority to near financial
collapse and threatening its stability. This is coupled
with distrust and a total breakdown in communication
among the parties. There are no official contacts
between the main parties that are supposed to negotiate
peace and discuss the much-promised peace plan.
The bases of a peaceful settlement are under
tremendous pressure and a source of concern, especially
the status of Jerusalem and the United Nations
resolutions that for more than 70 years constituted the
international legality on which any equitable, just and
comprehensive solution must rest, from resolutions 242
(1967) to 338 (1973) and 478 (1980), ending with 2334
(2016). The Council, as the French Ambassador said,
cannot remain silent on this.

On the ground, things are no better. Gaza is still
bleeding. The tragic targeting ofcivilians continues, and
despite the international outrage there is no indication
that this will come to an end. The Israeli decision not
to renew the mandate of the Temporary International
Presence in Hebron is yet another threat to stability.

What is missing today is not United Nations
resolutions or peace plans or road maps for peace. All
of this has been done time and again. What is needed
is the political will to choose life and to take the road
to peace. That is why the Arab world made its strategic
choice for peace in its Arab Peace Initiative and still
believes that a comprehensive, just and equitable
solution is the only way forward.

But this peace cannot come through annexation or
recognition of the illegal annexation of occupied land.
Lebanon is seriously concerned about the implications
of recognizing the sovereignty of Israel over the
occupied Golan Heights. It considers this a flagrant
violation of resolution 497 (1981). Lebanon is also
concerned about the continued Israeli occupation of the
Lebanese territories seized by force in 1967.

I am pleased to report to the Council that over the
past three months, important political and institutional
developments took place at the domestic level in
Lebanon. A new National Unity Government was
formed, headed by Prime Minister Saad Hariri, setting
a very ambitious and proactive reform agenda. The
Government has shown a robust dedication to addressing
urgent priorities, especially in terms of the economic
and fiscal situation, structural reform and combating
corruption. It intends to preserve this momentum
with a view to making up for the time lost in the
formation process and meeting the many commitments
that Lebanon has made under the Paris Conference
economique pour le developpement, par les reformes et
avec les entreprises - the CEDRE Conference.
However, persistent challenges remain. The
continued Israeli occupation of Lebanese territories
and the daily violations of Lebanon's sovereignty and
resolution 1701 (2006) are keeping the situation on the
southern border fragile. In the past three months alone,
Israel has violated Lebanese sovereignty 431 times: 112
times by land, 149 times by sea and 170 times by air.
This has to be noted, condemned and stopped.

Lebanon remains committed to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to
working towards a permanent ceasefire on its
southern border. It is also committed to continuing its
constructive engagement to settle border issues within
the framework of the tripartite mechanism and the
good offices of the United Nations and international
partners. It also hopes that it can one day soon move
to a permanent ceasefire. The Council can contribute
greatly to making this a reality by taking all the
necessary measures at its disposal to compel Israel to
shoulder its share of responsibility in this regard.

Finally, Lebanon remains committed to supporting
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and calls on all
States to renew their commitments and to help it uphold
its responsibility towards the Palestinian people.

