Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
(S/2014/656) and Special Representative Jan Kubis for
his briefing. Italy fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier by the observer of the European Union
and would like to add a few remarks in my national
capacity.

The uncertainty of the results of the Afghan elections
and the continued absence of a new President, in the
context of the last phase of the transition process - a
very delicate juncture for Afghanistan - are a source
of grave concern for the future of the country. That
is why it is crucial for the electoral process to reach a
positive outcome in the short term that is accepted and
trusted by a majority of the Afghan people. The pursuit
of the necessary dialogue between the parties should
be driven by the highest interest of the country. It is
therefore our strong hope that the efforts undertaken by
the international community, in particular the United
States and Special Representative Kubis, whom we fully
support, will be crowned with success. To achieve that
goal, all stakeholders must show great moderation and
a sense of responsibility and avoid divisive initiatives
that might undermine an agreement.

We expect the commitment of the two presidential
candidates that was reiterated in the message addressed
to the NATO Heads of State and Government at the Celtic
Manor Summit to be realized as quickly as possible so
as to create a solid foundation for the socioeconomic
development, peaceful settlement and stabilization of
Afghanistan. Today, it is more urgent than ever that the
electoral process be finalized through the installation of
a new President and a new Government. That will also
reward the widespread action and commitment of the
Afghan National Security Forces (ANSF) to guarantee
to the Afghan people the right to express their wishes
at the ballot box and to limit the insurgency's attempts
at destabilization.

The insurgency continues to be a dangerous force,
as demonstrated by the fresh wave of terrorist acts
in recent months. That is why Italy, together with its
partners, has affirmed the commitment that it made in
Chicago two years ago and reiterated most recently at
the Celtic Manor Summit of NATO Heads of State and
Government, to support the ANSF in the transition to
the post-International Security Assistance Force phase.

At the same time, however, Afghanistan should
implement transparency and accountability criteria in
the management of the resources allocated to it. The
prompt signature of the bilateral security agreement
between Afghanistan and the United States and of the
status of forces agreement with NATO is imperative if
the resolute support mission is to start. The purpose
of those agreements is to provide the necessary legal
framework for the presence of international troops in
the country.

My country reiterates its wish to carry on its
more than decade-long commitment to foster the
development and stabilization of Afghanistan, in
coordination with the broader action of the international
community. Consistent with the legacy of Tokyo, the
conditions for that to happen are based on concrete
and measurable progress by the Afghan parties in the
field of human rights, particularly those of women,
democratic principles, the fight against corruption and
drug trafficking, and administrative and economic
governance. In those areas, thanks also to the ISAF
mission, Afghanistan has made giant steps forward,
though much remains to be done.

