Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Like others, we would like
to offer our deepest condolences for the many United
Nations officials that perished in the tragic incident of
Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. We are also sad, as we
lost an Indonesian national who worked for the World
Food Programme, Ms. Harina Hafitz. We would like to
convey our condolences to her family. I see Ambassador
Taye Atskeselassie Amde in the Chamber, whom I ask
to please convey our deepest condolences to the people
and the Government of Ethiopia for that tragic accident.

We also would like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary- General for Afghanistan
and Head of United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), Ambassador Yamamoto, and
welcome the National Security Adviser of Afghanistan,
Mr. Mohib, as well as our dear colleague Ambassador
Adela Raz to the Security Council. We would also like
to thank Ms. Storai Tapesh for her briefing.

The work of UNAMA has been and will remain
indispensable to reinforcing peacebuilding in
Afghanistan for the foreseeable future. We commend
the whole of the UNAMA team for its vital efforts, under
the leadership of Ambassador Yamamoto. Indonesia
also thanks all States Members of the United Nations
on their constructive engagement on the UNAMA
mandate renewal, and hopes for a smooth adoption of
the draft resolution later this week. As a co-penholder
with Germany, we hope for a united resolution, in which
a united Council, with its full support, intensifies the
momentum on a collective trajectory for peace, which
the people of Afghanistan so much deserve. We are
fully committed to helping the country succeed, in line
with the aspirations of all Afghans, and we reaffirm
our full support for its sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity.

Over the course of the years, the national authorities
and people of Afghanistan have achieved progress in
their nation-building efforts. Indonesia commends
their efforts towards realizing a nationally united,
peaceful, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan, in
full consonance with the wishes of its citizens. But as
we heard today, much more needs to be accomplished.

Listening to the various briefers, I am reminded
once again of the words of the wondrous Afghan author
Khaled Hosseini, who said:

"we are waiting, all of us, against insurmountable
odds, for something extraordinary to happen".

We in the Security Council must make sure that
happens and perform our duty unfailingly. Other
United Nations system entities, as well as partners
outside, must also do their utmost to enable peace to
prevail in Afghanistan.

On its part, Indonesia has had long-standing
engagement with Afghanistan. We have provided
capacity-building and technical assistance in many
areas, such as education and health care. People-to-
people contacts have also been instituted. We began our
engagement in the Afghan peace process in 2017. As
our Foreign Minister Retno Marsudi reiterated at the
Geneva conference last November, Indonesia is playing
its role in meaningfully promoting peace and well-being
in Afghanistan. That effort has included the hosting of
a trilateral Ulema conference in Bogor last year, where
prominent ulemas from Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Indonesia undertook to spread the message loudly and
clearly that violence and extremism have no place in
the religion.

In response to today's briefing, we would like to
underline the following points.

First, I will address national reconciliation and
democracy. An Afghan-led and Afghan- owned peace
process, underpinned by a comprehensive intra-Afghan
dialogue, is fundamental. To that end, we welcome
the plan to hold the grand jirga, which we hope will
consolidate the different opinions among Afghans.
Indonesia concurs with the Secretary-General's
observation that

"[t]he current moment represents perhaps the
most significant chance to date for a negotiated
settlement" (S/2019/193, para. 56).

A successful dialogue with all parties without exception
and adherence to the democratic process, including
mainstreaming of acceptance and honouring due rights
for all segments of society, including women, are
critical. There should be no reversals, only progress
in the areas of human rights, rule of law and inclusive
democracy. We call on all the parties to play a positive
role in that regard. It is also important to learn from
past shortcomings in parliamentary elections and to
ensure that adequate preparations are made so that
presidential elections can be held freely, fairly and on
time. We support Ambassador Yamamoto's call for the
successful holding of presidential elections.

Secondly, security must improve. Indonesia is
deeply saddened and shocked by the record number of
civilian casualties for 2018. As Mr. Yamamoto said in
his briefing this morning, UNAMA's data shows an
11 per cent increase in the number of deaths, with a
staggering number of casualties, almost 11,000, nearly
half of them women and children. We also condemn the
increasing attacks on children. Such wanton targeting,
as well as that of essential civilian infrastructure,
is deplorable, as is the number of displaced persons,
which in 2018 reached almost 360,000, half ofwhom are
children. While we call on the Afghan Government to
use the capacity it has to protect its people, we also urge
anyone who has any influence with the insurgents and
terrorists to thwart their vile attacks. We acknowledge
that the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant also remains
a serious danger. No effort must be spared to deal with
and eradicate terrorist groups. The Secretary-General's
report also describes the various parties whose actions
have resulted in civilian casualties. Indonesia implores
everyone to fulfil their obligations under international
human rights law and humanitarian law.

Thirdly, effective State institutions are imperative.
Indonesia hopes that the reforms pursued by the current
Government continue after the election this year. Well-
functioning and accountable governance structures,
justice, transparency and effective anti-corruption
mechanisms also help to build the people's sense of
ownership of the Government's national vision, which
is crucial.

Fourthly, broad-based socioeconomic development
is essential. The Government must increase its focus
on enabling livelihoods for ordinary Afghans across
the country. Nevertheless, we recognize that the recent
drought, and the concomitant increase in the numbers
of displaced people, has added to the strain. This is
another instance where climate change is affecting
livelihoods, peace and security, and the international
community should come up with a fitting response.
Human lives - Afghan lives - are at stake.

In conclusion, I want to emphasize Indonesia's full
support for all measures that hasten Afghanistan's march
towards the dawn of a new era of peace and prosperity.
We must stand united in our sustained efforts to enable
it to emerge from its challenges, rebuild robustly and
care for its people.

