Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I would like first of all to associate myself
with the words of appreciation that have been
expressed to the Chairman of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC), Ambassador Greenstock, and to
thank him both for the comprehensive account of what
has been done by the Committee that he has headed for
the past nine months, and for the efforts that he
personally has been making in order to guarantee such
results.

Thanks to the energetic work being carried out
openly by the CTC under the auspices of the United
Nations, an unprecedented global system to combat
terrorism is being created. We very much appreciate
the fact that in carrying out its work, the Committee
has knitted together all areas of its activity into one
organic whole. First of all, it has undertaken a
comprehensive analysis of the reports submitted to it
on the counter-terrorism measures of various countries,
and secondly, it is seeking concrete ways and means to
provide advice and technical assistance to those States
that need such assistance in order to comply with their
obligations under resolution 1373 (2001).

We welcome the Committee's intention to focus
in particular on cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations in the fight against terrorism.
We believe that cooperation between the CTC and the
Commonwealth of Independent States anti-terrorism
centre and the regional anti-terrorist structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization would prove very
fruitful.

We support the programme of work of the CTC
for the fourth 90-day period. The Committee, in
essence, is entering into a new phase of its work, in
which its major task will be to study the additional
reports submitted by States in response to requests by
the Committee.

Of course, it is important at this stage to define
and clarify the ways and means and methods that will
guide the Committee in making recommendations, in
order to eliminate any gaps or flaws. We are convinced
that the success of this work is guaranteed, given the
dedication of the Council and the Committee as well as
the overall clear understanding that the CTC will not
function as a punitive body or overstep the bounds of
its mandate. This is especially important with respect
to the involvement in the work of the CTC of those
States that, for one reason or another, have not yet
submitted reports to it pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001).

In his letter of 13 June addressed to you, Mr.
President, the Chairman of the CTC concretely and
clearly described the situation and the prospects for the
work of the Committee on this question. The work of
the Committee promotes the establishment of a solid
basis for the comprehensive implementation of the
provisions of resolution 1373 (2001). We believe that
we in the CTC are providing a clear confirmation of
the effective discharge by the Security Council of its
major functions as the body that is responsible, under
the Charter of the United Nations, for the maintenance
of international peace and security. Russia in future
will take an active part in the work of the Committee.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the
delegations that have warmly commended the work of
the Bureau of the CTC.

