Mr. Carneiro (Angola) (spoke in Portuguese; interpretation furnished by the delegation): On behalf of
the Government of the Republic of Angola, I bring
greetings to all members of this Council and express our
heartfelt gratitude for the efforts that the
Secretary-General and the Security Council have made for
the reestablishment of peace and national reconciliation in
Angola.

This moment, perhaps, would have been an excellent
opportunity for Angolans, the United Nations, Africa and
the international community in general to rejoice in
celebration at the end of another peace mission -
provided that it had been successful.

Unfortunately, however, that is not our experience
today as the Security Council proceeds to vote on a draft
resolution terminating the United Nations Observer
Mission in Angola (MONUA), because Mr. Jonas
Savimbi has once again dashed our best hopes for peace,
which have grown over the past three years and since
1994, when the Lusaka Protocol was signed. We should
underscore here that Mr. Savimbi, with this new act of
betrayal of the peace efforts developed by the Angolan
Government and the international community, must never
again be counted upon to assist in resolving the Angolan
conflict, because his personal agenda is incompatible with
any understanding that may be reached concerning the
termination of the conflict in Angola.

 

Mr. Savimbi is trying to seize power at all costs. Since
he was unable to do so through the 1992 elections, he will
pursue his relentless campaign to seize power through the
force of arms so long as he can count on support and
mate'riel from certain quarters in continuing to wage war in
Angola.

The Angolan Government believes that if there were
greater commitment on the part of the international
community and a more exacting mechanism for monitoring
compliance with the United Nations sanctions, Mr. Savimbi
and his armed group would soon be neutralized militarily
and that conditions would then be conducive to the
reestablishment of peace in Angola.

This will become feasible only if we all act in
common cause towards the same objectives, which are
essentially to help Angola put a definitive end to the state
of war that has been the scourge of our country for the past
30 years. This is a deep-felt conviction of the Angolan
Government. We do not believe in the good intentions of
any country that acts in a manner other than that we have
described, even if it does so under the pretext of helping
Angola to become peaceful. Such so-called contributions
are useful only if made in close coordination with the
Angolan Government. In this connection, we would like to
direct an appeal to the countries neighbouring Angola to
break off all contacts with Mr. Savimbi and to suspend all
logistical support that enables him to wage war in Angola.

Concerning Zambia, the Angolan Government firmly
believes that the current diplomatic demarches will prompt
Zambian authorities to become ever more vigilant in
preventing Zambian territory from continuing to be used as
a point of trans-shipment for the military and logistical
materiel that Mr. Savimbi needs for his military campaign.
We firmly believe that as a result of a new cooperation
framework between the Angolan Government and the
United Nations, new and more stringent measures will be
taken to isolate and neutralize Mr. Savimbi.

We hope that telecommunications sanctions will be
adopted by all Member States.

We would like to avail ourselves of this opportunity
to praise the role played by the sanctions committee and the
new and renewed impetus imparted to its activities. We
encourage the committee to do its best so that all Member
States will comply with the sanctions as imposed.

After deliberating here in New York with the members
of the Security Council on a wide range of concepts on the
follow-up configuration of the United Nations
representation in Angola, we are now ready to submit to
our central Government those proposals that in our view
are best suited to the model that the Angolan authorities
would like to see in place in our country. Within a few
days we will convey our position to the Security Council.
In closing, I would like to express on behalf of the
Angolan people our deep appreciation to the United
Nations for the efforts developed by United Nations
Angola Verification Missions I, II and III and by the
United Nations Observer Mission in Angola. We would
also like to pay deeply felt tribute to all United Nations
personnel who sacrificed their own lives for the cause of
peace in Angola. Although the results have fallen short of
an unqualified success, many positive aspects were seen,
and for that we sincerely thank you.

