Mr. Melkert: The 7 March elections for Iraq's
Council of Representatives marked a turning point for
Iraq, as the results will determine the Government that
is to oversee the withdrawal of United States forces in
the course of 2010 and 2011 and govern Iraq during the
next four years. This is an opportunity to further
strengthen the country's sovereignty and to move with
more determination towards reconciliation.

Still, there are reasons for serious concern. I
regret to draw attention to the hard fact that a chilling
number of violent incidents in the year 2010 so far
have left over 2,000 Iraqis dead and 5,000 injured.
Yesterday, newly elected member of parliament Bashar
al-Aqidi was assassinated in a despicable act of crime.
It is imperative that the international community
condemn and isolate the perpetrators. That would be to
the benefit of an orderly transition towards a new
Government as a critical moment for creating a
political environment conducive to meaningful dialogue
and power-sharing.

Against this backdrop, I would like to share some
observations and concerns.

Following the vote recount in Baghdad and the
forthcoming ratification of the electoral results by the
Federal Supreme Court, the first full election cycle in
Iraq will be completed in a credible and successful
way. It is difficult to overstate the importance of this
milestone. It represents a firm rejection by the vast
majority of the Iraqi people of the violent forces and
their objectives.

Despite challenges often highlighted in the
media, what I observed in the post-elections period was
a genuine and shared understanding among all elected
leaders that there is no alternative to respecting the
constitutional basis for the transition to the next
Government. This shared political attitude is key in
assessing the ongoing process, including its time-
consuming features. The latter reflect the absence of
established procedures and customs, as well as
characteristics of the parliamentary system, which is
not unlike those of other countries of the world.

This is not to say that time does not matter, for
the Iraqi voters expect to see the results of their votes,
and destructive forces stand ready to derail progress.
However, the crux is in the determination of political
leaders, as well as of religious and civil society voices,
to establish the country's future on a constitutional
basis in an open and inclusive spirit.
10-37501
As we speak, some signs are positive, others are
less so. From various sides, a round table format has
been suggested for the Government-formation process.
We have advised key leaders to embark upon this
without further delay.

In this context, it would be important for all to
recognize that the constitutional system requires
majority support for all Government positions and
policy agreements. In Iraq's political system, the
election result alone is not a direct guarantee of the
choice of a Prime Minister. Hence the permanent effort
by the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
(UNAMI) to encourage the winning parties to meet and
converge around agreements that, at this stage, could
be guided by three principles: first, a Government
coalition inclusive of all major winning lists; secondly,
a Government based on power-sharing principles; and
thirdly, a Government-formation process within a
tentatively agreed time frame.

Agreeing to such principles could demonstrate
commitment to a specific direction while allowing for
more time for the complex process of consensus-
building to unfold without creating a political vacuum.
Democracy is not necessarily limited to the distinction
between a majority in government and a minority in
opposition. At this juncture, Iraq would probably be
better served by a broadly inclusive Government as a
radical alternative to the exclusion and
disenfranchisement that many communities have
experienced in the past.

Another major challenge ahead is the need to
respond to high expectations that political and security
progress will translate into economic growth and
the creation of jobs, leading to a drastic improvement
of living conditions. The list of infrastructure and
services challenges is immense, with shortages
everywhere, varying from schools and health-care
centres to roads, sewers and electricity. In Iraq, life
expectancy at birth is 58.2 years, as opposed to, for
example, 73.6 years in Syria. The reintegration of
internally displaced persons - many living in appalling
conditions as squatters - and those refugees who want
to return demands far more priority attention and
resources.

The new Government can benefit from policy
directions offered by the National Development Plan.
Yet, it is hard to avoid the conclusion that
reconstruction and reform have often been piecemeal,
10-37501

suffering at times from leadership and capacity gaps. It
is also a concern that, in the current post-election
phase, attention to the economic and social policy
priorities seems virtually absent. Failure by the next
Government to address the needs and aspirations of the
population will predictably be a source of increasing
instability and undermine the gains of the democratic
process so far.

Let me say a few words on areas of United
Nations action. The signing of the first United Nations
Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) on
11 May marked a milestone towards longer-term
economic and human development planning for Iraq,
centring on the five national development priorities
outlined in the Secretary-General's report (S/2010/240).
Resource mobilization to enable United Nations
agencies to play their part in implementing these
priorities will be necessary, as will finding the right
balance between increasing Iraqi contributions and
ongoing commitment from Iraq's partners in the stage
of crucial transition to long-term development
assistance. Currently, the framework for a UNDAF
trust fund is under preparation for discussion among all
partners, with the aim to be operational by the
beginning of 201 1.

The need for a vote recount in Baghdad made it
necessary for UNAMI to continue to dedicate
additional attention and resources to election
management support. The eventual confirmation of the
initial count was a moment of deserved pride for all the
United Nations staff who have tirelessly stood by the
Independent High Electoral Commission in the
delivery of an historic result. In the coming period, the
United Nations election team will work closely with
the United Nations country team to plan for future
electoral events and to strengthen support for relevant
constitutional and parliamentary processes, taking into
account many valuable lessons learned.

Whilst the Government formation process is
gradually evolving, there are opportunities to advance
some of the key outstanding issues more than was
possible in the pre-election period. This particularly
concerns areas crucial to reconciliation that require
action at different levels of engagement.

I am particularly pleased to report that UNAMI'S
impartial outreach, aimed at reconciliation between
different communities and interests in the province of
Ninewa, has generated a positive atmosphere and the
3
possibility of tangible results in the near future.
Building on Deputy Prime Minister Issawi's initiative
of last year, UNAMI is facilitating meetings between
the Governorate of Ninewa and the Kurdistan Regional
Government as a basis for progress in four specific
areas: clarifying responsibilities and involvement in
security policies for Ninewa; facilitating the release or
transfer of Arab detainees held in the Kurdistan region;
strengthening support for and protection of minorities
that are suffering discrimination and attacks, including
the disturbing recent attack on a bus with Christian
students in Mosul; and ending the absence of
representatives from the Kurdish Brotherhood List in
the Ninewa Provincial Council and administration as a
step towards normalizing relations within the
Governorate.

I hope that these first signs of change in
atmosphere and determination bode well for taking up
the task to seriously address the outstanding issues
concerning all so-called disputed areas. These still cast
their shadow on the stability and future of Iraq. The
time has come for all parties to come to terms around
the relevant provisions of the Constitution. To this end,
we are exploring the possibility of expanding the work
of the high-level task force. Our advice to all parties
will be to focus the expanded agenda on, in particular,
principles guiding the management, development and
revenue-sharing of oil production throughout Iraq,
including the Kurdistan region and Kirkuk province; an
approach to achieving consensus on the future
arrangements concerning Kirkuk province; clarification
of the relevant administrative roles and responsibilities
with regard to disputed territories; and practical
modalities for joint security arrangements ensuring
long-term stability.

In many aspects, the effort to achieve
reconciliation has a strong regional dimension. The
future Government should reflect on building an
internal and external consensus on a regional policy for
Iraq. Security, stability and economic growth go hand
in hand, and Iraq and its neighbours would be well
served by capitalizing on the strengths of a region with
so much more potential for progress than we have seen
so far. Constructive engagement, rather than partisan
interference, would be of great benefit to all. The
United Nations should stand ready to facilitate bilateral
and multilateral processes if requested. Importantly,
hosting next year's summit of the League of Arab
States in Baghdad will offer Iraq a unique opportunity
to reinforce a positive agenda of regional engagement
and cooperation.

Not least important in normalizing the position of
Iraq within the region and the wider international
community is the aim to exit Chapter VII as soon as
possible, as are consensus opinion and hope among all
parties in Iraq. I should not hide my concern that signs
of ambivalence seem to stand in the way of advancing
towards good-neighbourly relations with Kuwait.
UNAMI continues to convey the message that
reaffirmation by Iraq of the border demarcated in 1993
and affirmed in resolution 833 (1993) is indispensable
to bringing the resolution of other outstanding issues to
a close, counting on the reassurance of the Government
of Kuwait that normalizing relations is of mutual
interest and benefit.

Finally, reconciliation requires strong commitment
to upholding human rights, which in many ways are
still under tremendous pressure. We urge the authorities
in Baghdad and Erbil to take very seriously the alarm
sounded by the International Federation of Journalists
that violence against journalists in Iraq is again on the
rise, and its call for investigations in two recent
killings. UNAMI is also concerned regarding reports of
ill-treatment and torture in secret detention places.
Stemming the trend of ongoing violence that has hit
scores of innocent citizens yet again requires both
effective security forces and consistent application of
the law in order to avoid a vicious cycle of
infringement of elementary rights.

Allow me finally to draw the Council's attention
to the conditions that should enable the United Nations
to play its mandated roles. At this particular moment,
we have to anticipate important consequences from the
reduction of support services by the United States
forces in light of the drawdown between now and the
end of 2011. Given high security risks to the United
Nations that will likely continue in the foreseeable
future, the ability to provide adequate protection to
United Nations staff remains key when determining the
level and extent of the future presence of the
Organization in Iraq.

We are working more and more with the Iraqi
security forces. It has been established, however, that
the provision by the Iraqi security forces of the full
range of security services that the United Nations
requires will be gradual and will take some time. That
will necessitate a combination of security options
during this transitional period, including by improving
the United Nations own capabilities; gradually
increasing reliance on the Iraqi security forces;
additional support from Member States, especially
more United Nations guards; and, as a last resort,
judiciously outsourcing some security functions, in
accordance with principles outlined in General
Assembly resolution 55/232.

In that regard, the United Nations in Iraq will also
have to work towards becoming self-reliant in the full
range of life-support and logistical services. The ability
to deploy staff to Iraq is directly linked to the
availability of safe accommodation and offices,
together with security and air assets. As the Council is
aware, preparations for a new United Nations
compound in Baghdad are under way, following the
offer by the Government of Iraq of a construction lot
and payment of the initial contribution of $25 million
as part ofa proposed 50 per cent share.

We count on the attention and support of Member
States in the framework of the forthcoming budget
process to enable the United Nations to continue to be
represented in Iraq with the current footprint and, if
possible and as requested by Iraq, more than that. The
alternative will be a reduction in presence with a
negative impact at a time when major tasks are still
ahead and the demand for United Nations support is
already more than can be supplied at the moment.

