The President: May I take it that the Council is
ready to proceed to an eighth ballot? I request the
Conference Officer to distribute the ballot papers.

At the invitation of the President, Mrs. Onanga
(Gabon) and Mrs. Agawa (Nigeria) acted as
tellers.

The President: Members of the Council should
place an "X" in the box next to the name of the
candidate for whom they wish to vote. I would like to
remind members of the Council that only those
candidates whose names appear on the ballot papers
are eligible for election and that ballots containing
votes for more than one candidate will be considered
invalid.

>l<>l<>i<


The President: I take it that all the members of
the Council have now voted and I ask the Conference
Officer to collect the ballot papers.

=x==|<>x<


The President: All the ballot papers have been
collected. I should like to remind Council members
that in accordance with the established practice, the
ballots will not be counted until it has been verified
that the ballot papers in the General Assembly have
also been collected. The Council will remain in session
pending the receipt of that information.

=|==|<>x<


The President: I have now been informed that
the ballot papers have been collected in the General
Assembly. The counting of the ballots in the Security
Council will now begin. The tellers will now count the
ballots. As agreed in our consultations, there will be
two independent countings of the ballots, one by each
teller. I should like to remind Council members that, in
2

accordance with established practice, I shall wait for
the General Assembly to complete its count before I
announce the results of the voting in the Security
Council. The Council will remain in session.

***


The President: The result of the voting is as
follows:

Number of ballot papers: 15
Number of invalid ballots: 0
Number of valid ballots: 15
Number of abstentions: 0
Required majority: 8
Number of votes obtained:

Mr. Abdul G. Koroma 8

Ms. Julia Sebutinde 7

I should like to inform the members of the
Council that I have received from the President of the
General Assembly the following letter:

"I have the honour to inform you that, at the
66th plenary meeting of the General Assembly,
held today for the purpose of electing five
members of the International Court of Justice, the
following candidate obtained an absolute
majority of votes in the General Assembly:
Ms. Julia Sebutinde."

Accordingly, no candidate has received the
required absolute majority of votes in the Council and
in the General Assembly. As fewer than five candidates
have received the required absolute majority of votes
in both the Council and the General Assembly, the
Council shall proceed to a ninth ballot for the
remaining vacancy, in accordance with Article 11 of
the Statute of the International Court of Justice.
However, I have been informed by the President of the
General Assembly that, due to the lateness of the hour,
the Assembly will adjourn its meeting and the ninth
ballot will be scheduled for a date to be announced
later. May I suggest that the Security Council follow
the same procedure?

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The meeting was adjourned at 6p.m.
11-60542

