Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock for their briefings.

The United States remains committed to the people
of Yemen as they continue to endure one of the worst
humanitarian crises in the world. We are concerned by
recent reports of widespread and acute food insecurity
in the country. It is unacceptable that 17 million people,
more than the combined populations of three members
of the Security Council, are in need of immediate food
assistance. Of course, the situation would be much
worse without international assistance. Significant
portions of that assistance have come from the World
Food Programme (WFP), to which the United States
is the largest donor. We are thankful that WFP has
extended its beneficiary reach from roughly 7 million
to more than 12 million individuals per month in 2019.
Those efforts have saved millions of lives.

We also know that sustenance is not enough, which
is why the United States continues to support the health
and economic welfare of the Yemeni population. We
recently announced an award of more than $14 million
to strengthen health systems in Yemen, which will
reduce maternal, neonatal and child mortality over the
next three years. Additionally, we made a $25-million
contribution to support UNICEF's emergency cash
transfer programme, helping millions access goods and
services in the local economy. Those contributions are
just two smaller pieces of the more than $2.2 billion
in United States humanitarian assistance to Yemen
since 2015.
While we are proud to be one of the largest
humanitarian donors to Yemen, the needs are too vast
for any one country to meet. We are grateful to Saudi
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait and others
that have recently dispersed critical funds towards
humanitarian programming in Yemen. The United
Nations must be able to conduct its work helping
suffering Yemenis. Those much-needed funds will
allow it to do so more effectively.

As Under-Secretary-General Lowcock said, the
only way to end the suffering in Yemen is to stop the
war. In that regard, it is critical that we not lose sight
of the goal of reaching a political solution in Yemen.
We continue to support the work of the United Nations
Mission to Support the Hodeidah Agreement and
we are committed to the full implementation of the
Al-Hudaydah Agreement, but that cannot come at the
expense of progress on a broader political solution. The
time has come to pursue both concurrently.

We understand that the Government of the Republic
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council
have made important progress towards reaching an
agreement, and we appreciate Saudi Arabia's efforts
to facilitate that dialogue. We also welcome the
announcement made by the Houthis on 20 September
that they will suspend missile attacks against
Saudi Arabia. It is our hope that this will serve as a
stepping stone to United Nations-led efforts towards a
comprehensive political settlement.

We continue to call on all parties to exercise
restraint, respect Government institutions underpinning
economic stability, refrain from imposing bureaucratic
impediments to the humanitarian response and allow
humanitarian aid workers unhindered access to the
civilians affected by the unrest. We hope that those
concrete actions will lead to further de-escalation in
Yemen and that they will help Special Envoy Griffiths
and his team galvanize the political process. Too many
people have suffered from that conflict for far too long;
now is the time for concrete action.

