Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom is appalled by the decision of Russia
and China to veto the draft resolution (S/2012/538)
aimed at bringing an end to the bloodshed in Syria and
at creating the conditions for a meaningful political
process. This is the third time that Russia and China
have blocked the efforts of the Council to address the
crisis in Syria.

More than 14,000 innocent Syrians have been killed
since Russia and China first vetoed our efforts to stem
the violence in October 2011 (see S/PV.6627). Since
then, the regime has intensified its use ofheavy weapons
in population centres, including the use of artillery and
helicopter gunships. More than 100 civilians are being
killed every day. The events in Damascus over the past
48 hours demonstrate the need for urgent and decisive
action by the Security Council to stop the downward
spiral into chaos, which will claim many more innocent
lives and affect the stability of the region. Meanwhile,
the United Nations Supervision Mission in Syria
(UNSMIS) has been rendered inoperable due to the
dangerous security situation.

Against that backdrop, we proposed eight days
ago a draft resolution aimed at changing the situation
on the ground for the better. Its logic was simple and
clear - to use the collective weight of the Council to
provide greater support to the work of the Joint Special
Envoy of the United Nations and the League of Arab
States and his efforts to secure implementation of his
six-point plan. In so doing, we were aiming to create
the prospect of a reduction in violence by all sides
and the conditions for the political process agreed by
the ministerial Action Group for Syria in Geneva on
30 June, and to promote a conducive environment in
which the United Nations Mission could resume its
operations. We put the draft resolution under Chapter
VII of the Charter as a clear signal to all parties that
their commitments were binding.

Both the Secretary-General and Mr. Annan had
repeatedly requested that the Council stipulate serious
consequences for non-compliance with the six-point
plan and resolutions 2042 (2012) and 2043 (2012). That
is precisely what we did in proposing draft resolution
S/2012/538. It is an approach supported by the Arab
League and all key regional actors. It focuses on the
removal of heavy weapons as a first step, because
we had been repeatedly told by the Envoy and the
Secretary-General that it was the first and most urgent
problem that must be tackled and the one most likely to
alter the dynamic on the ground.

Yet throughout the negotiation process, Russia
and China chose not to support the course of action
proposed by the Envoy. They claimed their agreement
to a transition plan in Geneva as a great step forward,
but when it came to turning words into action, taking
the decisions required to implement the two resolutions
that they have supported and securing an improvement
on the ground that might eventually lead to progress
against the transition plan, they chose to refuse
engagement.

They argued that a Chapter VII draft resolution
was somehow designed to seek military action through
the back door. Those arguments are irrational. The
Council has adopted many Chapter VII resolutions,
most recently on the Sudan and South Sudan. Today's
draft resolution, like that one, was set under Article 41.
It was not under Article 42 of the Charter and could
not therefore be construed as a precursor to military
intervention.

We offered flexibility on Russia and China's
concerns and gave them more time. But still, they
refused to engage. Instead, they advocated more of
the same approach that has consistently failed to have
an effect. Instead of the pressure that Mr. Annan had
requested, they advocated relying on Al-Assad's empty
promises - the same promises that had been made and
broken with predictable consistency since November
last year. Instead of trying to generate the conditions
in which the United Nations Mission could become
effective, they argued for its extension in a manner that
willfully ignored the fact that it was currently unable
to operate.

By exercising their veto today, Russia and China
have failed in their responsibilities as permanent
members of the Security Council to help resolve the
crisis in Syria. They have failed to provide the Joint
Envoy and the Secretary-General with the support they
have asked for. They have failed the people of Syria.
They have, for the third time, blocked an attempt by the
majority of the Council and supported by most of the
international community to try a new approach. The
effect of their actions will be to protect a brutal regime.
They have chosen to put their national interests ahead
of the lives of millions of Syrians.
The consequences of their decision are
obvious - further bloodshed and the likelihood of a
descent into all-out civil war. For our part, we shall
continue to work with the Envoy, the Secretary-General
and responsible members of the international
community to achieve the political transition that is the
only way forward for Syria. It is deeply regrettable that
the Council has been unable today to play the role for
which it was established and is duty-bound to fulfil.

