Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): Mr. President, allow me
to convey my congratulations to you and the Arab
Republic of Egypt on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May. Also, allow
me to express my gratitude to you for organizing this
highly important debate.

I wish to associate myself with the statement made
by the representative of Thailand on behalf of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Since the turn of the twenty-first century, terrorism
has grown increasingly transnational, and the threat of
the next terror attack has become ever-present. Indeed,
this threat has no territorial limits, it knows no borders,
and any city of the world could be the next target.
Playing on the emotional reactions of anger, fear,
and anxiety among the general population, terrorist
organizations have been publicizing their despicable
crimes on the Internet, targeting social media platforms
to spread their message of violence and contempt for
humankind. Regrettably, their efforts have enabled the
recruitment of supporters.

My delegation is deeply concerned by the intensity
and spread of terrorist attacks. We need to work
closely together in countering the spread of terrorism
and counteracting the violent narratives and distorted
ideologies of these terrorist groups. In the fight against
terrorism, countering extremist ideology and the
narrative is one of the most important objectives to
achieve. In this context, the international community
must adopt an integrated social, economic and political
response that would counteract the message of
violence and destruction with a message of peace and
prosperity. In this light, my delegation believes that
the United Nations can play a central role in designing
a comprehensive international strategy aimed at
countering and refuting the extremist ideologies of
terrorist organizations.

To that end, a number of measures could be
considered, including addressing the root causes
of violent conflict, promoting education and civic
engagement in the attainment of the sustainable
development agenda, and engaging the United Nations
and its specialized agencies in the dissemination of a
strategic agreed counter-narrative. It is important to
note that any and all measures undertaken in this regard
should be in full accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, respecting the principles of sovereign
equality, territorial integrity and non-intervention in
domestic affairs.

When it comes to terrorist recruits, there is
no unified profile for law enforcement officials to
concentrate on. The age, gender, social background
and motivations of recruits vary on a case-by-case
basis, making standard solutions difficult to apply. The
international community should focus on addressing
the root causes of violent conflict. Conflict prevention
is the prerequisite for sustainable peace and respect of
human rights. Undercutting terrorist recruitment and
the spread of terrorism globally requires the adequate
and stable implementation of social, political and
economic conditions so as to put an end to long-lasting
regional conflicts.

In your concept note, Mr. President, you rightly
say that terrorist "propaganda exploits perceptions
of economic and political disenfranchisement among
young Muslim women and men" (S/2016/416, annex, para. 5), leading to their radicalization and joining of
terrorist forces. As such, in promoting peace, stability
and socioeconomic development, it is important
to involve young people in the development of the
future we want. The promotion of civic engagement
programmes involving young people in the attainment
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/1), as well as the
Paris Agreement on Climate Change, will empower
young people and provide them with a sense of
purpose. Furthermore, the promotion of education and
volunteering programmes will provide young people
with a sense of ownership in the implementation of
global sustainable development action, breaking them
away from the cycle of violence.

In our efforts to silence the extremist narratives
and distorted ideologies of terrorist groups and thereby
turn young people away from violence, it is important
that the global community speak with one voice. That
voice is best heard through the work and actions of the
United Nations and its specialized agencies.

In practicing preventive diplomacy, we must decide
on the core message of the United Nations, a message
that would resonate globally, yet apply comfortably to
local conditions. That message should be easy to spread
in the print media and over the Internet, and be in line
with the Charter of the United Nations. Moreover,
the content of the message should be integrated into
the work of the United Nations itself, with United
Nations staff members receiving clear communication
guidelines on how to inform the public about their work
more effectively.

Developing such a unified counter-terrorism
narrative could further strengthen the values of peace
embraced by the Organization. Naturally, those efforts
will require political and financial support so as to
enable effective global action. As such, capacity-
building, technological capabilities and financing
should be ensured, so that less developed States can be
active actors for development, thus contributing to the

maintenance of international peace and security.
