Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Secretary-General Ban, Minister Mohamed and
Commissioner Chergui for their briefings. I offer
thanks to each of them as well as to the Ministers who
have shown the importance of the issue before us by
making the long trip here to New York. We are very
grateful.

Preventing conflicts and promoting stability in
Africa is obviously an immensely important subject for
the Security Council to focus on. The list of political,
economic and social factors to debate is long, as is the
list oftools that we have at our disposal. But at a moment
when conflicts are re-emerging in Africa and too many
other States are on the brink, the Council needs to do
more than debate lessons learned. It needs to reaffirm
the principles that are fundamental to ending conflicts
and take concrete steps to translate them into practice.

National ownership of peacebuilding processes is
important, as many speakers have highlighted today
and as many more speakers will continue to do. But
national ownership cannot be a pretext for the Council
or the international community to defer reflexively
to Governments when we know their practices are
undermining or failing to enhance peace and security.
And this happens too often. Especially when the Council
authorizes major peacekeeping missions to restore
stability, we must hold political leaders accountable for
committing to the process of stopping violence, abiding
by the rule of law and strengthening State institutions.
I will set up the importance of sustaining political will
across the different stages of the peacebuilding process,
drawing upon South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia as examples.

First, the violence in South Sudan this past
month shows what happens when political leaders
fail to commit to peace at the start of a peacebuilding
intervention. In just four days of fighting in Juba, from
7 to 11 July, more than 36,000 people were displaced.
The United Nations reported that the number of
refugees who arrived in Uganda from South Sudan on
21 July was the largest single day total for this conflict
in more than two years - some 8,337 new arrivals,
many of whom had spent days on foot, often with little
more than the clothes on their backs, to reach safety.
Women and children make up more than 90 per cent of
the refugees who have left South Sudan since 7 July.

The international community has spent billions of
dollars trying to avert a famine in the country, money
that, if not for this man-made conflict, a conflict that
contributes to severe acute malnutrition, prevents
planting and stymies the economy completely, could
have been dedicated to building roads, economic
development, girls' education and boys' education; it
has been a total waste. And yet we have to continue
to mobilize resources to try to keep this long-suffering
population living with some basic dignity and
living - surviving - in the first place.

Gruesome atrocities are being committed daily,
with civilians targeted and killed, women raped,
homes looted and destroyed. Both Government- and
opposition-affiliated soldiers have been implicated in
these horrors. Yet there has been no effort to hold the
perpetrators accountable, which then compounds the
tendency to ascribe collective guilt, which in turn fuels
ethnic targeting, which in turn further fuels the cycle of
violence. Amid all of the foregoing, to quote a 42-year-
old from South Sudan named James Benjamin Wani,
who asked a simple question of a reporter after days of
fighting in Juba: "Why do our leaders not want to sit
down and solve their problems? Let them hear us. Let
them cry. We do not want fighting. We want peace."

The level of misrepresentation of the population by
leadership that will not commit to the implementation
of the steps that the international community has
rallied behind is clear. For years we have been asking
questions similar to those asked by this 42-year-old
man. In 2011, we invested heavily in South Sudan's
future by giving the United Nations Mission in the
Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) a mandate to assist
the State at all levels - building institutions, fostering
economic development, reforming the security sector
and promoting human rights. At every step the Mission
sought to collaborate closely with the Government of
South Sudan, taking pains to avoid imposing solutions.
UNMISS was designed with peacebuilding best
practices in mind. It was South Sudan's leaders who
failed to live up to their end of the bargain by being
unable to put their personal power struggles aside.

We now have to come together as a Council, as an
international community, around a single approach to
end the violence in South Sudan and, more importantly,
to prevent its recurrence. In the immediate term,
this means working with and present South Sudan's
leadership to provide for security in Juba, to safeguard
freedom of movement and to provide for unfettered
humanitarian access. It also means answering the calls
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union for strengthening UNMISS so
that the Mission can better protect civilians and help
establish a secure environment so the parties can in fact
make political progress.

Restoring security in Juba may be necessary but we
all know it is far from sufficient. South Sudan's leaders
must govern on behalf of their people and demonstrate
the political will for peace. In practical terms, the parties
need to carry out the reform pillars in the August 2015
Peace Agreement, professionalizing the security sector,
carrying out economic reforms, promoting justice and
accountability and drafting a constitution. What all of
this underscores is that peacebuilding, as others have
noted, is itself a form of conflict prevention, and it is
one form that collectively we need to double down on in
a country where too much tragedy has been happening
for too long. This formula is not revolutionary or
even new; the difference is that the members of the
Security Council, together with partners in the region
and the international community, must redouble our
collective efforts to influence the choices made every
day by individuals who comprise the South Sudanese
leadership.

On the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we
have a country now entering a later phase of its
peacebuilding process as it prepares for elections.
Further progress depends on President Joseph Kabila's
political commitment to upholding the Constitution.
The Congolese have spent many years building a
relative peace with the support of billions of dollars
invested in the peacekeeping mission there, that is,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic People's Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO). President Kabila is barred from running
for a third time when his term expires at the end of the
year but there are serious concerns that elections will
not be held in accordance with the Constitution.

As the deadline for elections approaches, instability,
as we have seen, is growing, which is why the United
States has stressed the need for an environment that
supports international efforts to bring Congolese
stakeholders together to determine a way forward. And
yet, at precisely the moment a dialogue is needed to
resolve these tensions, the Government is closing off
space for the political opposition and civil-society
groups to assemble and has not taken adequate steps to
release political prisoners.
In recent months, the Government has continued
to harass and imprison politicians and civil-society
activists, and peaceful protests have all too often
ended with arbitrary arrests, injuries and even death.
According to United Nations reports, the Government
arbitrarily detained dozens of people during opposition
rallies in April and May, and clashes between protesters
and security forces led to deaths and injuries on both
sides. With major rallies planned for this very week, and
with the return of opposition leader Etienne Tshisekedi
yesterday, we call on the Government and security
forces to respect the fundamental rights of citizens to
peaceful assembly. Again, that is not a matter of purely
domestic concern, but is an extension of the objectives
that the Council has supported since MONUSCO
deployed six years ago to help build a fragile peace.

Thirdly, and finally, Somalia's leaders have to
show the political will to extend State authority and
develop functioning democratic institutions. The
Federal Government must match the achievements of
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in
building security with commensurate steps to build
institutions to keep people safe.

AMISOM's troop contributors deserve the
Council's immense gratitude for the Mission's ability
to improve security for the Somali people, especially
around the capital. Their sacrifices, especially over the
last year, have been mind-blowing. The United States
condemns in the strongest terms the attack this past
week by Al-Shabaab on the United Nations base at the
Mogadishu international Airport - just the latest in a
wave of heinous attacks.

AMISOM. has a critical role to play, as the
Security Council has recognized and endorsed, but the
Government does as well. And that is why the Council's
interest in Somalia does not end with AMISOM's
performance. Just as in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Somalia has made progress towards a durable
peace based on the success of the political steps taken
by the Government. The Council should welcome
the agreement on an electoral model for 2016 and
encourage its swift implementation as a step towards
universal direct elections by 2020. Yet for that process
to succeed, President Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and
his Government must accelerate the training of the
Somali national army and the process of building State
institutions, and all of us must, of course, chip in to
support the Government as they do that. In particular,
the Government needs to strengthen the protection of
human rights, including by showing respect for free
expression and the media and by holding security forces
accountable when they commit violations.

We all know that the conditions in Somalia and the
circumstances and the steps that I have described are
not only difficult but downright daunting. And they
will, of course, take time. But military victories alone
will not bring peace, unless the Government takes
concrete steps to establish peace and extend its reach.

While South Sudan, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Somalia each face very different
challenges, the common principle is that success in
peacebuilding requires political will. There are only
so many workarounds that the region and the Security
Council can come up with.The Council has authorized
a peacekeeping mission for each of those countries in
order to help restore stability; but at every stage, the
Council has to remain focused on taking steps to ensure
that leaders make choices in the service of peace.

Amid the violence in South Sudan, the BBC reported
recently that a group of musicians called the "All Stars"
gathered to write a song speaking out against revenge
killing. The song, written in multiple South Sudanese
dialects, includes the lyric "I wish my talent could be a
weapon. I would use it to protect my people."

There are so many South Sudanese who share that
group's desire to protect people from conflict just to
keep their families safe. We must harness our tools to
help create an environment in which such talent can be
harnessed and in which peace can, at last, take hold.

