President Kaljulaid: I thank you, Mr. President, for
convening today's open debate. We in Estonia remain
committed to Secretary-General Guterres' reform
agenda. Reforms should take us to a more effective
United Nations, with a clear emphasis on conflict
prevention and mediation. Our peacekeeping operations
must have tangible targets and exit strategies. To be
effective, the operations must have built-in flexibility,
as the surrounding situation is inevitably volatile.

The best information about the changing needs
come from our mission commanders and other field
entities. Applying their suggestions guarantees
automatic adaptation to changes on the ground. In
addition, listening to those in the field and taking into
account what they have to say is good for the motivation
of our field staff. We need those with courage to reach
out to us decision makers. These people are with us only
if we respond in a receptive manner. Thus, we create a
positive circuit of adaptation necessary to achieve our
peacekeeping objectives.

To achieve sustainable peace, partnership with
regional organizations, host Governments and local
communities is vital. It is best done by demonstrating
day after day how important it is for us to protect
civilians, assure the sustainability of the rule of law,
respect for human rights and international law, and
to involve local actors in supporting the core values
underlying all our actions.

Peacekeeping operations need to be complemented
with activities aimed at effectively improving the living
conditions of the affected populations, including the
quick implementation of effective and visible projects
that create jobs and deliver basic social services in the
post-conflict phase. Also, all mechanisms to support
women's full participation in peacebuilding and
security issues are vital, as they will also guarantee the
best protection of children in mission areas.

We can achieve sustainable peace only if we have
a thorough and broad understanding of conflicts and
their root causes. In that regard, it is unfortunate
that the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali will be left without its
intelligence unit. The latter provided decision makers
on all levels with unique understanding of the issues
at hand.

United Nations peacekeeping operations have an
essential role to play in securing peace and stability
globally. Unfortunately, peacekeeping operations are
sometimes seen as a waste of resources, with a lack
of positive outcomes, but we know that the truth is
quite the opposite, and we must find ways to make that
common knowledge. Communication is an important
guarantee of the continued support of general public.

Wide attention via modern channels is difficult
to achieve, but it is rapidly becoming one of the most
efficient tools for sharing our objectives, actions and
achieved results. As research shows, peacekeeping
reduces the number of civilians killed. Moreover, it is
also cost-effective. The United Nations peacekeeping
budget is less than half of l per cent of global military
spending, and it is shared among all 193 United Nations
Member States. That is the simple truth that we have
every right to be proud of while we continue to aspire
to the constant improvement of our peacekeeping
activities, as we should do in this unpredictable world.

