Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to express my deep appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate today to
discuss the threats to peace and security in West Africa
and the Sahel region, especially in the light of the
expansion of transnational organized crime and its
links to the illicit spread of small arms and light and
heavy weapons and to other phenomena such as the
smuggling of rare metals, the trafficking in illicit drugs
and the increase in cross-border activities by armed
groups. Such activities also include terrorist activities,
piracy and armed robbery.

Those phenomena, as the Council well knows, are
fuelled by open borders between most States in West
Africa and the Sahel region and by tribal links among
the various population groups and individuals that live
along the borders in those States. This situation has
subjected each of our States to the direct effects of the
security and stability situations in neighbouring
countries. Those influences and effects can be both
positive and negative.
Several States in our region have carried out great
efforts to contain the activities of transnational armed
groups. Here, for example, I would like to mention my
country's experience, together with the Republic of
Chad and the Central African Republic. Through close
cooperation, we have achieved great results in
containing infiltration across borders and strengthening
communication channels so that they could be a bridge
for cooperation among us, rather than a tool to export
violence and transnational crimes.

The Council has also heard from a number of
speakers who discussed the regional plan of action
adopted by the Economic Community of West African
States, which includes practical steps in this regard,
similar to what we have agreed upon with Chad and the
Central African Republic.

We reaffirm the importance of having the
participation of the international community,
specifically the United Nations and international
partners such as the World Bank, in support of these
initiatives, especially since several States in the region
were directly affected by the repercussions of the fall
of the Al-Qadhafi regime in Libya. We should take into
consideration that the Al-Qadhafi regime was a strong
supporter of many destructive activities and a sponsor
of many armed groups. Those groups supported his
brigades during the Libyan revolution. After the fall of
that regime, those groups infiltrated the borders of
neighbouring countries, such as the Sudan, with all
their weapons and ammunitions.

In this context, I would like to recall the
complaint lodged by the Sudan to the Security Council
on 29 December 2011 (S/2011/810), when we
explained that there were remnants of the Justice and
Equality Movement that were active in Darfur and
which had crossed with all of their weapons and
ammunitions into the State of South Sudan. Those
forces had been fighting side by side with the brigades
of the former regime of Colonel Al-Qadhafi. The
Sudanese forces confronted them. However, they
escaped and crossed into the State of South Sudan. We
informed the Security Council of the locations where
these forces are now in the State of South Sudan. I will
repeat once again for the Council's benefit that they are
now in the Tensaha area and that they are armed with
the weapons they smuggled and had received from the
Al-Qadhafi regime.

We would like the Council to translate its words
into deeds. Those are the organizations and the armed
groups that undermine and threaten peace and security
in Central and West Africa and in all parts of Africa.
Those forces crossed with about 79 vehicles fully
loaded with weapons from Libya, including
37-millimetre guns and 40-millimetre grenade
launchers. That is a living example of the danger of the
infiltration and border-crossing by armed groups.

We had expected that the Security Council would
deal with our complaint with greater attention and
grant it the special, urgent treatment it deserves. We
hope that our deliberations today will remind the
Council of the importance of dealing firmly with such
infractions, which constitute a true threat to security,
peace and stability in all the States of the region.

