Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke in French): I would like to thank our briefers today.

We share the frustration over the delay in
implementing the agreement on Al-Hudaydah
redeployment plan. Given the humanitarian emergency,
it must not fail. We therefore welcomed this morning's
announcement of an agreement on the first phase of
redeployment, and we call on all parties to implement it
as soon as possible. We also call on all the parties to fully
respect the ceasefire and to implement the agreement
in good faith generally. In that regard, we reiterate our
full support for the efforts of Special Envoy Martin
Griffiths and Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard.

Secondly, efforts to improve the catastrophic
humanitarian situation continue to be crucial. I would
like to echo the call made by Under-Secretary-General
Mark Lowcock regarding humanitarian access,
particularly access to the Red Sea Mills. We also heard
his call to disburse our pledges as soon as possible.
Belgium's contribution to the Yemen Humanitarian
Fund will be available in May, and we call on other
contributors to do the same.

Thirdly, we are particularly concerned about the
situation of children in Yemen. They are the main
victims of this conflict, as Special Representative
Virginia Gamba has just described. Children have been
recruited, killed and even mutilated by all the parties.
Air strikes are still hitting schools and hospitals even
though the coalition was censured for this violation
last year. Sexual violence is a major issue, and child
marriage has increased dramatically. There have been
several cases of denial of access to humanitarian aid for
children. We therefore call on all the parties to respect
international humanitarian law and take effective and
urgent measures to end all such violations. In that
context, we welcome the signing of a memorandum of
understanding between the Special Representative and
the coalition, and we look forward to the development
of a programme of activities for implementing it in a
concrete and meaningful way. We ask Mr. Griffiths to
ensure that child-protection measures are at the heart of
the peace process.

Finally, Ms. Muna Luqman's courageous testimony
reflects the importance of civil society in Yemen. Her
experience as a mediator in Taiz shows the importance
of involving women in peace processes and in the
implementation of agreements.

