The President (spoke in Russian): I will now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
Russian Federation.

I wanted to comment on the Prosecutor's report,
but there is basically nothing to comment on. There has
been zero progress in the investigations. The report, a
document that in theory should deal with the Court's
activity, is largely devoted to listing the international
travels of the President of the Sudan, while the rest of it
is stuffed with quotations from the Secretary-General's
reports and verbatim transcripts of Security Council
expert briefings.

One topic, however, is worthy of attention and I will
consider it in more detail. The International Criminal
Court (ICC) continues to call on States Members of the
United Nations, including those that are not party to
the Rome Statute, to arrest and turn over to the Court
various subjects of its investigative activities. I am
referring in particular to the arrest of the President of
the Sudan based on resolution 1593 (2005). However, the
resolution clearly states that States that are not party to
the Rome Statute have no obligation under it, and they
are therefore not required to satisfy this type of request
from the ICC. If my memory does not deceive me, that
was inserted into the resolution at the suggestion of the

United States. However, the mere fact that a situation
has been referred to the ICC by the Security Council
does not automatically cancel the immunity of official
representatives of the Governments involved. We hope
that the States parties to the Statute also realize that.

The immunity of Government officials from
criminal prosecution is one of the key norms of
customary international law and an extremely
important factor for stability in international relations.
According to customary law, there are no exceptions to
the personal immunity of high officials, while all other
government officials enjoy functional immunity. What
the ICC has created, therefore, is a situation where
we are seeing States consistently refusing to comply
with the warrants issued by The Hague for the arrest
of the President of the Sudan. This is not surprising.
Governments act based on their international legal
obligations. This situation will continue to steadily
erode the level of trust in the International Criminal
Court. That, alas, is the reality and our assessment of
the situation. I am therefore unfortunately compelled
to say that the ICC today is not a body capable of
effectively carrying out the tasks that the Security
Council originally entrusted to it.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.

