Mr. Lim Yoon Boon (Singapore): The delegation
of Singapore would like to express its sincere
appreciation to the President of the Security Council
for organizing this open debate on piracy off the coast
of Somalia.

Over the past few years, significant progress has
been made by the international community in tackling
the scourge of piracy in the Gulf of Aden and off the
coast of Somalia. That demonstrates the important
roles that user States and other stakeholders can play to
complement the efforts of littoral States in combating
piracy and ensuring the safe and secure transit of ships
through key sea lanes. It also reflects the reality that no
single State acting on its own has the necessary
capacity to solve the complex security challenges that
we face today. As such, international and regional
cooperation, carried out in accordance with
international law, is necessary.

As a major maritime nation, Singapore shares the
concerns of the international community regarding the
situation in the Gulf of Aden. We fully support the
ongoing efforts by both the United Nations and the
International Maritime Organization to address the
piracy situation there. Aside from actively participating
in the work of the Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia, Singapore has also deployed military
assets, including our landing ship tanks and Super
Puma helicopters, to Combined Task Force 151 to help
patrol the Gulf of Aden. This year, we were honoured
to take command of Combined Task Force 151 from
20 January to 21 April. We will soon deploy a maritime
patrol aircraft this year to assist in surveillance
operations in the Gulf. Those efforts demonstrate our
commitment to helping to ensure the security of key
sea lanes.

While these seaward operations by various
countries have gone some way in helping to deter the
threat of piracy in the Gulf of Aden, it is clear that a
permanent solution will not be possible without
addressing issues on land, such as the prosecution and
imprisonment of captured pirates. In that connection,
the Secretary-General's report on the options regarding
the prosecution and imprisonment of pirates is timely
(S/2010/394).

Singapore is of the view that the international
community should study which of the options outlined
in the report are the most practical, cost-effective and
time-efficient in terms of implementation. The
deliberation over the various options should also not
preclude the complementary nature of both the
international and regional approaches to piracy
prosecution or the continuation of efforts to build the
capacity of the States in the Gulf of Aden, which is
listed in option 1 of the report. As noted in the report,
that option has already achieved some success in that
respect. We also encourage the Transitional Federal
Government of Somalia to redouble its efforts at
reconciliation to find lasting peace, security and
stability in Somalia.

