Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): My delegation wishes to
take this opportunity to express its highest appreciation
to the head of the mission, Ambassador Verbeke, for
his very able stewardship and finesse in guiding our
mission.
We would also like to express our appreciation to
the Secretariat for organizing the mission, as well as to
all parties that facilitated the work of our mission to
Kosovo.

Being a newly-elected member of this body, the
delegation of Indonesia has amply benefited from the
visit. For that reason, we would like to thank the
Russian delegation for proposing the visit at a time
when the Security Council has to decide on the future
of Kosovo.

The visit has given us detailed information and
valuable inputs on the issue under discussion. Meetings
with various political, religious and community
leaders, as well as field visits, enhanced and refined
our understanding of the various dimensions of the
issue at hand. We can comfortably and confidently
assert that we now have a better and clearer view of the
lssue.

The mission confirmed our perception that the
issue of Kosovo is a sensitive and delicate matter, and
that it may be difficult to find a good solution that can
satisfy both sides. However, we are determined to take
steps to assist the region in moving forward in a
peaceful and just manner. To that end, the legitimate
concerns of all sides have to be taken into account.

Geographically, Indonesia is located far from
Kosovo. In its political considerations, however, the
issue of Kosovo is close to all of us. This is an issue of
human tragedy; it is an issue of protecting civilians;
and it is also an issue that has consequences far beyond
Kosovo's natural borders. For those reasons, my
Government is following the issue with great caution.

During the visit, we could vividly sense the deep
animosity among communities that hinders cooperation
and dialogue. While the issue of internally displaced
persons and refugees fleeing by the hundreds of
thousands has yet to be resolved, the most important
need is the creation of a suitable environment for
reconciliation. The region can come to terms with the
past and build an enduring peace only if the
communities are ready to accept and work out their
differences. It is a moving experience to see families
torn apart by violence and taken away from their
familiar roots. The Security Council has a moral
obligation to heal the wounds of those communities so
that they can embrace today and plan for the future.

Reconciliation has never been easy or smooth
sailing for any society torn apart. It is a long and
difficult journey. Unfortunately, there is no quick fix or
shortcut. There is only a long and difficult route, but it
is a journey worth taking. Without reconciliation, those
societies will forever live in a world filled with hatred
and bigotry, no matter what the change of status may
be. Violence will recur no matter how we try to prevent
it. It is a matter only of when and where, and not of
why.

The visit and today's meeting are overtures for
more constructive discussion and consultations among
members of the Security Council. Indonesia, for its
part, is ready to continue extensive consultations with
all relevant parties, in particular members of the
Security Council, to find a way of dealing with the
matter in a just, balanced and comprehensive manner.
The weeks and months ahead will be difficult for all of
us, but the success of our visit is a good omen for the
Council.

Finally, let me once again reiterate our
appreciation to the head of the mission, Ambassador
Verbeke.

