Mr. Gilmore: It is a pleasure and an honour for
me to speak before the Security Council in my capacity
as Chairperson-in-Office of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). In my
address today, I will outline the main priorities of
Ireland's OSCE chairmanship and also discuss a
number of key issues common to both of our
organizations.

With 56 participating States covering a
population of over 1 billion, the OSCE is the world's
largest regional organization under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter. The United Nations and the
OSCE are founded on core principles and common
values. We share a common belief in a comprehensive
approach to security that addresses that challenge in all
of its dimensions.

In my address to the OSCE Permanent Council in
January, I outlined that Ireland would adopt a
pragmatic and fair-minded approach to our
chairmanship responsibilities. I noted that our aim was
to elaborate a set of priorities that would ensure a
balanced and coherent approach across all three
dimensions: politico-military, economic and
environmental, and human. I can assure the Security
Council today that we Will take forward work in all
areas in 2012. We will do everything in our power to
achieve concrete results and deliver tangible benefits. I
am firmly committed to the OSCE's concept of a
common, comprehensive and indivisible security based
2
on a cross-dimensional set of agreed principles and
commitments.

Ireland has always attached importance to the
human dimension, and we will have an ambitious
agenda this year. The Irish chairmanship will work
closely with the Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, the OSCE High Commissioner on
National Minorities, and the Office of the
Representative on Freedom of the Media to address
specific instances where OSCE commitments are not
being met and to take forward a number of key issues.

We intend to prioritize the issue of internet
freedom. As in other parts of the world, the threat to
freedom of expression online is ever-present in the
OSCE region and appears to be growing. We will work
to ensure that existing OSCE commitments in relation
to freedom of expression and freedom of the media
apply to all forms and means of their exercise. As part
of these efforts, we intend to organize a conference in
Dublin in June for OSCE participating States, at which
we will aim to move towards a common understanding
of the issues at stake.

Human dimension events are also planned on a
range of other topics. We intend to organize meetings
focused on freedom of association and assembly,
freedom of religion and belief, trafficking in human
beings, and racism and intolerance in sport. Ireland
also intends to maintain the highest standards for
OSCE election observation activities. This year will
see important elections throughout the OSCE region.

In the politico-military dimension, we hope to see
continued progress on the updating of confidence- and
security-building measures and enhancement of the
conflict prevention capacity of the OSCE. We will take
forward work that will enable the OSCE to deepen its
involvement in all phases of the conflict cycle and to
strengthen its capacity to tackle conflict, from
prevention to resolution. In this regard, we will work
closely with OSCE Secretary General, Lamberto
Zannier, on implementation of the conflict cycle
decision that was agreed at the Vilnius ministerial
meeting.

We will examine the options available to us to
achieve progress in the areas of arms control, conflict
prevention and resolution, and transnational threats,
which pose challenges to all of our societies. In
relation to the updating of the Vienna Document, we
will work with the chairs of the Forum for Security
12-2284]
Cooperation to build on the good results achieved last
year. We will also encourage participating States that
are party to the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces
in Europe to strive to overcome the current impasse in
this area.

A shared challenge for our two organizations is to
ensure close and effective cooperation to tackle
complex transnational threats. One key area of shared
interest is counter-terrorism, where the focus of the
OSCE's activity is to support the implementation of
United Nations anti-terrorism instruments. The OSCE
also cooperates closely with the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime. During our chairmanship, we will
build on our joint efforts to tackle transnational threats
such as organized crime, cyberthreats - including
cybercrime - drugs, terrorism and trafficking.

Within the economic and environmental
dimension, the core theme of the Irish chairmanship
will be the promotion of security and stability through
good governance. We firmly believe that weak
governance undermines economic development and
exposes states to greater security risks. Here, too, we
see great potential for building on the existing
cooperation with the United Nations in this field.

Ireland's ratification last year of the United
Nations Convention against Corruption signals our
determination to further international cooperation in
this area. The United Nations Convention is a
comprehensive anti-corruption treaty that requires
countries to implement legal and regulatory regimes
within both the private and public sectors. The OSCE
Ministerial Council decision on combating corruption
specifically highlights this Convention and encourages
OSCE participating States to ratify it. During our
chairmanship, we will promote further dialogue within
the OSCE on the role it can play to support and
encourage implementation of the Convention.

During our chairmanship, we will focus in
particular on measures to counter corruption, money-
laundering and terrorist financing. We will also
consider the issue of confiscation of the proceeds of
criminal activity. In this regard, we intend to highlight
the work of Ireland's Criminal Assets Bureau as a
model for other participating States to consider.

As Chairperson-in-Office, I will seek ways in
which progress can be made towards lasting
settlements of a number of conflicts that persist in the
OSCE area. Among these are the conflicts in Moldova
12-22841

regarding the territory of Transdniestria; in Georgia
regarding the territories of Abkhazia and South
Ossetia; and the Nagorno Karabakh conflict. I have
appointed two Special Representatives to assist me in
addressing these complex conflicts.

As regards Moldova and Transdniestria, we stand
ready to build on the momentum achieved by Lithuania
with the successful resumption of the official 5+2
talks. We look forward to hosting the first official talks
under our chairmanship in Dublin later this month.

The situation in Georgia, particularly the
humanitarian situation, is a matter of utmost concern.
Ireland strongly supports the Geneva discussions in
facilitating engagement and a way forward for all
concerned. We very much welcome the rich
cooperation with the United Nations in these
discussions, and would like to pay tribute to the work
of United Nations Representative to the Geneva
international discussions, Ambassador Antti Turunen,
and his team.

We also commend the continuing efforts of the
OSCE's Minsk Group in addressing the long-running
Nagorno Karabakh conflict and look forward to
working closely with the co-Chairs and other members
of the Minsk Group during the year.

In supporting these efforts, we will draw from our
own experience of conflict resolution. I will host a
conference in Dublin on 27 April that will focus on
Northern Ireland as a case study, aiming to explore a
number of aspects that might be applicable to conflict
situations in the OSCE region. I believe that we can
encourage those engaged in negotiations elsewhere to
persevere in their efforts by showing that it has been
possible to create and build peace in Northern Ireland
and by explaining how this was achieved and how it is
being sustained. I will also share some of Ireland's
experience in this area through the United Nations
Group of Friends of Mediation, of which Ireland is a
member. Let me take this opportunity to welcome the
vital enhancement in recent years of the United
Nations capacity in the area of mediation, which we
have been pleased to be able to support on a national
basis.

At a time of constrained resources and ever-more
complex transnational threats, a closer partnership
between the OSCE and the United Nations is
indispensable. Our cooperation has advanced not only
in the development of common approaches to the
challenges we face, but also at the field operational
level. The OSCE mission in Kosovo is the first
example of the organization's becoming an integral
part of an operation led by the United Nations. That
mission has a specific tasking from 1244 (1999) to take
the lead role in matters relating to institution and
democracy building and human rights and the rule of
law. Indeed, the former United Nations Special
Representative for Kosovo and Head of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Lamberto Zannier, is now serving as Secretary General
of the OSCE. In the valuable contribution which he has
made to each, he embodies the ever-closer relationship
between the two organizations.

Close and effective cooperation exists in many of
the OSCE's 16 field missions with many of the United
Nations agencies, notably the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
On Afghanistan, I recall that Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon specifically welcomed greater OSCE
involvement when he addressed the OSCE summit in
Astana. I am pleased to confirm that we will promote
implementation of the decision agreed at the Vilnius
ministerial meeting through concrete projects in
Afghanistan, in close cooperation with the United
Nations and other international actors in the region.

The United Nations has provided strong
leadership on the issue of women and peace and
security, reflected in resolution 1325 (2000). Ireland's
national action plan, launched last November, is a
powerful statement of our commitment to the rights of
women affected by conflict. Within the OSCE context,
the promotion of resolution 1325 (2000) is carried out
by the Forum for Security Cooperation. In that regard,
a dedicated military office, based in our permanent
mission to the OSCE in Vienna, has been tasked to
examine ways that the Forum can support the
implementation of that and other resolutions related to
gender and security.

A great many tasks lie before us as we direct the
work of this organization across a wide range of
activities. It is a signal honour for Ireland to discharge
this important multilateral responsibility in 2012. As
Chair of the OSCE, a key regional partner of the
United Nations, I pledge my full support and
partnership. I am confident that our cooperation will be
richly successful.
