Today's vote on resolution 2540 (2020), regarding the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM), underscores the strong and continued commitment of the United States and the international community to supporting peace, stability and development in Somalia. UNSOM remains a critical partner of the Federal Government of Somalia and the federal member states in bringing security and political and economic stability to the Horn of Africa region. In order to foster a clear understanding of the Security Council's expectations in Somalia among all partners, we need an UNSOM mandate that precisely delineates the Organization's roles and responsibilities and that avoids language unrelated to the Mission. However, given the context of the resolution and the Organization's activities in Somalia, we believe that the eighteenth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 13 should focus specifically on assessing risks and developing risk-management strategies related to the impacts of drought, desertification and food insecurity rather than on any particular potential cause of those impacts, such as climate change. The United States supports the inclusion of language in the UNSOM resolution that highlights the adverse effects of specific natural disasters on the stability of Somalia. Droughts, desertification, land degradation, food insecurity and ecological changes can all negatively impact the stability of any nation. We can and should ask the United Nations and Governments to consider those implications as part of their planning. We support the Organization's efforts to carry out risk-assessment and risk-management strategies, as well as the Council's role in addressing specific challenges such as droughts, desertification, land degradation, food insecurity and ecological changes. With respect to climate-change language in this document, the United States has submitted its notification to withdraw from the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. The climate-change language in this resolution is without prejudice to our national position on the Paris Agreement. We affirm our support for promoting economic growth and improving energy security, while also protecting the environment.
