Mr. Adejola (Nigeria): I too would like to thank
the Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Gary Quinlan,
for his presentation of the report of the Committee.
Nigeria commends the Committee for its continued
assistance to States and international organizations in
their implementation of the relevant Security Council
measures on the 1737 (2006) sanctions. It is essential
to protecting the integrity of the decisions taken by the
Council and ensuring that States do not unknowingly
flout the Iran sanctions regime. It is important that
States continue to seek guidance from the Committee
on proposals for technical cooperation with Iran on
matters within the Committee's purview.

The Chair's report indicates that the Committee
has requested comments from Iran on two incidents
investigated by the Panel of Experts. We are concerned
that Iran has not responded to those requests. It is
important that the Iranian authorities demonstrate
their cooperation with the Committee by responding
to the requests for comment without further delay. We
commend the efforts of the Panel of Experts, which have
contributed significantly to the Committee's work. We
note that the Committee is continuing its consideration
of the Panel's 2014 final report, and look forward to
the Committee's decisions on the recommendations it
contains.

Nigeria has been following with keen interest
the negotiations between Iran and the five permanent
members of the Security Council and Germany. We
note that negotiations resumed in Geneva yesterday and
that the deadline for reaching an agreement has been
extended to 1 July 2015. We urge the Iranian authorities
to continue to negotiate in good faith with a view to
reassuring the international community of the peaceful
intentions of their nuclear programme.

Since this is the last briefing by Ambassador
Quinlan in his capacity as Chair ofthe 1737 Committee,
on behalf of the Nigerian delegation I would like to pay
tribute to him for his astute leadership of the Committee
over the past two years. We are honoured to have worked
with him and would like to take the opportunity to wish
him the very best in his future assignments.

