The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Botswana.

On 12 December 1995 the Security Council adopted
resolution 1029 (1995), which, inter alia, adjusted the
mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Rwanda (UNAMIR) and extended it for a final period
until 8 March 1996. This was done in keeping with the
formally expressed wishes of the Government of Rwanda.
I must confess that my delegation was one of those which
did not favour a precipitate departure of UNAMIR from
Rwanda. We are therefore delighted that the United
Nations will continue to play a significant role in assisting
the Government of Rwanda to address the crucial issues
of national reconciliation, the return and resettlement of
refugees, and the rehabilitation and reconstruction of the
socio-economic infrastructure of the country.

It was precisely because we realized that Rwanda
still needed the assistance of the international community
in these areas that we were reluctant to support an abrupt
withdrawal of UNAMIR. Botswana is gratified that the
Security Council has maintained its unanimity on this
issue, which is of vital importance to the peace, security
and stability of the Great Lakes region. It is our hope that
the Government of Rwanda will continue to cooperate
with the United Nations for the benefit of the
Banyarwanda.

It is clear from the foregoing that the end of
UNAMIR's mandate does not in any way imply that the
difficulties and challenges facing the Government and the
people of Rwanda are over. The return of the refugees
will obviously be one of the most intractable of these

 

challenges. Botswana strongly believes that there can be no
peace and stability in Rwanda so long as one third of its
population lives in refugee camps in neighbouring
countries. Concerted efforts are required to ensure the early
return of the 1.7 million refugees. We note the tremendous
efforts being made by the Government of Rwanda in the
promotion of national reconciliation and in rebuilding a
country shattered by one of the worst acts of human
behaviour ever witnessed in the latter part of this century.
They deserve our commendation for the successes they
have scored so far in very difficult circumstances. The
Rwandese should now engage in earnest in the process of
consolidating the relative peace and stability that now
obtain in the country and in the building of a new society
based on justice and the rule of law.

In this connection, the strengthening of the judicial
system is one of the key elements in the whole process.
The continuing support of the international community will
be crucial all the way. "Post-genocide peace-building" in
Rwanda remains the primary concern and a major
responsibility for both the Government of Rwanda and the
international community. Recent experience has shown that
while peace cannot, or should not, be built without justice,
the presumption of innocence of the accused remains the
cornerstone of any fair judicial system.
My delegation has on several occasions in the past
stated that the problems facing Rwanda have subregional
dimensions which must be addressed urgently by the
countries of the Great Lakes region. The return of the
refugees, for instance, can proceed smoothly only if there
is close consultation and cooperation with the States hosting
them. It is an established fact that there is rampant
intimidation in the refugee camps by elements of the former
Government against those intending to return to Rwanda.
The same elements also harbour ill intentions of
undertaking military incursions into Rwanda. The
international community must make it abundantly clear to
these elements that the withdrawal of UNAMIR does not in
any way mean the abrogation of the measures it undertook
through the relevant Security Council resolutions to bring
an end to intimidation in the refugee camps and to the
military activities against Rwanda. In fact, the arms
embargo imposed under resolution 918 (1994) and extended
to Rwandese nationals in neighbouring States by resolution
1011 (1995) remains in force.

The Security Council still awaits a report of the
International Commission of Inquiry, which was established
tO

"investigate reports relating to the sale or supply of
arms and related materiel to former Rwandan
Government forces in violation of Council
resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and 1011
(1995)". (resolution 1013 (1995), para. 1 (a))

All these measures can be implemented robustly
only with the full cooperation of the neighbouring
countries. In this context, the recent return by the
Government of Zaire of some military equipment to
Rwanda was a welcome development. We hope that it
will have a salutary effect on the search for solutions of
the remaining issues, especially the return of the refugees,
and that it will mark a new era of rapprochement between
the two brotherly countries.

My delegation would be in favour of the convening
of a regional conference on peace, security and
development in the Great Lakes region, under the
auspices of the United Nations, with the active
participation of the Organization of African Unity. There
is a great deal of international good will aimed at seeking
a lasting solution to the problems of the Great Lakes
region. The European Union, the Carter Center and
former President Mwalimu Julius Nyerere have
undertaken political and diplomatic efforts aimed at
finding common ground on the convening of the
conference. We fully support these commendable efforts
and hope that the considerable time and energy expended
in this endeavour, especially by former President Nyerere,
will be crowned with success.
In conclusion, let me extend Botswana's
congratulations to the men and women of UNAMIR for
their contribution to the cause of peace in Rwanda. It was
a mission haunted by an unfortunate past - events that
everyone wishes had never happened and will never
happen again - yet they made the best of that past that
they could.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers. The Security Council
has thus concluded the present stage of its consideration
of the item on its agenda. The Security Council will
remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 7.40 p.m.
