Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Ms. Zerrougui, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, for her briefing. We also listened
to the briefing by Ms. Modi, Executive Director of
Afia Mama.

At the end of last year the Democratic Republic of
the Congo successfully held presidential and legislative
elections, which achieved a smooth transition of power.
Currently, the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo remains stable. President Tshilombo Tshisekedi
is actively forming a new Government, strengthening
governance, building security capacity and promoting
economic and social development. In areas such as
the Kasai region, militiamen and armed groups are
voluntarily engaging in the disarmament process.

China welcomes those positive developments and
commends the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for their efforts. That testifies
to the will and ability of the Government and people
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to resolve
their own issues through their own efforts. Meanwhile,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo still faces
challenges with regard to security, the humanitarian
situation, the Ebola outbreak and development, among
others. The international community should therefore
focus assistance on the following three priorities.

First, in order to demonstrate its full respect for
the country's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity, the international community should support
the ownership and leadership of the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo in dealing with its own
affairs, enhance its cooperation with the Government,
assist the country in overcoming its challenges in the
humanitarian, security and development fields, among
others. The current focus should be on helping the
Democratic Republic of the Congo to strengthen its
security capacity-building and support the efforts of
the Government to maintain peace and stability.

Secondly, the international community should
continue to support the African Union, the Southern
African Development Community, the Economic
Community of Central African States, the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region and other
regional and subregional organizations in doing
their part to facilitate increased cooperation between
the parties and the Government so as to promote
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region. In order to jointly contribute to realizing
peace and stability in the country and the wider region,
international partners should support efforts to ensure
that armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo abandon the military option and resolve issues
through dialogue and consultation instead.

Thirdly,tocontinuetoprovidenecessaryhumanitarian
assistance and economic support to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, international
partners should focus on increasing contributions in
the areas of education, health care, infrastructure and
other assistance in order to help the country to increase
employment opportunities, improve people's livelihoods
and engage in socioeconomic development. We hope
that bodies such as the United Nations Development
Programme and the Peacebuilding Commission can
play a greater role. The international community should
continue its active response to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo's call for humanitarian assistance, support
the activities of the World Health Organization and the
International Committee of the Red Cross and help to
contain the Ebola outbreak.

The MONUSCO presence is currently crucial to
the peace and stability of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. China supports the renewal of the Mission's
mandate. We hope that MONUSCO can continue its
activities in accordance with its mandate in order to help
the country to achieve peace, stability and development.
We hope that the Secretariat, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the troop-
contributing countries can work together, conduct
a timely assessment in the light of the developments
and put forward proposals for the adjustment of the
MONUSCO mandate so as to ensure a gradual and
orderly handover of security responsibilities from
the Mission to the security forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. China stands ready to work with
the wider international community to continue to assist
the efforts of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to achieve peace, stability and development as soon
as possible.

