Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania):
We thank the Government of India for initiating this
important debate under its presidency of the Council.
We also thank the Deputy Secretary-General for his
presentation this morning.

The United Republic of Tanzania, like other East
African coastal States, has been and continues to be
directly affected by the spectre of maritime piracy and
armed robbery at sea. The incidents that have taken
place to date off the coast of Somalia, the Gulf of Aden
and other areas of the Indian Ocean have disrupted
trade and commerce, inhibited the smooth delivery of
humanitarian aid to Somalia, endangered the safety
of seafarers and other persons, and raised maritime
insurance premiums and thus the price of goods being
shipped by sea to markets in our region.

It is therefore pertinent that we collectively
continue to pursue a comprehensive solution to this
problem, focusing on deterrence, security, the rule of
law and development.

The United Republic of Tanzania has taken several
judicial and security measures domestically to address
the piracy menace. In May 2010, the Parliament of
Tanzania enacted amendments to the Penal Code and
the Merchant Shipping Act, giving our national courts
jurisdiction over offences committed by any person
on the high seas. The amendments also gave piracy a
broader definition, as provided for under the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. With these
enactments in place, the courts have been able to
prosecute suspected pirates captured within and beyond
Tanzania's territorial waters. Likewise, the Tanzania
People's Defence Forces have carried out operations
both singly and jointly with regional and international
partners. These partnerships have proven crucial in the
fight against piracy.

As we have said in this Chamber before, Tanzania
and other countries of Africa have entered into
agreements to receive and prosecute in national courts
pirates captured off the coast of Somalia. These
arrangements are complementary to prosecution by
the Somali courts themselves. While discharging this
important historical duty of holding these culprits to
account, we would also like to see a predictable and
sustainable international funding mechanism to assist
us in these endeavours. International cooperation and
assistance in this area are pivotal to sustaining our
collective efforts against piracy.

We are pleased with the initial efforts of the
international community, organizations, individual
States and groups of States in suppressing piracy and
building capacities for countries ofour region and Africa.
In particular, we commend the continued leadership of
the Contact Group on Piracy off the Coast of Somalia in
facilitating the discussion and coordination of actions
among States and organizations. The Trust Fund
established by the Contact Group is quite instrumental
in ensuring that justice is administered to suspected
pirates, masterminds and profiteers. We encourage
States that are in a position to do so to contribute to the
Trust Fund.

We are optimistic that piracy in general and Somali
piracy in particular can be eliminated. The recent
statistics on piracy in that area are very promising.
The political milestones in Somalia this year also point
to a brighter future for the country and spell doom
for pirates, pirate masterminds and their financiers.
Piracy must be uprooted from its sources and prevented
from resurfacing anywhere in the world. We should
discourage catch-and-release situations, which are
sending the wrong signals to the culprits.

We also commend the work of the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), the European Union,
NATO and other partners that are carrying out
anti-piracy operations, together, as well as the Somali
forces, for contributing to the reduction of piracy in
Somalia. Similarly, we commend the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia, under the leadership of
our compatriot Ambassador Augustine Mahiga, for a
job well done. We believe that the incorporation of a
maritime component into AMISOM's mandate would
further strengthen those efforts.

Despite our optimism, we are concerned that the
defeated elements of Al-Shabaab have moved from the
coast to the hinterlands, as far as eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, forging alliances with notorious
armed groups that are engaged in a protracted conflict
in that area. We call on the Security Council to monitor
that new phenomenon, in cooperation with the regional
players such as the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region.

Finally, we call for the full implementation of
resolutions 1976 (2011) and 2020 (2011) and other
relevant resolutions pertaining to the prevention of
illegal fishing and illegal dumping, including of toxic
substances, on Somali territorial waters and beyond. We
encourage Somalia to proclaim its exclusive economic
zone in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

