Mr. De La Sabliere (France) (spoke in French): I
too should like at the outset to thank Mr. Jessen-
Petersen, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, for his briefing and for his resolute leadership
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo. I would also like to welcome the presence
of Mr. Tadic, President of Serbia, and of Mr. Kosumi,
Prime Minister of Kosovo, who is here as part of
Mr. Jessen-Petersen's delegation.

I fully associate myself with the statement to be
made later by the Permanent Representative of Austria
on behalf of the presidency of the European Union. I
should like, however, to make a few brief comments.

I should like, first of all, to pay tribute to the
memory of President Rugova, who devoted his life to
defending his people by peaceful means. It is now for
his successor, Mr. Fatmir Sejdiu, and the authorities
and the people of Kosovo as a whole, to follow in his
footsteps by constructively engaging in the talks that
will soon begin.

We share the Secretary-General's analysis of the
progress achieved in Kosovo over the past few months.
There can be no doubt that the authorities are now
better prepared to participate in the negotiations.
However, we must acknowledge that too little has been
done in terms of genuinely implementing the standards.
We now expect concrete action and improvements on
the ground. Whatever Kosovo's future status may be, it
will have to be multi-ethnic. It is today that future
relationships among the various communities must
begin to be built. We therefore call upon the Prime
Minister and all of Kosovo's Provisional Institutions to
take the necessary measures to accelerate the
implementation of the priority standards.

The capacity of Kosovo's authorities to find
solutions to a range of problems, including those
relating to security, education, housing, refugee return
and the power supply, will be seen as a basic criterion
when the time comes to determine Kosovo's status.

Since the previous Security Council meeting on
Kosovo (see S/PV.5289), the Secretary-General has
appointed Mr. Martti Ahtisaari to lead the talks on
Kosovo's status. We believe it essential, at this
sensitive time, for the international community as
whole, and the Security Council in particular, to
unfailingly support his mission. We believe in
particular that the approach that he has chosen - to
tackle concrete questions first - is entirely
appropriate.

At the same time, we must not lose sight of the
objective set out by the Contact Group in London on
31 January: to conclude the negotiations in 2006. We
call upon the political authorities in Belgrade and in
Pristina to resolutely engage in a constructive dialogue
with Mr. Ahtissari. In this connection, the meeting
scheduled for 20 and 21 February in Vienna on matters
relating to decentralization is essential for the dialogue
to start on a positive note. Be that as it may, the final
status will have to be, among other things, acceptable
to the population of Kosovo. The leaders of Serbia and
Kosovo will have to demonstrate courage and political
vision in order to find a realistic solution.

Just as the Contact Group did in its statement of
31 January, we would like to recall the specific nature
of the Kosovo question. The current situation is the
result of dramatic events that followed upon the
disintegration of the former Yugoslavia. The solution
to be found for Kosovo's status must necessarily take
this into account.

Whatever Kosovo's future status may be, it will
be anchored in Europe's architecture. It is also from
this perspective that progress towards a democratic and
multi-ethnic society is indispensable, in our view. We
hope that the parties will make the best use of the
coming months to this end.

