The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Security Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

After consultation among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the
lNovember 2001 inauguration of Burundi's
Transitional Government, and calls on all
Burundians to support it and work together to
ensure the success of this broad-based and
inclusive government's fulfilling its functions in
accordance with the agreements that led to its
establishment.

"The Security Council welcomes the
continued engagement of the Regional Initiative
and, in this regard, also welcomes the deployment
of the first elements of the multinational security
presence tasked with the protection of returning
political leaders. The Council calls on all the
Burundian parties to support this undertaking,
and expresses its gratitude to the Government of
South Africa for its contribution to the cause of
peace in Burundi.

"The Security Council expresses its deep
appreciation to former President Nelson Mandela
for his dedicated service as facilitator of the
Arusha Peace Process, and reiterates its hope that
the region and the international community may
continue to rely on his moral leadership. The
Council welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-
General and his Special Representative for the
Great Lakes, through the Implementation
Monitoring Committee.

"The Security Council condemns the recent
attacks by the FDD and FNL on civilians, and is
gravely concerned that the frequency of such
attacks has increased. The Council once again
states that the installation of a broad-based
government in accordance with an internationally
supported peace process makes armed rebellion
the

an unacceptable means of political expression.

"The Security Council reiterates its call for
an immediate suspension of hostilities in Burundi
and for the armed groups to enter into
negotiations to reach a definitive ceasefire, which
is the priority issue. In this regard, the Council
welcomes the involvement of President Bongo of
Gabon and Deputy President Zuma of South
Africa and expresses its full support for their
efforts.

"The Security Council expresses its concern
at the human rights and humanitarian situation in
Burundi and once again calls on the responsible
parties to ensure full compliance with the relevant
international conventions.

"The Security Council calls on the
international community to increase its
humanitarian assistance, as well as to assist in
Burundi's economic recovery and development
through, inter alia, honouring the pledges made at
the Paris donors' conference."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2001/33.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 6.35 pm.
