Mr. Pedersen: I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity
to brief the Security Council for the second time. I have
spent the past eight weeks shuttling between the Syrian
Government and the opposition and consulting with key
players. I am doing everything I can to move forward on
rebuilding trust and confidence and opening the door
to a political process in Geneva between the Syrian
Government and the opposition, a process that can
begin to build a new future for all Syrians - women
and men - and between Syria and the international
community. After eight years of conflict, that process
will be long and difficult, but I think that it is possible
to move forward step by step. To that end, I have been
seeking to advance the five priorities I outlined to
the Council in February (see S/PV.8475), which are
grounded in a comprehensive approach to my mandate
pursuant to resolution 2254 (2015).

I remain absolutely committed to engaging the
Syrian Government and the Syrian Negotiation
Commission in a sustained comprehensive dialogue.
Such a dialogue is the very foundation of a Syrian-
led and Syrian-owned process, in line with resolution
2254 (2015), that fully respects Syria's sovereignty,
unity, independence and territorial integrity. In March
and April, I engaged in positive shuttle consultations.
Foreign Minister Al-Moualem hosted me twice in
Damascus; he demonstrated a positive attitude and we
were able to advance certain issues. I also met twice
with the Syrian Negotiation Commission's leadership in
Riyadh and Geneva; they also demonstrated a positive
attitude that enabled us to advance the issues.

In both sets of interactions I stressed the
importance of working on the full range of issues
addressed in resolution 2254 (2015). I stressed the need
to make a tangible difference in Syrians' lives. Both
the Government and the opposition remained open
to discussing a broader range of issues. It is my hope
that such regular engagement will continue to build
trust and confidence and will evolve into a sustained
dialogue that leads towards building a safe, calm and
neutral environment and brings about peace.

That has also been my message to international
stakeholders in recent weeks, but I would like to
reiterate - action and tangible progress, not just
dialogue, are needed. I need not remind the Council
that the situation for Syrians remains dire.

We have seen a very troubling surge in violence
in recent weeks in and around the Idlib de-escalation
zone, some of which led to civilian casualties and
further displacement. I welcome the recommitment
of the Astana players to fully implement the Idlib
memorandum, including through coordinated
patrols, but more must be done. De-escalation must
be consolidated.

Idlib is not the only part of Syria that remains
heavily militarized or where Syrians continue to suffer.
The situation in the north-east is calmer for now but
its underlying dynamics remain unresolved. We have
also received reports of growing tensions and violence
in the south-west. Many threats of renewed escalation,
and even threats to international peace and security,
remain outstanding in Syria. I would like to remind
the Council that resolution 2254 (2015) calls for a
nationwide ceasefire.

Terrorist groups listed by the Council remain
a major threat. Only last week, the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant took credit for attacks on Syrian
Government forces in the desert. Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham
still controls large swathes of territory. I would like
to stress, however, the Secretary-General's reminder
that counter-terrorism operations cannot override the
responsibility to protect civilians.

Even where violence has abated, the toll of suffering
remains staggering. There is a desperate need to meet
the humanitarian and protection needs of Syrians,
whose suffering is not limited to refugees and displaced
persons - millions of Syrians all across the country
face a critical shortage of commodities, including fuel,
that is approaching crisis levels. The 73,000 people in
Al-Hol, 92 per cent of whom are women and children,
are facing a terrible situation. Humanitarian needs and
protection concerns remain acute.
I remain deeply concerned about the situation in
Rukban. We continue to pursue principled and durable
solutions, in coordination with all stakeholders. Most
civilians who have recently left have been able to
relocate from temporary shelters. Most residents of
Rukban remain in the settlement and are in dire need of
assistance, including food and essential medicines. The
deployment of a third humanitarian convoy to Rukban
remains urgent in order to avoid the further suffering
of more people in the camp. As I have remarked to all
stakeholders, the more steps we see taken to address
the issues of which I speak, in coordination with the
United Nations, the more momentum is created to build
confidence within Syria and internationally.

I have discussed in depth with the Syrian
Government and the opposition the specific need for
concrete action on the release of detainees/abductees
and the clarification of the fate of missing persons.
Meaningful progress on that key humanitarian issue
would send a positive signal to Syrians and would be an
important confidence-building measure. I appreciated
the openness to consider more meaningful actions in
my dialogue.

In parallel with my bilateral engagements, my
Office participated in two additional meetings of the
Working Group on the subject, held in Moscow and
in Nur-Sultan. The Working Group was made up of
representatives from Iran, Russia and Turkey, with the
United Nations and the International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) also represented. I am ready to host
the next meeting of the Working Group in Geneva.

The Working Group was able to secure the release
of a small group of detainees/abductees in northern
Syria on 22 April. For the first time, members of my
team were present on the ground as observers, which
enabled us to make an assessment of how the operation
was to be conducted and share recommendations with
the Working Group. My team's observations included
some positive elements. However, there is considerable
room for improvement in terms of the procedures to
be followed during future release operations to ensure
consistency with international humanitarian law.

We need to scale up and speed up the release of
detainees/abductees, particularly vulnerable ones, such
as women, children, the elderly and the sick. The Syrian
Government and the opposition should ensure the
detainees/abductees' protection prior to, and following,
their release. They should move away from the one-for-
one exchange framework and address the issue on a
larger scale.
The fate of the tens of thousands of persons
who have gone missing since the beginning of the
conflict must be clarified. In close coordination with
the ICRC, my Office is developing procedures for
compiling, consolidating, safeguarding and exchanging
information, as well as conducting searches for missing
persons. The scale of the issue is of unprecedented
proportions that oblige us to continue our collective
attempts to make progress - months, if not years, of
meticulous and committed work will be required to
complete the process.

For any political solution to be durable, it must
meet the aspirations of the Syrian people. I have made
it a priority to engage a wide spectrum of Syrians in
recent weeks. In calling for concrete action, I recollect
the voices of those many Syrians, from refugees in
neighbouring countries to people living in shelters in
Homs. The appalling scale of Syrian's suffering and the
uncertain future of millions weighs heavily on me, as it
should, of course, on us all. I believe that most people
will judge a political process on the basis of its ability
to deliver improvements on the ground and to take into
consideration the needs and priorities of all Syrian men
and women.

I strongly believe in the importance of engaging a
wide range of Syrian interlocutors. I intend to further
my outreach and engagement with Syrian refugees, civil
society, women's organizations and other Syrian actors,
including through the Civil Society Support Room. The
Women's Advisory Board continues to remind us of the
specific security, economic and human rights concerns
of Syrian women, who bring diverse experiences and
views to the table and share the right to have a voice at
the table.

Clearly, much hope rests on at last convening a
constitutional committee. It could be the first sign of
real progress. It could, if approached in the right spirit,
help unlock a broader political process that leads to
the holding of United Nations-supervised elections in
a safe, calm and neutral environment. I will continue
to work towards a final agreement on the composition
and terms of reference of a credible, balanced, inclusive
and viable constitutional committee. Many earlier
differences have indeed been narrowed down.

While nothing is agreed until everything is agreed,
we have a clear understanding on balanced co-chairing
arrangements, a formula for decision-making, a shared
acceptance of the United Nations facilitation role and a
political commitment to ensure the safety and security
of all those who will be involved. Both the Syrian
Government and the opposition have been constructive
on those points, and I am grateful to them. I believe that
the final terms of the mandate can be agreed on with a
modicum of goodwill.

It is now agreed that six specific names on the
earlier so-called civil society list need to be removed.
Work continues to identify a set of names that, when
viewed in totality, will have the support of all concerned
in order to enhance the quality and credibility of the
list. Efforts are being made to achieve the objective of
at least 30 per cent female participants.

Those are all the elements of the process on which
I believe it is now possible to advance. I have expended
a lot of effort to build buy-in. If everyone is prepared to
compromise just a little, the process can move forward.

For my fifth priority I spoke of the need to improve
international dialogue on Syria. Yes, a credible and
sustainable political settlement must be Syrian-led and
Syrian-owned. Yet the process and its outcome must
enjoy international support and legitimacy. The conflict
is highly internationalized, and external intervention
is one of its hard realities. Syria's sovereignty,
independence, unity and territorial integrity must be
respected and restored - but saying so will not make
it so.

In that context, let me emphasize once again that
the United Nations position regarding the occupied
Syrian Golan will continue to be determined by the
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
on that issue. I will discharge my mandate while fully
respecting Syria's sovereignty, independence, unity
and territorial integrity, in accordance with resolution
2254 (2015).

External intervention poses real threats to
international peace and security. Five international
armies operate across Syria's land and airspace,
in tension or even in conflict, generating risks for
dangerous escalation. Those risks must be contained
and ultimately removed.

Different formats of international cooperation
for resolving the Syrian conflict exist at present. I
had useful conversations with the Astana guarantors
in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April. I will hold formal
consultations with them in Geneva in May. I will
consult with the members of the small group in Geneva
on Friday.

I remain convinced that key international players
agree on much more than might be apparent. I believe
that they all understand the need for international
cooperation on Syria. I will continue to use my good
offices to help the key players with influence to join in
one active conversation to provide common support to
a Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process under
United Nations facilitation.

As we approach agreement on the constitutional
committee, I would like to use the opportunity to
facilitate a revitalized and broad-based international
process of cooperation. To realize my mandate, a
common forum supporting the Geneva process must be
found. I believe that we are making progress. I hope
that the next time I brief the Council I will be able to
report tangible achievements on the long road towards
a political settlement of the conflict in Syria.

