Mr. Zarif (Islamic Republic of Iran): I should
like to join previous speakers in briefly expressing our
felicitations to you, Mr. President, and to your French
predecessor, as well as our appreciation to Mr. Blix and
Mr. ElB aradei.

My country, as one of Iraq's neighbours, is
following attentively the situation concerning Iraq and
its disarmament obligations under Security Council
resolutions. On the one hand, we directly experienced
the horror of becoming the victim of all-out aggression
and of the massive use of chemical weapons in the
1980s. Today, 15 years after the end of the war, the
wounds are yet to be healed. Tens of thousands of the
chemically wounded civilians and soldiers who
survived the horror continue to live agonizing and
excruciating lives, and hardly a week goes by without
one or several of them dying as a result. Therefore, we
have an unparalleled interest in ensuring that there will
never again be an aggression in our neighbourhood and
that weapons of mass destruction will never again be
used there.

On the other hand, the prospect of another
destabilizing war in our immediate vicinity is a
nightmarish scenario of death and destruction. The
Iranian people and Government are concerned first and
foremost about the humanitarian catastrophe that would
undoubtedly befall the Iraqi people in the event of a
war - let alone the influx of displaced persons and
refugees.

The extent of destabilization in the region and of
uncertainty in Iraq in the event of a war might go far
beyond anything we can imagine today. Given the state
of Iraqi society and of the whole region, there are many
wild cards that no one can fit into his calculations with
any degree of certainty. But one outcome is almost
certain: extremism stands to benefit enormously from
an ill-calculated adventure in Iraq. The prospect of
appointing a foreign military commander to run an
Islamic and Arab country is all the more destabilizing
and only indicates prevailing delusions.

Bearing all that in mind, every effort should be
made to fulfil the international community's unanimous
demand for the disarmament of Iraq without recourse
to armed force. Under the current circumstances, and
with a devastating war in the offing, it is all the more
incumbent upon the Iraqi leadership to cooperate fully
and proactively with the weapons inspectors, especially
on substance, as the inspectors have repeatedly called
for. Iraq's other obligations - including that it release
prisoners of war and cease harbouring terrorists on its
soil - have yet to be fully carried out.

Likewise, we do not see any reason for the rush-
to-war rhetoric. We agree that resolution 1441 (2002) is
about disarmament and not about inspections. But we
believe that, while the chief inspectors are signalling
their intention to continue to work, there is no ground
for aborting the process and embarking on military
action, with all its known and unknown devastating
consequences. We further believe that the
strengthening of the inspection regime by providing it
with additional inspectors and equipment cannot be
readily discarded by a rush to war. We therefore
express our full support for the efforts of members of
this Council and the proposal of France to strengthen
the inspection system.

We are increasingly hearing that the United
Nations should show backbone and courage or become
an irrelevant talking society. While we fully agree with
the need for the effectiveness of the United Nations as
the sole universal Organization, we cannot accept that
the priorities of one Power should provide the criteria
for the effectiveness or relevance of the United
Nations. We need not recall that dozens of Security
Council resolutions explicitly demanding an end to
Israeli occupation of Arab lands have been dead letter
not for weeks or years, but for decades; nor do we need
to name the only major Power that has enabled Israel to
contemptuously flout the will of the international
community.

The same dubious track record applies to
weapons of mass destruction. The international regime
governing the prohibition of weapons of mass
destruction has enormously suffered from the
application of self-serving and arbitrary criteria,
condoning and even encouraging friends of the day on
the path of acquiring such weapons. The provision of
chemical precursors and biological agents to Iraq in the
1980s, which is widely documented and lies at the
origin of the current crisis, is a brazen example in this
respect. Condoning Israel's nuclear arsenal and
precluding the realization of the repeated demands of
the General Assembly and even of this Council to
establish a zone free from weapons of mass destruction
in the Middle East is another illustrative case.

Against this backdrop, it is difficult to accept
such arguments about the effectiveness of the United
Nations or the repeated claims to moral clarity.

We believe that what is at stake today goes far
beyond the mere disarmament of Iraq. The rush-to-war
rhetoric is not coming out of a vacuum; neither is the
anxiety expressed by the international community
hyperbole. We are approaching the peak of a trend,
which includes pre-emptive strikes and the use of
tactical nuclear weapons against non-nuclear States.

What we witnessed last Friday here in this
Chamber and, more importantly, what followed the day
after across the globe were clear expressions of
concern and alarm over a trend which, willingly or
otherwise, is undermining not only the international
consensus to eradicate Iraq's weapons of mass
destruction, but in fact the very institution and norms
that have been instrumental in forging that consensus
and in maintaining international peace and security in
general.

In closing, let me stress that the current and
historically non-permanent power imbalance and
patterns of friendship should not induce anybody to
indulge themselves in undermining the credibility and
authority of the Security Council. It is imperative that
the Security Council, as the legally competent forum
entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, remain
the centre of decision-making on how to deal with the
Iraqi issue, and all members of the international
community should genuinely abide by its decision.

