Mr. Galvez (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): We
appreciate the convening of this meeting and welcome
the presence of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda. We also
welcome her introduction of her seventh report to the
Council.

Chile recognizes the complex security situation in
Libya and the need to continue the work in support of
institutions that respect the rule of law and human rights
while allowing Libya to comply with its obligation
to cooperate with the Court and its Prosecutor, in
accordance with the provisions of resolution 1970
(2011). We reiterate our country's support to the
International Criminal Court and the work of its
Prosecutor. Its establishment was a major step in the
fight against impunity.

We underscore the work of the Council and its
essential role in the case of Libya. The adoption of
resolution 1970 (2011), under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, makes it possible for
the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court to
extend to a State that is not party to the Rome Statute,
in this case Libya, just as it binds all States Members
of the Organization, whether party or not to the Statute.
We acknowledge the cooperation of both categories of
States with the International Criminal Court and Libya
in that regard.

Furthermore, Chile stresses that the responsibility
of the Council should not be understood as coming to an
end simply with the referral of a situation to the Court.
The Council should maintain the dialogue with the
Court and the Prosecutor and respond to their requests.

The Council's silence in response to such requests
would imply a lack of responsibility. That is why Chile
supports the establishment of an effective follow-up by
the Council.

We welcome the signing late last year of the
memorandum of understanding between the Office of the
Prosecutor and the Libyan Government and the contacts
made this year with the Prosecutor General of Libya
in order to implement the memorandum. Coordinated
work, in which the tasks of the investigation, legal
processes and arrest procedures are shared, will make
it possible to duly comply with resolution 1970 (2011)
and to establish the basis for a national reconciliation
process.

With regard to the detainees in the custody of
armed brigades, we are concerned that the self-imposed
deadline of 2 March, set by the Government of Libya to
put an end to the situation, has not been met. The fact
that there are approximately 7,000 detainees while the
Libyan State is not in control of the situation, leaving
them defenceless without charges brought against
them, violates their most basic human rights. We
therefore reiterate the appeal made in resolution 2144
(2014), which renews the mandate of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, for all such individuals to be
transferred to State custody.

Chile underscores the fact that last year Libya
adopted legislation that provides for the prosecution
of torture, ill treament and discrimination. However,
we regret the fact that, according the report of the
Prosecutor, to date there have been no reported
prosecutions of the alleged perpetrators of the crimes
of torture and abuse, including sexual and gender-
based violence and deaths as a result of the torture that
continues to occur in detention centres in that country.
My country underscores the importance of the Libyan
Government moving forward and sharing with the
Council and the international community its national
policy for responding to such crimes. That would allow
us to reaffirm and recognize Libya's commitment to a
modern justice system in accordance with international
standards, while determining those areas or needs
to which cooperation should be dedicated in order to
reform the security sector in Libya.

We recognize the work of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court in investigating crimes
committed since February 2011. We urge her to
continue in that vein in order to ensure that perpetrators
of crimes, regardless of their origin, including those
responsible for crimes committed against minorities,
shall be brought to justice before the International
Criminal Court or in Libyan courts, in accordance
with the principle of complementarity established
under the Rome Statute. As a result, we call on the
Libyan authorities to comply with their obligation to
transfer Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi to the International
Criminal Court without further delay. Similarly , in
the case against Abdullah Al-Senussi, we appeal to
the Libyan authorities to refrain from any action that
could impede the Court from reconsidering the case if
the inadmissibility appeal were to be overturned by the
International Criminal Court when it decides.

I conclude by reiterating my country's support
for and commitment to the work of the International
Criminal Court and the Prosecutor.

