I thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix, Ambassador Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, and Mr. Vervaeke, Managing Director for Africa at the European External Action Service, for their briefings. I also welcome the participation of the Foreign Minister of the Central Africa Republic in this meeting. The current political situation in the Central African Republic is generally stable. Progress has been made in implementing the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. China welcomes the efforts of the Government of the Central African Republic to engage in inclusive dialogue with armed groups, and commends the passage of several laws by the National Assembly, including on the creation of the Commission on Truth, Justice, Reparations and Reconciliation. At the same time, we still see severe challenges arising from continued violent attacks by armed groups, which seriously endanger the safety of civilians, and the pandemic has added new complexities. The international community needs to continue to provide support to the Central African Republic for lasting peace and development there. Holding successful elections is a priority task for the political process in the Central African Republic this year, and it is essential for the maintenance of peace and stability in the country. We noted that the National Electoral Authority revised the election calendar according to the latest developments, and hope all parties in the Central African Republic will enhance communication and coordination, and work together to carry forward the preparation process as scheduled. Differences related to the elections should be resolved through peaceful dialogue and consultation. The international community needs to create an enabling environment for the smooth conduct of elections, and provide the necessary support while respecting the ownership of the Central African Republic. Achieving sustainable peace and stability in the Central African Republic will require a holistic approach. The current focus should be on maintaining security and stability. We are concerned about the continuing violent conflicts among armed groups, and call on all parties to the conflict to positively respond to the Secretary-General's appeal for a global ceasefire. We call on all relevant parties to show political will and continue the implementation of the Peace and Reconciliation Agreement. From a long-term perspective, the international community should assist the Government of the Central African Republic in improving its capacity to protect the security of its people, provide social services and promote economic and social development, in order to help the country achieve lasting peace through sustainable development. We will continue to support the work of the Special Representative and the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) and hope that MINUSCA will strengthen coordination with other United Nations agencies and regional and subregional organizations in order to create synergies. The Central African Republic is also facing the serious challenge of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. The international community must continue to provide material, technical and personnel-related support. China recently delivered the second batch of medical supplies to the Central African Republic, including 150,000 surgical masks and 30,000 testing kits. During the Extraordinary China-Africa Summit on Solidarity against COVID-19, held last week, President Xi Jinping emphasized that China will continue to do whatever it can to support Africa's response to COVID-19. We will start ahead of schedule the construction of the headquarters of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention this year. We also pledge that, once the development and deployment of the COVID-19 vaccine has been completed in China, African countries will be among the first to benefit. China will continue to work with the international community and to help the Central African Republic and other African countries to overcome the pandemic and to make new contributions to peace, stability, development and prosperity in the Central African Republic.
