Mr. Ami] (Pakistan): I would like to thank you,
Sir, for organizing this important debate on
peacekeeping and for this opportunity to share our
views. As the top troop-contributor to United Nations
peacekeeping operations and a long-time participant in
the policy discussions, Pakistan brings a rich and
diverse perspective to this discussion. We are a major
stakeholder in the success of United Nations
peacekeeping. This is a collective endeavour of the
Security Council, the United Nations Member States in
particular, the troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat. Let me also thank the two Under-Secretaries-
General - Under-Secretary-General Le Roy and Under-
Secretary-General Malcorra - for their briefings.

Peacekeeping is today the face of the United
Nations and its flagship activity. It is a major tool for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
While retaining its original purpose, peacekeeping has
also evolved over time in response to the changing
nature of conflict. Success in recent years, particularly
of multidimensional operations, has led to raised
expectations, increase in demand and corresponding
challenges of planning and management, bridging the
gap between mandates and resources and effective

09-3860]
integration of conflict prevention and peacebuilding
elements to achieve lasting and self-sustaining peace.

The shared objective of making United Nations
peacekeeping work better has brought Member States
together on several important initiatives and efforts on
policy issues, reform, restructuring and capacity-
building over the last couple of years. The latest of
these - the Secretary-General's reform proposal -
resulted in a major overhaul and reconfiguration of the
United Nations peacekeeping architecture, which
focused in particular on strengthening capacity at
Headquarters. Of course the proposal was presented as
a necessary sequel to the Brahimi process and peace
agenda for 2010, and was considered a comprehensive
response to the challenges confronting peacekeeping.

Member States have not yet had the opportunity
to fully and properly assess and review the result and
impact of that reform exercise. We do not have a clear
idea of how effectively the new mechanism and
structures are performing. In the meanwhile, several
new initiatives by some Member States and the
Secretariat - such as the New Horizon initiative -
have been put forward.

Our preliminary analysis of those initiatives is
that while they could become catalysts for discussion,
there is little new as regards the major issues and
challenges. And we wonder whether it is a question of
exposing the limitations of past reforms, or a question
of fully implementing them through a sustained effort.
Nevertheless, the value of these initiatives lies in
considering them in an open and transparent manner
within the framework of the ongoing process to ensure
coherence and best results. Apart from the Security
Council, the Committee of Thirty-Four remains the
best forum to discuss all these issues in a
comprehensive fashion.

Pakistan welcomes the special focus that the
presidency's concept note puts on cooperation and
partnerships with the troop-contributing countries
(TCCs). The TCCs contribute the basic building blocks
of the partnership for peacekeeping. The role and
engagement of the TCCs cuts across the whole range of
activities in the mission cycle from early planning to
deployment, management, drawdown and withdrawal
of operations. It is therefore inconceivable that the
effectiveness and success of the missions could be
achieved unless that partnership is made more
substantive and visible.

There is a clear need to enhance the level and
frequency of interaction and consultations with the
TCCs. Debates such as this one provide good
opportunity. The Security Council Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations is also an important avenue
for providing trilateral cooperation, as its recent
meetings have shown. It would be more productive if
those meetings were held more regularly and coincided
with the Council's direction of new missions as well as
the review and renewal of ongoing mandates.
Moreover, focused discussion of the situation on the
ground, operational issues and challenges can really
add value by promoting interaction with and feedback
from the TCCs. In our view, enhanced consultations in
the Working Group could also catalyse the hitherto
somewhat lacklustre private meetings held under
resolution 1353 (2001).

There is general agreement that to ensure
successful implementation of the mandates, we need a
high degree of coherence between those who conceive
and write mandates and those who implement them on
the ground. How can we achieve that in practice? We
should try to address the issue in a more innovative
way through a more dynamic interplay and sharing of
roles and responsibilities between the designers and
implementers of mandates.

Take the issue of resources, for example.
Shortfall of resources, particularly personnel and
equipment, can be met by broadening the contributors
base, with more burden-sharing in the field by the
developed countries. Not only will they bring the
required niche capabilities, the developed countries
will also get first-hand experience of the resource gaps
in the missions, which will better inform them in
designing mandates. The existing major troop
contributors, who are mostly developing countries,
should, on the other hand, be accorded an increased
role in the design and decision-making process in the
Council, through consultations and increased
representation in the Security Council.

Diversifying and expanding the contributors base
and the decision makers base is also important in
promoting a common understanding of the concepts,
basic principles and guidelines for peacekeeping. This
is essential for maintaining the credibility, legitimacy
and neutrality of the United Nations, which are so
essential for the continuing success of peacekeeping.
We do not think there is a problem of evolution of new
concepts and tools to adapt peacekeeping to changing

requirements. The membership, particularly those who
are contributing troops, have played an important role
in facilitating the evolution and transformation of
peacekeeping, including complex missions and robust
mandates. That evolution, in our view, does not affect
the basic principles of peacekeeping, which remain
valid and relevant.

Surprisingly, some of the objections with regard
to concepts and principles, and the push for certain
ideas that lack consensus, come from those who are not
among the contributors in the field. This participation,
we believe, will provide them better insight into the
possible complications and difficulties in the field.
There should be no monopoly on policy- and decision-
making. Let me add, from the perspective of the TCCs,
that the question of decision-making and command and
control is not limited to dialogue or consultations. We
call for an enhanced and visible representation of
major TCCs at highest-level positions at Headquarters
and in the field.

Finally, in the context of a comprehensive
approach, the political process and peacebuilding
efforts must be pursued in parallel to the peacekeeping
activity in order to ensure speedy fulfilment of
mandates and to prevent relapse. The financial crunch
and finite resources are all the more reason to focus on
conflict prevention and resolution in the first place, not
to undercut peacekeeping.

Let me conclude by saying that if the Member
States regard peacekeeping as an indispensable
instrument, then we should all take a strategic decision
to support it fully and wholeheartedly, with the
political will, burden-sharing and pooling of resources
and equitable decision-making to ensure its success.

