Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, I wish to thank Mr. Blix for his statement. I
also wish to thank him and the representative of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for the
work programme submitted today.

The United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC) and the IAEA
strived to submit this work programme as early as
possible. Today they have done so, ahead of the
schedule provided for in resolution 1284 (1999). Yet,
due to rapidly developing events, our efforts have
fallen behind.

The inspections have been suspended and the
inspectors are on their way home. In spite of all this,
today's meeting still holds special significance. It
demonstrates that the Council, all along, has attached
great importance to inspections. This work programme
includes key remaining disarmament tasks, questions to
be answered and obligations to be implemented by Iraq
in order for these tasks to be accomplished. This
programme, if implemented, will surely make the
inspections more organized and more targeted and will
help enhance the effectiveness of the inspections.

In the light of the recent progress made in the
inspections, we believe that it is possible to achieve the
goal of disarming Iraq through peaceful means. We
should not put an end to the road to peaceful
disarmament. Here, I would like to take this
opportunity to express my appreciation and thanks to
the inspectors for their effective work under arduous
conditions. Our appreciation and thanks also go to Mr.
Blix and Mr. ElBaradei, who have discharged the
mandate conferred on them by the Council in an active,
rigorous and professional manner.

The situation in Iraq is indeed worrisome. We
express our utmost regret and disappointment at this
situation; war may break out at any moment. We
express our utmost concern for the humanitarian
situation in Iraq and for peace and security in the
region.

The Chinese people are a peace-loving people.
The Chinese Government has always independently
pursued a foreign policy of peace. No matter where in
the world, we will do all we can to avert conflict, to
avert war, so long as there remains a glimmer of hope
of maintaining peace, for winning over peace. Together
with Council members and vast numbers of Member
States, we are ready and will continue to pay close
attention to the Iraqi issue.

The Council bears the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security. No
matter what the circumstances may be, the Council
must shoulder its responsibility in earnest so as not to
let down the expectations of the vast numbers of
Member States and the international community.

