I thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing. I would also like to welcome Ms. Qaddour to the Security Council and acknowledge, through her, the critical work humanitarian organizations are doing on the ground despite the many challenges and the growing dire humanitarian needs. As the coronavirus disease pandemic slowly makes itself present in Syria, we remain concerned about the poor capacity of the country's health-care system to respond to it. Doctors and health-care workers have had to flee their country as a result of 10 years of conflict. The conflict in Syria is one that has not only destroyed critical infrastructure, but also emotionally devastated millions of people. At the same time, the options to effectively assist the Syrian people in the most effective and direct ways have been critically undermined. The closure of the Bab Al-Salam border crossing pushes the difficulties of delivering humanitarian assistance to the north-west of the country to very extreme limits. The closure decision was inappropriate in the light of the immense challenges and enormous suffering that persists in the area. Indeed, the current situation on the ground, with its compounding, coexisting crises, paints a sombre picture for the Syrian people. An alarming 9.3 million - and soon many more - are food insecure. In practical terms, that means that families are skipping meals, parents are not eating well enough, and children are not getting the nutrition and regular meals they need to grow up healthy. These people simply cannot afford to be food secure. It is not a matter of food scarcity, but a matter of food prices. The effects of the conflict, which is at the core of all this suffering, are increasingly harsh on the civilian population: from the humanitarian needs to the economic hardships, it is they who are paying the highest price. And yet, a credible, negotiated, political solution facilitated by the United Nations is not on the horizon in the short term. The only way to assist civilians in coping with the different crises they are dealing with is through increased and sustained humanitarian assistance using all feasible modalities. We have heard the call from non-governmental organizations working in Syria for this Council to urgently reauthorize access through the United Nations border points they were previously authorized to use. They are already seeing the impacts of decreased access, which could worsen even further in coming weeks and months. They are the ones responsible for the transportation and delivery of assistance. It is their staff, mostly Syrians, who are exposed to security risks and increased costs while trying to scale up and fill the gap for the closure of the crossing I just mentioned - not to mention the mobility constraints due to the pandemic or even the potential increase in hostilities in the area. The Dominican Republic believes that this is not the time to discuss anything other than how to meet the dire humanitarian needs of the Syrian people. This includes a complete ceasefire and an impulse to the political process through the full implementation of resolution 2254 (2015). Let us remember that, while we are here, hearing each other's statements and blaming one another for the failure of humanity that we have let ourselves fall into, there are millions of people going hungry and hundreds of thousands of children receiving no education, protection or health services. Many more are arbitrarily detained or in overcrowded camps. All of them are subject to a pandemic that could ultimately take their lives. And since this is the last public meeting under your presidency, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you and your team on delivering such successful and fruitful results this month. It has been a pleasure.
