The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received letters from the representatives of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany and Italy, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
item on the Council's agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the discussion
without the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took a seat at the Council
table; Mr. Eitel (Germany) and Mr. Terzi di
Sant'Agata (Italy) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, document S/l998/227 and
Corrigendum l and Addendum 1. Members of the Council
also have before them document S/l998/415, which
contains the text of a draft resolution submitted by
France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Portugal, the Russian
Federation, Sweden, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to document S/ 1998/314, which contains the
text of a letter dated 9 April 1998 from the Secretary-
General addressed to the President of the Security
Council, transmitting a letter dated 9 April 1998 from the
High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution contained in document
S/l998/415. Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the
draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America


The President: There were 15 votes in favour. The
draft resolution has been adopted unanimously as

resolution 1168 (1998).

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.20 pm.

