Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I thank Guatemala for
scheduling this very important open debate on peace
and justice, with a special focus on the role of the
International Criminal Court, under the agenda item
entitled "The promotion and strengthening of the rule
of law in the maintenance of international peace and
security".

Allow me to express our appreciation to Foreign
Minister Harold Caballeros of Guatemala for his
participation in today's debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General, the President of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) and the representative of
the Office of the Prosecutor of the ICC for their
comprehensive briefings this morning.

Peace and justice are complementary to each other.
Peace processes that take justice into account are
more sustainable and lasting than those that do not. In
negotiating peace processes, taking into account the
views of victims is critical. Victims want peace at the
beginning, and once peace is obtained they demand
justice. Ifjustice is not achieved, that leaves room for a
relapse into conflict.

The establishment of the International Criminal
Court, a permanent court to help fight impunity for
the crimes of highest concern to the international
community, is considered a milestone. The ICC was
given jurisdiction over genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and aggression. As of September
2012, 121 States had ratified the Rome Statute, which
came into force on 1 July 2002, and were subject to its
jurisdiction. Bangladesh is a State party to the ICC. We
have signed and ratified the Statute.

The Rome Statute granted the Security Council
unique powers to refer situations and place them under
the jurisdiction of the Court, even in a case concerning
a non-State party. Article 13 (b) of the Statute allows
the ICC to exercise its jurisdiction regarding the
aforementioned crimes when the Council, acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, refers a situation to the
Prosecutor of the Court. Article 16 allows the Council,
in exceptional circumstances, to adopt a resolution
under Chapter VII to defer an ICC investigation or
prosecution for a renewable period of 12 months.

The Security Council is a political organ of the
United Nations. On 26 February 2011, the Council
unanimously adopted resolution 1970 (2011), referring
the situation in Libya to the ICC, imposing an arms
embargo and targeted sanctions and establishing a
sanctions committee. Resolution 1970 (2011) also
invited the Prosecutor to address the Council within
two months, and every six months thereafter, on actions
taken pursuant to the resolution.

However, it also appears that the Council could
not actively cooperate with the ICC on that referral. In
fact, the few instances of Council cooperation with the
ICC are related to situations that were initiated by the
situation countries themselves, or by the Prosecutor,
under articles 13 (a), 14, 13 (c) and 15 of the Statute,
respectively, and therefore independently of the
Council.

Another worrying factor is that the pertinent
resolutions contain provisions that are contrary to the
integrity of the Rome Statute. In its referral on Libya,
the Council excluded nationals of non-State parties to
the ICC from the jurisdiction of the Court, or a domestic
court in another country, even for crimes committed
within Libya. The resolutions also recused the United
Nations from any financial obligation regarding the
referrals, notwithstanding article 115 (b) of the Rome
Statute, which provides for United Nations funding for
Council referrals, subject to approval by the General
Assembly.

It is our understanding that those elements are
undermining the rule of law by infringing on the work
of the ICC and are undermining the perception of the
Court as an independent legal body free of political
considerations. Therefore we hope that the ICC will
be better equipped to function as a tool of preventive
diplomacy so that it is able to assist the Security Council
in carrying out its mandate to uphold the rule of law
objectively and fairly, maintain peace and security and
combat impunity, while ensuring accountability.

We call on all concerned to translate their
commitment into action, in particular, through
executing arrest warrants and helping to reinforce the
fair rule of law across the globe, but also by building
new institutions, social and economic, to achieve, in the
long term, justice in a broader sense.

Victims want justice, no matter how much time
has elapsed since the perpetration of mass atrocities.
Here I would like to draw the Council's attention
to the case of Bangladesh. In order to bring the
perpetrators to justice, we set up, in March 2010, an
international crimes tribunal to try and punish any
individual or group of individuals, or any member of
any armed, defence or auxiliary forces, who committed
crimes against humanity, or genocide, war crimes,
premeditated murder, rape, arson, ethnic cleansing or
looting of people's property and assets, during the 1971
war of liberation.

Our ongoing effort is a natural expression of our
intention to end the culture of impunity for crimes
against humanity. That emanates from our firm belief
that peace and justice are mutually reinforcing and
that full enjoyment of peace is not possible without a
mechanism to ensure sound justice.

We have been taking every step to ensure that our
national process conforms to international standards.
That is why leading judicial personnel of the tribunal
that we set up in Bangladesh have visited The Hague.
They followed the work of the Court, including
evidence collection, the process of assessing veracity,
investigations of gender crimes and other war crimes.
We hope that our tribunal will be exemplary in ending
impunity while also cementing national reconciliation.

The trials are important not only for us, but their
outcome is equally important to the international
community and to our future generations. The process
will send a strong message to others who would commit
such crimes anywhere in the world. It will show that it
is possible for a national system of a developing country
to bring to justice those who are responsible for war
crimes, even long after the event.

Let me conclude by saying that Bangladesh is a
responsible, peace-loving nation and the Government
is a strong proponent of democracy, rule of law, human
rights and secularism. Bangladesh also expresses its
unequivocal commitment to the International Criminal
Court and the evolving system of international criminal
justice.

