Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Let me first thank the Non-Aligned
Movement and the League of Arab States for having
taken the initiative to request the convening of this
open meeting. We are also pleased that this request has
been granted.

Cameroon would like to pay tribute to the
Secretary-General for having been present at the
opening of our debate, to his personal commitment
throughout the management of the Iraqi crisis and his
praiseworthy efforts to avoid a tragic denouement with
which we are all familiar. My delegation would also
like to thank the Secretary-General for the speed with
which he put proposals to the Security Council to
quickly address the humanitarian tragedy in Iraq. We
fully support the Secretary-General.

Cameroon is participating in this new debate on
the situation in Iraq, both moved and aware of the
seriousness of current circumstances. Despite lengthy
months of negotiations and work, the Security Council
was unable to prevent the war that broke out exactly
one week ago in Iraq. My country regrets and deplores
the fact that the Council was unable to reach a
consensus in this regard. It is no longer time for us to
indulge in recriminations, even if we must
acknowledge the fact that we have all failed, either
because of our intransigence or our desire to be right at
all costs, or our inability to find a compromise.

We have lost many opportunities to stay on the
path of peace and have thus dashed many expectations.
Even up until Friday, 14 March 2003, six countries
who are members of the Security Council, including
Cameroon, vainly endeavoured to put forward some
middle ground that would have provided a foundation
for compromise. Unfortunately their suggestions were
not followed. Cameroon's position regarding this crisis
has repeatedly been expressed to the Council and
elsewhere and I shall not repeat it now.

I would simply like to emphasize that Cameroon
is a peace-loving country and intends to remain so.
Accordingly, in the international arena Cameroon will
continue to promote the peaceful settlement of
disputes. Having said this, today is the time for realism
and pragmatism, and a way to manage the urgent
current difficulties must be found. A response to the
humanitarian needs of the people of Iraq is a concern
of paramount importance which must take priority.
Last week, Secretary-General Kofi Annan
presented some extremely relevant and timely
proposals as to the best way to manage the
humanitarian crisis that goes hand in hand with this
war. Cameroon fully supports those proposals and their
implementation.

We consider that the Council must give clear
authorization to the Secretary-General to conduct an
emergency policy of humanitarian assistance in Iraq,
mobilizing all of the United Nations agencies,
beginning with the oil for food programme. Cameroon
regrets to note the re-emergence of polemics which,
without taking into account the suffering and tragedy
of the Iraqi people, may make a hostage of the
decision-making process in the Security Council. What
is of utmost importance is that we intervene in the
field. Any politicization of the discussion of how to
manage this humanitarian crisis at this very grave
moment seems inappropriate at this time.

There will certainly be a proper time to strike a
balance sheet of our collective and individual failures
on the part of member States of the Security Council.
There will also be a time to draw lessons from the
management of this international crisis. Cameroon, as
is customary, will actively participate in the debate that
is certain to take place in this connection. For the time
being, we only wish that the conflict come to a speedy
conclusion and pray that as few victims as possible
result.

We must act as quickly as possible to adopt
concerted measures in order to help the distressed Iraqi
people. Today we must commit the United Nations to
taking on the role of managing the Iraqi humanitarian
tragedy. We have failed to prevent war, so let us work
together to restore peace. The major role of the
Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security will, once again, have meaning. The Iraqi
people will find some comfort and the peoples of the
United Nations may find new reasons for hope.

