Sir Jeremy Greenstock: I thank you,
Mr. President, for that statement. Nothing has given
more momentum to the work of the Committee and of
the Chair than the warm and consistent support of all
my colleagues on the Council, and I thank them for
that.

Thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
meeting to review the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee (CTC) on the basis of the Committee's next
quarterly work programme. We have absorbed and are
working to implement ministerial instructions to the
CTC within resolution 1456 (2003). The task of
guiding the implementation of this programme will rest
with my successor, Ambassador Arias, and I wish him
well.

The CTC's work programme for its seventh 90-
day period, contained in document S/2003/387, builds
on the solid foundation gained from 18 months' work. I
should like to highlight for the Council two aspects:
first, the excellent cooperation we have established
with the vast majority of Member States; and secondly,
the beginnings of a global network to tackle terrorism.
Transparency and consistent hard work have been the
instruments.

In 18 months, the CTC has received 343 reports
from States and others. In response, it has sent 243
detailed letters in its efforts thoroughly to monitor the
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). For those
furthest ahead, the CTC's comments and questions are
moving from examining legislation to establishing that
executive machinery exists, is sufficient and is
functioning effectively. We do not expect every State to
move at the same pace, but we do expect each State to
move at its best possible pace.

The CTC will need to move ahead with both
sensitivity and firmness as it gets into the detail of
monitoring implementation. The existence of
legislation was relatively easy to judge: it was there or
it was not. But as we get into what the CTC has called
stages B and C, the existence and then the utilization of
Government machinery to prevent terrorist activities
and to bring terrorists to justice, the CTC will need to
deepen its understanding of what is required of States,
and communicate that to Governments. There is no one
standard pattern of counter-terrorism machinery for all
countries. So, I am convinced that the CTC's tailored
approach must continue.

States must be proactive in their response. The
guidance is there. Log on to the CTC's web site, which
is getting increasingly good as a source of information.
Talk to our experts, who know where assistance might
be found. Seek assistance from, or offer assistance to,
your neighbours and partners. Set your own
benchmarks or use your regional organizations to do
this.

Because terrorism will not remain static. New
threats will emerge. In January, our ministers
highlighted weapons of mass destruction. We must at
all costs prevent terrorists getting access to the
materials used in chemical, biological, nuclear and
other deadly weapons. I am pleased that the CTC will
shortly meet representatives of those organizations and
agencies with experience in this area: the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the World Customs
Organization and Interpol. The CTC will need to
explore how it can broaden its cooperation with them,
including in its exchanges with Member States.

I must mention here the States that need to do
more to achieve full current compliance with the CTC.
Three States have still not submitted even a
preliminary report to the CTC. They are Sao Tome and
Principe, Swaziland and Vanuatu. The Council should
now decide what further action to take in this regard.
The Council should also consider what action to take,
if any, with respect to the 51 States that have not yet
met the deadline set by the CTC for subsequent reports.
All late submitters have been repeatedly contacted and
offered the necessary assistance, and are in
contravention of resolution 1373 (2001).

Could I recall that there is a self-interest reason
for responding to the CTC. We have all seen, for
instance in Bali and Mombasa, the effects a single
terrorist outrage can have on tourism, investment, the
economy, social structure and political stability of a
whole region.

Counter-terrorism, in response, has now gone
global, with the United Nations at the centre. The
special meeting I hosted on 6 March brought together
the representatives of some 60 international, regional
and subregional organizations, all with counter-
terrorism programmes. The event was important for
establishing a global structure in concrete terms.
Participants recognized that every organization had its
own role to play and its own mandate. But they agreed
that, by working together, everyone could shorten the
journey and add more value to the fight against
terrorism.

So what does creating a global network mean in
practical terms? First, it means a better flow of
information. The CTC's web site will be expanded to
host the best information, in an user-friendly format, so
that in one place an interested person can access
information on assistance, regional activities,
implementation kits for the conventions and every
piece of collective best practice relevant to resolution
1373 (2001).

Secondly, the network must be exploited, so that
best practice spreads quickly and easily. The CTC will
further develop the list of contact points so that
contacts are made as simple as possible. I encourage all
States, and all international, regional and subregional
organizations, to use these contact points, and the
information about what others are doing, to develop
collective action.

Now let me say a few words in my personal
capacity. It is satisfying that the CTC has been
complimented for the dynamism of its approach over
the first 18 months. But there has also been criticism.
Colleagues have asked: When is the CTC going to
make a difference? When is it going to catch terrorists?
How can it make a difference on the ground when it
will not even say what terrorism is? They have accused
the CTC of doing no more than push paper. These are
perhaps understandable criticisms, but they are
misguided ones.

First, there has been a real change in a huge
number of capitals. There is an almost universal
awareness of the threat of terrorism as a particularly
hideous form of violent crime. This has led to revised
legislation, in some States already in force, elsewhere
working through the parliamentary system.
Governments are understanding the connection
between tackling terrorism and tackling organized
crime and other illegal activity. They are on heightened
alert for suspicious activity, including fund-raising.
And they are beginning to recognize that the world has
changed forever.

Secondly, the Committee has unlocked the
potential of collective effort. I suspect that many
participants in the 6 March meeting were surprised by
the extent of existing best practice and experience, on
which they can now capitalize. The international and
regional organizations have understood that there is a
standard of activity to follow. To keep up, they must
become more professional, harnessing the activities of
the international community, and sharing this with their
member States. The 6 March meeting showed that
regional organizations will be stronger, and will serve
their members better, if they develop institutional
capacity on counter-terrorism. They have also, like the
CTC itself, recognized the link between resolution
1373 (2001) and other obligations, particularly those in
the human rights field. The CTC will follow up this
awareness.

I believe that collective effort will pay dividends,
because no country can prevent terrorism in isolation.
Parts of the world that never considered counter-
terrorism before are now taking action. This was well
illustrated by a meeting of the Southern African
Development Community (SADC) in Botswana last
week, attended by our own chief technical assistance
expert, where participants grappled with issues such as
how to prevent the movement of terrorists and terrorist-
related goods in an open border region. I doubt
whether, before the CTC came into existence, the
members of SADC would have ever expected to tackle
counter-terrorism alongside their traditional
development agenda. But raising Government counter-
terrorism capacity is a key part of development.
Counter-terrorism policies must be mainstreamed into
Government programmes and development
programmes.

Only Governments working together can raise
global counter-terrorism capacity. But they have to be
organized. It took a horrific terrorist act less than five
miles from this building to shake the international
community into adopting the legally binding and global
standards of resolution 1373 (2001). But memories can
fade, and so can the call of responsibility. The vigour
of a central, catalytic body can make a huge difference
to the maintenance of global law and order in this vital
field. The CTC has become that. And perhaps, one day,
it may become something more: a full-time,
professional and global body of experts, working under
the Security Council but following up all the avenues
which resolution 1373 (2001) has opened.

Speaking once again in my capacity as
Committee Chairman, I cannot end without paying
tribute to those most closely involved in our work over
the past 18 months. The Committee's experts have
brought to us their experience, their professionalism
and their enthusiasm, and the CTC has relied on them
fully. I thank the Secretariat for managing a
voluminous paper flow, ensuring that we have meeting
rooms and translation and interpretation as required,
and overseeing the smooth running of the Committee. I
thank the Vice-Chairmen through the past 18 months,
Ambassadors Gaspar Martins, Lavrov, Koonjul,
Valdivieso and yourself, Mr. President, for your wise
guidance and immense dedication. I pay tribute to
every member of the Committee, without exception,
for his or her constant interest, patience and
constructiveness over these 18 months. I would be
expected to add something else, which is the pride that
I feel in the work of my own team in the United
Kingdom delegation - Anna Clunes, Iain MacLeod,
Juliette Gilbert, John Steven and Sue Broughton - in
providing the intellectual and bureaucratic energy and
innovation to fill the vacuum that stood in the world
and in the Council on 4 October 2001 and in giving
their dedication to the work of the Council and the
Committee over that period. I thank them from the
bottom of my heart.

It has been an honour to chair the CTC for its first
18 months, and I thank the members of the Security
Council for the confidence they have placed in me.
Ambassador Arias has a far more daunting challenge
ahead of him, as the Committee gets into the meat of
its important work. But he has all the qualities to
succeed. I hope that we have given him a solid basis on
which to continue. He can rely on the full support of
the United Kingdom Government and the United
Kingdom delegation in the period ahead.

