Mr. Asselborn (Luxembourg) (spoke in French):
I thank the Secretary-General for his live presentation
from the Middle East, as well as the representative of
the non-member Observer State of Palestine and the
Deputy Representative of Israel for their statements.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
that will be made shortly by the representative of the
European Union.

The Middle East today seems farther away than
ever from peace, so much so that to speak of the Middle
East means to speak of the conflicts there, as if the
identity of the region has become inseparable from
the wars tearing it apart. At its heart lies the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which has, for seven decades,
reflected the impotence of the international community.
For two weeks, that conflict has once again tragically
reminded us of our responsibilities. As we meet, the
Israeli offensive against Gaza has claimed more than
600 lives and more than 3,500 wounded, the majority
of whom are civilians.

Already an open-air prison, Gaza is literally
becoming a graveyard for its inhabitants. Can there be
any conceivable argument to justify such blood-letting
and such disproportionate use of armed force against
civilians? No, there is none. Clearly, the right of Israel
to defend itself and protect its people is not disputed.
We condemn in the strongest terms the rocket fire
showered on Israeli cities. But Israel's right does not
justify the despicable suffering inflicted on the civilian
population of Gaza.

More than 100,000 Palestinians are now living as

displaced persons. That has plunged the Gaza Strip into
an unprecedented humanitarian and public health crisis
without precedent, with even more tragic consequences
than operation Cast Lead in 2009. All in all, the toll on
children is perhaps the most terrifying. According to
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), 30 per cent of
those killed are children. The fact that, as indicated
by organizations on the ground, children die under
Israeli fire than Palestinian combatants is yet a further
reason for outrage. Under international humanitarian
law, all parties have an absolute obligation to safeguard
the lives of civilians caught up in the cross-hairs of a
conflict. Of course, that obligation applies to Hamas
and other armed groups that indiscriminately targeting
Israeli civilians.

The absolute priority today is to immediately halt
the suffering of Palestinian civilians on the ground.
That requires the prompt conclusion of a humanitarian
truce so as to care for the wounded, the displaced people
and those trapped in the ruins. We place great hope in
the mediation efforts headed by Egypt with the support
of the Secretary-General and United States Secretary
of State John Kerry. Those efforts will receive our full
support. We also reiterate our support to UNRWA and
its crucial work to lessen the suffering ofthe Palestinian
people.

Once a humanitarian truce is agreed to, a
comprehensive and lasting cessation of hostilities will
need to be negotiated. There is no other solution. The
violence must stop. Actions that fuel hate and discord
must be stopped as well. Suffering and humiliation
must be halted. The Palestinian people deserve to live
in a dignified manner. The blockade draining life from
Gaza for years must be lifted as an imperative. No
one can live in the conditions imposed on the people
in Gaza. For seven years, these people have lived
besieged between three walls and the sea. They have
survived solely thanks to UNRWA's aid and that of
the international community. That is the only way that
Israel can afford to subject 1.7 million Palestinians to
those appalling conditions.

Finally, there is a need to tackle the root causes of
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The stronger of the two,
Israel, has to choose to accept the only possible way
to live in peace, that is, the two-State solution, halting
provocation and the expansion of settlements, or getting
increasingly carried away in repeated military actions,
which only exacerbate the conflict. As the Ambassador
said, it is true: the truth and reality need to be seen
as they are. We need to be forward-looking. For now,
we hope that the Security Council will play its role to
support efforts to put an end to the spiral of violence.

After taking up the carnage in Gaza, I now turn to
the Syrian tragedy.

The conflict in Syria has claimed at least 160,000
lives and forced more than 3 million Syrians to flee their
country. That reflects on the international community
as a sad reminder ofits limits and divisions. As for facts,
the Bashar Al-Assad regime has been allowed to bomb
schools and hospitals, to attack humanitarian convoys
as well as medical personnel and to use starvation as a
weapon of war against besieged people. The situation
is most concerning for the 10.8 million Syrians, half of
them children, who are in urgent need of humanitarian
assistance. More than 4.5 million Syrians are trapped
in combat areas that are difficult for humanitarian
workers to reach.

Resolution 2139 (2014) was adopted by the Security
Council in February. It has changed nothing. On the
ground, humanitarian access continues to worsen,
given the systematic obstruction by the Syrian
Government. We hoped that resolution 2165 (2014),
adopted unanimously by the Security Council in the
past week upon the initiative of Australia, Jordan and
Luxembourg, would serve as a turning point. Pursuant
to the resolution, humanitarian agencies of the United
Nations are authorized to transport humanitarian aid
in a cross-border manner by the most direct routes
to those in need all over Syria. The consent of the
Syrian Government is no longer necessary. Aid is
to be distributed on the basis of needs assessments
carried out by the United Nations, not by Damascus.
Should resolutions 2139 (2014) and 2165 (2014) not be
complied with, the Security Council should undertake
supplementary measures, which is an essential element.
We hope that this innovative resolution will allow for
a true breakthrough on the ground. Its implementation
should allow for assistance to flow to between 1.4 and
2 million people in Syria who are to date still out of
reach for humanitarian workers. That being the case,
the implementation of Security Council resolutions
will not be enough in itself to resolve the humanitarian
crisis. The only lasting solution is the resolution of the
Syrian conflict, which implies a political process that is
Syrian-lead, along the lines of the Geneva communique
(S/2012/522, annex) of June 2012.

In that regard, Luxembourg welcomes the
appointment of Mr. Staffan de Mistura as the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria. That could
breathe new life into seeking a political solution to the
Syrian conflict.

In conclusion, just a few words about the effect
of the Syrian crisis on the countries of the region,
particularly Lebanon and Iraq. Over the past month,
deadly attacks have increased in Lebanon. That is the
most worrying sign ofthe growing impact of the Syrian
conflict on Lebanon. The effects of the presence and
influx of Syrian refugees on the political, economic
and social stability of the country are also significant,
which is to be expected.

Since April, the number of refugees from Syria
officially registered in Lebanon crossed the threshold of
1 million people: one fourth of the Lebanese population.
To grapple with those challenges, it is crucial for the
Lebanese political players to elect as swiftly as possible
a President to succeed Mr. Michel Suleiman. The
election would bolster Lebanese institutions and help
stabilize the country. The election would also facilitate
the implementation of the disassociation policy in line
with the Baabda Declaration.

I turn now to Iraq.

We would like to condemn in the strongest terms
the systematic persecution of ethnic and religious
minorities by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
and by armed groups associated with it. In particular,
we are deeply concerned by reports of the treatment of
the Christian population in Mosul. Those individuals
are subject to unacceptable threats. We therefore fully
support the press statement on the persecution of
minorities in Mosul, adopted yesterday by the Security
Council. The unity and stability of the region are
threatened by the onward march of Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant. Thus, a swift establishment of a
new Government is of crucial importance. We have no
doubt that Iraqi political stakeholders will rise above
their partisan interests to tackle the challenges before
the country and that, i a spirit of unity, they will swiftly
form a Government that reflects the Will of the Iraqi
people.

There is no miracle solution to resolve the numerous
conflicts impacting the Middle East, but every chance
we get we must do everything in our power to bring
diplomacy back to centre stage. First and foremost,
we must demonstrate to whom the international
community's heart goes out. That is to the weakest, the
victims, be they in Aleppo, Mosul or Gaza.

