Mr. J a'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): My delegation adds its voice to every word of
your statement, Sir. We understand your words today in
this Council as representing the correct way of
exercising the privilege of the moral veto against any
attempt to turn facts on their head and every endeavour
to rob of its substance the role of the United Nations in
achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in
the Middle East.

We listened to the briefing given by Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe this morning. While seeking
to the maximum possible extent to gloss over the
ongoing Israeli Violations of all international norms
and laws and contraventions of the Security Council's
resolutions, and to obscure the facts on the ground, the
briefing could not help but paint a very dark picture of
the situation on the ground that the region has endured
over more than 40 years of abhorrent Israeli settlement
colonialism.

With regard to the monthly briefing by Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe, I wish to express our
dissatisfaction at its failure to address the situation in
the occupied Syrian Golan. The item under which the
monthly meeting of the Security Council is held is, as
all colleagues know, "The situation in the Middle East,

including the Palestinian question". The occupied
Syrian Golan is an intrinsic part of that situation,
which has been brought about by the ongoing Israeli
occupation of Arab lands. Today, we participate in this
meeting of the Security Council as a principal
concerned party, pursuant to the Council's own
decisions. Proceeding from that, we call on the
Secretariat to ensure that no such omission occurs in
future briefings. We express our gratitude for all
information concerning Israeli occupation activities in
the occupied Syrian Golan.

The principles and purposes of the United
Nations Charter and the resolutions of the Security
Council and the General Assembly all identify
occupation as the worst form of aggression and the
worst violation of fundamental human rights. Despite
that fact, and the hundreds of cumulative resolutions
condemning Israel by name for its practices in
complete contravention of all such principles and
resolutions, Israel - a truly unique practitioner of
outlaw behaviour in today's world - has persisted and
continues to persist in ignoring the most fundamental
principles of international law and in engaging in
violence, oppression and morally and politically
irresponsible behaviour. Israel boasts of such shameful
behaviour and flouts international law and norms.

A few days ago, Israeli newspapers printed
statements by Yuval Diskin, head of the internal
security service known as Shabak, in which he boasted
that his service had killed 810 Palestinians, including
200 civilians, in 2007. Internal Security Minister Avi
Dichter averred that the number was too low, and that
the figure represented 5 per cent of those whom the
occupation forces ought to have killed. One Israeli
human rights organization reported that the occupation
authorities killed 152 children in 2007, including 48
under the age of 14. That would bring the total number
of Palestinian children killed between 2000 and today
to 866, according to Israel's own calculations.

Israel has inaugurated the new year by shutting
down the Gaza Strip, hindering the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and plunging the entire district
into darkness, in addition to unleashing daily
massacres of Palestinians that claim dozens of young
people and children, detaining thousands of Palestinian
pilgrims and patients at the Egyptian border crossing,
and preventing their return to Gaza. Israel continues to
turn a deaf ear to all international appeals based on the
principles of international law to halt the construction
of the apartheid wall and to release the
parliamentarians, members of the Legislative Council,
and Palestinian leaders whom it is holding without
justification.

Syria strongly condemns such inhumane Israeli
activities and calls on the Security Council to take
immediate action to end such Israeli crimes and to
punish their perpetrators. The international community
cannot stand motionless in the face of such crimes,
which rise to the level of genocide and crimes against
humanity.

The failure by this Council in the past few days to
adopt a simple presidential statement condemning
Israel for its flagrant Violations of human rights and
internationally proscribed policies of collective
punishment in the Palestinian territory, in particular in
Gaza - owing to the position of a permanent member
of the Security Council that always tries to tailor the
deliberations of the Security Council to suit Israeli
interests, whether such interests run counter to
international law or not. That failure runs counter to
the responsibilities entrusted to the Security Council by
the United Nations Charter and sends the wrong
message to Israel, namely, that it may persist in its
aggressiveness and may behave as if there were no
occupation and as if people under foreign occupation
had no right to fight such an occupation.

More than four decades have passed since Israel's
occupation of the Syrian Golan. Israel continues to
refuse to return the occupied Syrian Golan to its
motherland, Syria, or to respond to relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 497 (1981).
Israel's response to those resolutions has been in the
form of the worst Violations of international law,
humanitarian law and human rights, perpetuating the
occupation and preventing the inhabitants of the
occupied Syrian Golan from visiting their families and
relatives in their motherland, Syria. Such coercive
treatment of thousands of Syrians in the occupied
Syrian Golan, preventing them from reaching out to
their own families, increases the suffering of our
people and runs counter to the minimum obligations of
the Israeli authorities, the occupying Power.

Not one home in the Syrian Golan is without
relatives in the motherland of Syria. Here we recall the
harsh humanitarian suffering of families of the Syrian
Golan in cases of sickness or death when members of
the same family are prevented from contacting each
other. Syria emphasizes that the people of the Golan

are Syrian citizens in an occupied part of the
homeland. They have the humanitarian right to remain
in contact and to reach out to their own people.

The tragedy of Syrian prisoners in Israeli jails
continues unabated. Some have now been detained for
more than 30 years without justification. Some have
passed away and others remain there on their deathbed
because Israel refuses to respect international
humanitarian law. My country has dispatched letters in
that regard to the Secretary-General, to the President of
the Security Council, to the President of the General
Assembly, to Security Council members and to
governmental and non-governmental organizations,
seeking their intervention to assist in resolving the
issues relating to allowing Syrian citizens in the
occupied Golan to Visit their families and releasing
Syrian detainees from Israeli jails. We are confident
that we shall receive replies to those letters.

My delegation has repeatedly stressed that we are
determined to regain our entire occupied land to the
border of 4 June 1967 by all legitimate means available
to us. My country continues to address the issue, at
every opportunity, in our attempt to reach that
objective.

The Arab Peace Initiative is the main opportunity
that Israel ought not miss. It may not come again. That
initiative also set aside all of the empty pretexts that
Israel invokes. However, Israel has responded to all of
the initiatives and efforts with provocative, escalating
and unjustified steps. As was recently documented by
the United Nations in the latest report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force (UNDOF) in the Golan (S/2007/698),
Israel is strengthening its military presence, as well as
military training, in the Golan and that is a new
indication that it will continue its aggressive stance in
contradiction to all of its claims that it desires peace.

All such events merely entrench the conviction of
the people of the region that the Arab-Israeli conflict
remains unresolved because Israel lacks the political
will to end its occupation of Arab land and because this
conflict is being managed by a specific group of
countries, thus complicating matters and transforming
what could become a just, comprehensive peace into a
peace conditioned upon opportunistic, short-sighted
calculations.

The policy of obfuscation by Israel, a policy
based on daily attempts to place obstacles before
peace, thus pushing the region to states of despair
followed by explosions of Violence, is an entrenched
policy that is shored up by Israel's daily practices.
After some came to believe that the road to peace is
possible in the aftermath of the Annapolis conference,
the Israeli Government launched a new settlement
campaign in the Golan and in occupied Jerusalem and
acts of morally unjustified killing of Palestinians in
Gaza and the West Bank, which has led many to
believe that negotiations are but a waste of time.

The number of Israeli settlers in the occupied
Arab territories increased by 5 per cent last year. Israel
has attempted to draw international parties into a new
game, a game of redefining the concept of settlement
and dividing it into both legitimate and illegitimate
aspects. Israel inaugurated the New Year with intense
and illegitimate acts of military aggression against
Palestinian civilians. Such military attacks clearly
complicate the very fragile situation on the ground and
will work to defeat the hopes that some had in the
Annapolis conference.

The Arabs have again shown that they want a
peace that puts an end to Israeli occupation, a peace
built on the Arab Peace Initiative adopted by the Beirut
conference in 2002 and re-launched by Arab leaders at
the Riyadh summit. The Arab commitment to a just and
comprehensive peace requires a reciprocal, serious
commitment by the Israeli Government and its standard
bearers to work for peace, which includes abiding by
the resolutions of international legitimacy and
withdrawing from the occupied lands in accordance
with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). Syria has opted for a just and comprehensive
peace as a strategic choice, based on the well-known
Madrid terms of reference and the resolutions of
international legitimacy. These require the return of all
occupied Arab territories, including the occupied
Syrian Golan, to the line of 4 June 1967 and the
establishment of an independent Palestinian State with
Jerusalem as its capital.

The continuation of the occupation runs counter
to peace; it means more strife, more victims and more
destruction. A just and comprehensive peace is my
country's strategic option, but not at the expense of our
national rights or sovereignty. President Bashar
Al-Assad stressed that when he said that a just and
comprehensive peace was a strategic option, but not at
the expense of Syrian land or sovereignty.

My colleague, the head of the United States
delegation referred to my country when he was

discussing the situation in Lebanon. In that context, I
should like to remind members that Syria not only
supported the Arab Peace Initiative - whose
implementation is currently being supervised by
Mr. Amr Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of
Arab States - but also helped to create it and
participated in the meeting of foreign ministers at
which it was formulated. Therefore, Syria is very keen
to ensure the Initiative's success and to assist our
Lebanese brothers in reaching agreement among
themselves in order to achieve security and put an end
to Lebanon's current constitutional crisis.

We interpret the call for non-interference in
Lebanon's internal affairs as a call on all parties,
including the United States of America and others. No
one must interfere in Lebanon's internal affairs. Once
no one is doing so, we shall help the Lebanese to reach
agreement among themselves and to put an end to the
crisis in Lebanon.

I wish to reiterate my country's total
condemnation of all the acts of assassination that have
taken place in Lebanon. Such assassinations are aimed
at the Lebanese people themselves. Our condemnation
was made officially, and I shall reiterate it to the
members of the Council. Syria has every intention to
find the guilty hands that have assassinated Lebanese
people. We are confident that all the manoeuvres and
attempts to distract us from the truth will be revealed at
the conclusion of the investigations now under way.

