Mr. Mawe (Ireland): I thank you, Sir, for convening
today's debate. Ireland aligns itself with the statements
delivered by the observer of the European Union and by
the representative of Slovenia on behalf of the Human
Security Network.

In my national capacity, I wish to situate my brief
remarks in the broader context of sustaining peace. The
Security Council and, indeed, the entire United Nations
system was established not to mitigate the effects of
conflict, but to deal with threats and risks to peace in
order to prevent them from breaking out into full-scale
conflict. We commend Secretary- General Guterres
for emphasizing the primacy of peace and for placing
conflict prevention at the core of his mandate. We were
also glad to see all United Nations Member States come
together, with the backing of the Council, to adopt an
innovative resolution on sustaining peace in April oflast
year (General Assembly resolution 70/262). Preventing
and ending conflicts must be at the top of our agenda as
the most effective means to protect civilians.
Unfortunately, we are compelled to focus on the
many conflicts currently being fought. Today, there are
more people in conflict-related humanitarian need than
we have seen since the end of the Second World War.
Much of that is caused not by the mere existence of
conflict, but by violations by conflict parties of their
duties and obligations - most of which arise from
international customary law. Those are not accidents,
but deliberate decisions by parties to conflict.

We absolutely condemn attacks on medical and
health care facilities. We do so without qualification or
reserve. Not only are parties to conflicts reneging on
their obligations to ensure, in their military planning
and operations, the protection of hospitals and other
civilian facilities, they are engaging in deliberate
and repeated attacks. We commend the Security
Council for responding to that egregious trend by
adopting resolution 2286 (2016) in May of last year,
which underlines the obligations of parties to armed
conflict to comply with international humanitarian and
international human rights law to protect health care
infrastructure and personnel.

The growing trend of attacks on humanitarian
workers is also a cause of grave concern. We heard
yesterday in this Chamber (see S/PV.7950) that 17 aid
workers have been killed in South Sudan this year alone
and we are not yet in the month of June. Moreover, the
politicization and militarization of humanitarian aid
is unacceptable. Access to food, water and medical
care cannot be denied in an attempt by a conflict
party to gain military advantage. Similarly, we reject
the use of humanitarian access as a bargaining chip
in peace negotiations, as well as the attempted tit-
for-tat agreements we have seen regarding medical
evacuations in Syria.

We support the critical role of the International
Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), which works to
coordinate and protect those on the ground who are often
putting their lives at risk to access and assist victims
of conflict. We thank the ICRC for using its voice to
remind States and other parties to armed conflicts of
their legal obligations under international humanitarian
law, as has been done today by the Vice-President of the
ICRC, Ms. Beerli.

Ireland wishes to direct the Council's attention
also to the issue of civilian harm from the conduct of
hostilities in urban areas, particularly through the use
of cluster munitions. Last year, when explosive weapons
were used in populated areas, 92 per cent ofthose killed
and injured were civilians. The immediate effects are
clear; we have heard accounts in this Chamber of the
destructive aftermath in cities in Yemen, Syria and
many other places. What we often do not hear about is
the longer-term effect - the stagnation of economic,
social and environmental development, or the harm
and injury caused by explosive remnants long after the
initial conflict has ceased.

We therefore support the recommendation of the
Secretary-General for States to engage constructively in
efforts to develop a political declaration to address the
humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons
in populated areas. We also urge all States to accede to
the Convention on Cluster Munitions, the Convention
on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production
and Transfer of Anti-Personnel Mines and on Their
Destruction and the Arms Trade Treaty. Illegal and
irresponsible arms transfers to conflict regions must
be stopped.

Finally, when discussing the issue of the protection
of civilians we must also highlight the particular
challenges faced by women and children. Ireland is
supporting a civil society-led study to explore the
specific risks faced by women and girls following
forced displacement caused by explosive weapons in
populated areas.

Let us be clear. We are making lowest common
denominator calls today. We are asking that States and
non-State actors alike adhere to the rules and norms
that bind them to protecting civilians who have nothing
to do with the conflict happening around them. As we
have seen today in the Secretary-General's report, this
is simply not happening. What is more, perpetrators are
not being held accountable. If the Organization and the
Council are to remain effective and relevant they must
take the measures necessary to ensure that everyone
adheres to the most basic threshold of humanity.

