Mr. Pramudwinai (Thailand): On behalf of the
Government and the people of Thailand, I wish to
warmly congratulate Panama upon its assumption of

the presidency of the Security Council for February
and to express our appreciation to you, Sir, for
organizing the open debate on this important topic.

The Thai Government, like the Governments of
most other countries, shares the commitment of the
Secretary-General, his Special Representative for
Children and Armed Conflict, UNICEF and other
relevant parties to protect and improve the well-being
of children around the world. But since this morning
we have heard, and we continue to hear, various voices
of care and concern for the plight of children in all
situations of trouble. Some may see this as a fact of
life, one that is seemingly perennial, but taking
advantage of the fragility of children is not to be
tolerated. That practice must be curtailed, and their
future ensured.

In this connection, we would like to share with
the Council our views on this crucial issue. First,
Thailand notes that the Security Council has of late
made significant strides in the specific area of children
and armed conflict within the context of its principal
mandate on the maintenance of international peace and
security. We appreciate the commitment and
contribution of the Security Council in this area.
However, we are of the view that the mechanism
established by the Security Council on this particular
subject is still in its nascent stage; there is certainly
room for improvement and consolidation. Thorough
reflection by the Council would be necessary in this
regard, and we agree with many speakers that a
thorough but incremental, step-by-step approach offers
the best way forward.

Secondly, Thailand welcomes the fact that, in
conjunction with the Security Council, there has been
greater interest within the overall United Nations
system on the issue of children. This advancement of
the children's agenda can be recognized in various
forms and forums, including the General Assembly, the
Economic and Social Council, the Human Rights
Council, the executive boards of specialized agencies,
funds and programmes and relevant human rights
treaty bodies. In our view, because the issue of children
is multidimensional and diverse, our approaches,
strategies and instruments should be so as well, bearing
in mind the uniqueness, strengths and constraints of
each of those various bodies. Against this backdrop, we
firmly believe that greater effort should be made by the
international community to address the root causes of
armed conflict through greater international
cooperation in the areas of poverty alleviation and
sustainable socio-economic development. Development
is another name for peace and security.

Thirdly, the Thai Government has always been
fully committed to doing what it can to contribute to
the realization of our collective vision of a world fit for
children. Our track record in this area, both at home
and abroad, speaks for itself and underlines our strong
determination to constantly improve the well-being of
all our children. For in so doing, we know full well that
a strong and sustainable foundation for the peace,
security and future development of the country is
firmly laid.

As concrete testimony to our commitment, the
Thai Government has already become a party to the
Convention on the Rights of the Child and its two
Optional Protocols, on the sale of children, child
prostitution and child pornography, and on the
involvement of children in armed conflict. We are
determined to ensure that we have the most effective
domestic legal framework in place for our children. A
broad range of policy initiatives has also been
implemented to promote and protect the rights of
children in Thailand, including the right to education,
through a policy of universal access to education. In
short, our commitment to the cause of children is a
strong and healthy national commitment.

Fourthly, we cannot stress enough that utmost
care should be exercised in the preparation of reports
of the Secretary-General on such issues as children and
armed conflict. It should be clear that the scope of the
report on this issue and its follow-up should be strictly
restricted to situations of armed conflict. In this
context, we would like to echo the view expressed by
several previous speakers that any reference in such a
report to any country where there is no situation of
armed conflict is not only unwarranted but also
misleading and should not be repeated in the future.

In conclusion, the Thai Government wishes to
reaffirm its commitment to the cause of children. We
will continue to work actively with our partners at
home and abroad in various areas for the children, our
future.
