The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Dakhil for her very strong statement.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity
as Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Development of France.

I shall speak in no uncertain terms. In the Middle
East, we are facing a barbaric and systematic process of
ethnic and religious eradication. While, in their sheer
number, Muslims are the primary victims of Jihadist
terrorism, non-Muslim communities find themselves
especially targeted. They embody the type of diversity
that Daesh wants to eliminate. Christians, Yazidis,
Turkmen, Kurds and Shabak are all threatened by
what I would call a triangle of horror: forced exile,
enslavement and death.

Because of its history, France has deep ties with
Eastern Christians as well as a long tradition of
protecting minorities. We intend to stay faithful to what
are the tenets of the French nation.

In Iraq, as has been clearly described, upon the
capture of Mosul last summer, Christians were hunted
down. In Syria, the situation is tragic: nearly 220
Assyrian Christians were kidnapped by Daesh in the
northern region of Hasaka. Persecution has extended
beyond the official boundaries of the Middle East. Last
month in Libya, 21 Coptic Egyptians were beheaded.
Daesh would like to continue growing its network
of terror. While I have mentioned the targeting of
Christians, Daesh attacks all minorities with the same
inhumanity. For instance, the Yazadis besieged on Mount
Sinjar or Kurds targeted in Kobani especially come to
mind. Their barbarism strikes even the artefacts that
symbolize diversity - what the High Commissioner
referred to as the mosaic. These terrorists ransacked the
museum in Mosul and attacked the ancient Assyrian
city of Nimrod and the Parthian city of Hatra. They not
only want to erase the present, but physically destroy
its roots - they would like history not to begin before
or without them.

The danger of Daesh's enterprise is that of the total
disappearance of minorities. We are the international
community; we must no longer remain collectively a
powerless force. For that reason, from this Chamber, I
would like to send a dual message - one of solidarity
with the persecuted and one of determination against
the terrorists, what the High Commissioner called an
abomination. We must show to the minorities in the
Middle East that we are on their side and on the side of
States respectful of diversity. We must let the terrorists
of Daesh know that we will fight them relentlessly and
defeat them.

During the last few months, the world has tried
to respond to the humanitarian emergency in order to
save these minorities from death. While these efforts
obviously remain needed, we can all see that they are
not enough. The minorities are not asking for favours,
but rather they are demanding their rights. Our mission
must be the return of displaced minorities to their
homes. In that pursuit, all means must be used.

First, there must be humanitarian support. The
situation is dire. Our collective efforts should enable
exiled minorities to return home in safety and dignity.
United Nations agencies, especially the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), plays an outstanding and major role.
We believe it should concentrate its efforts on such
support. Member States must meaningfully strengthen
their financial support, which is absolutely essential.
Specifically, I propose that we set up a specific return
assistance fund that would help with the reconstruction
of homes and places of worship.

Accordingly, we should take the same approach
to military action. As Daesh retreats, we need to
enable minorities to return to the areas they had to
leave. This means that the presently deployed ground
troops must help secure their return, because without
security there will be no sustainable return. In areas
still not yet liberated, France wants the coalition, in
conjunction with the Iraqi authorities, on the one hand,
and the moderate Syrian opposition, on the other hand,
to make the return of minorities part of its strategy. In
tandem with the anti-Jihadist struggle, the preservation
of minorities in Iraq and Syria must become a key
objective of the military effort of the coalition and local
forces.

I would also like to reiterate my country's
commitment to combating impunity. We call upon the
States of the region that have not yet done so to adhere
to the Rome Statute in order that the International
Criminal Court can prosecute the perpetrators of
these crimes. Even if this raises legal issues, given the
irreversible destruction committed, we believe that
cultural genocide should be included in the scope of
crimes against humanity. Perpetrators of war crimes
and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted - and
in particular Daesh terrorists. We believe it is essential
that the Security Council refer such matters to the
International Criminal Court.

More generally, we all know that only an overall
political solution will allow for the sustainable
and peaceful return of minorities. That is why the
international community must support the consolidation
of States that are the guarantors of the coexistence
of all segments of society, rather than advocates of a
single community, because, as has been well said,
sectarianism breeds extremism. Only inclusive States,
protecting diversity and providing everyone with full
citizenship, are able to restore the confidence of the
people, especially minorities. Through this concept of
inclusiveness, ensuring a place for minorities is at the
heart of the solution to these crises. I will give three
examples.

In Iraq, the response to terrorists has been a process
of unificiation and reconciliation, initiated by Prime
Minister Al-Abadi; but those efforts must be increased.
This is the prerequisite for a united, stable and peaceful
Iraq.

In Syria, the issue of minorities is unfortunately
manipulated by a Power that has used the Jihadist threat
to erect a supposed bulwark against terrorism that it
itself triggered and colludes with. In this case as well,
only an inclusive political solution that includes both
the regime and the opposition and that serves to protect
the various communities, will lead to a meaningful
democratic transition and ensure the rights of each and
every one in future.

In Lebanon, the model of coexistence among the
communities established by the Constitution, the
National Covenant and the Taingreement is challenged
by the current institutional paralysis. We call upon the
Lebanese to elect, as soon as possible, a President who
will ensure the preservation of that model.

I know that comparisons may be misleading, but let
us remember Yugoslavia: the collapse of the State that
protected minorities caused a resurgence of violence
against them. Today, I propose and request on behalf
of my country that the Secretary-General submit to
the Security Council a charter of action to address
the situation of minorities in the Middle East. The
international community needs a detailed road map to
implement its response.

Such a charter could be organized around the four
components that I mentioned, and which other speakers
have addressed. The first is humanitarian assistance:
the action of United Nations agencies, especially
UNHCR, must be even more focused on the return of
minorities. Secondly, on the military level, the issue of
return and the security of minorities must be integrated
into the strategy of the coalition and local forces.
Thirdly, in the fight against impunity, the perpetrators
of war crimes and crimes against humanity must be
tried by the International Criminal Court. Finally,
politically, we must strengthen the unifying policy in
Iraq and promote an inclusive political transition in
Syria. I am thinking here of Libya, of Yemen and other
places, where we hope for Governments and States that
are inclusive.

I want to warmly welcome the announcement made
by the Secretary-General on the establishment of an
advisory panel of experts to look into this crucial issue.
I propose that their priority task, if he agrees, should be
to draw up a plan of action. France is prepared to host an
international conference focusing on the presentation
of the panel's findings.

Public opinion - by that I mean that of ordinary
citizens - is wondering how so many countries
gathered here together, who call themselves the United
Nations, have so far been unable to confront the threat
of terrorism and eradicate it. Those citizens are right.
This meeting of the Council will have been useful if
it serves not simply as a warning cry, but also as a
specific call for action, action focused on a single goal:
to preserve the 2,000 year-old diversity in the entire
region and to enable persecuted minorities to return
permanently to their lands.
That is the appeal, one of gravity and hope, that I
want to make today on behalf of France.

I shall now give the floor to the other members of
the Security Council.

