Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): I
wanted to speak late in the debate because I wanted to
hear what other people said and to pick up the tenor of
our discussion, so I am going to speak quite informally.
I am grateful to the Permanent Representative of
Tunisia for remaining this long.

Mr. President, you asked a question at the
beginning of the meeting, a question that has been
answered obliquely. That question was, can the
Security Council improve its performance in the
termination of peacekeeping operations? I think the
general answer around the table has been that it can,
and that it has to, improve its performance. The
question is, how? Having listened to 13 other members
of the Council, I think that we are remarkably united in
the prescription that we have put forward, and that is a
good thing. But we have not actually answered the
question, "how?", and we need to decide how to
answer it. There were some nuances in the debate. One
or two old hobby horses came out, and some things that
were not entirely relevant to the question came out.

I think that Namibia's remark that the
responsibility of the Security Council must not
abrogated, the question of whether we are too selective
in the termination of peacekeeping operations are
questions that the Security Council has to look at
politically. But, actually, in talking about exit
strategies, we are talking about strategy.

The United Nations, in the area of peacekeeping
and in some other areas, is to a large extent, a
minimalist Organization. We do not have many
resources, and we try to get away with the minimum
possible to deal with a certain situation. It is otherwise
too expensive or too difficult for our national decision-
makers to agree to commit themselves to a collective
operation.

So it is strategy that we are talking about. This
debate is taking place only two days after we adopted
resolution 1327 (2000), so we have done a lot of the
work that we are talking about, and it is absolutely
clear that we must have at the front three things in
particular.

One is a much deeper and broader analysis of
what we are doing, and we need to have the equipment
for that analysis. There is no point in just asking for it.
It has to be the Council's analysis because the Council
is responsible, but we obviously need the professional
work of the Secretariat to do much of that analysis for
us. I think we all think that Brahimi is quite right in
asking for a specific, strategic analysis capability to be
present in the Secretariat.

But it has to be an analysis not just of the swamp
into which we are sending our peacekeeping operation
but of the causes of the problem. All members have
said that. And it is not just the causes; it is the context.
Some have pointed to the regional context, and some
have pointed to the political, economic and social
context into which we are sending a peacekeeping
operation.

The mandate has to pick that up, and the mandate,
as has been stated here, is very often dependent - and
should very often be dependent - on the peace
agreement that the parties have come to. We are not
free. We are not starting from scratch in authorizing a
mandate. That is a problem because we are not in
charge of the peace agreement.

I think we should insert our interests into the
agreement at a much earlier stage, as Jamaica and
others have said. Then there would be a criterion in the
mandate for the exit. In other words, we have to direct
the peacekeeping operation with a clear objective
which can be judged as having been finished. As
Ambassador Holbrooke said, at the very least the
original problem has to be dealt with, and Ambassador
Ward set out a number of other considerations which
establish how we can define that the objective has been
met. That is extremely important, and we do not always
do it; we have to do it.

Once we set the mandate, there is then a second
item beyond the initial analysis, and that is that
everybody understands the mandate: the wider
membership, particularly the troop contributors, or
potential troop contributors which means that they
must be consulted before we finalize the mandate. In
among that broad understanding there has to be an
assessment of the capability and will of the
international community to perform the mandate.

Namibia pointed to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo as a clear example, in Namibia's View, of
potential or actual selectivity. But I think that in
making that remark they were not subscribing to what
is a much broader understanding that the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC) cannot actually start
the operation until certain conditions have been met
because the United Nations does not have an endless
capability or an endless will. It has very severe limits,
and the Secretary-General is now clearly aware of
those limits and is going to tell us what those limits
are. So we, too, have to have an understanding of what
we are capable of as the United Nations.

Then, the third area is implementation.
Absolutely crucial- and this is in the lap of the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations, at least in the
first instance- is that there needs to be better
planning, higher speed, better coordination and all the
things that fall under Brahimi.

Mr. President, you used one word in your
introduction, when throwing questions at us, that not
one member of the Council then picked up. That word
was "leadership". Nobody has talked about it. This
Organization as a whole is seriously deficient in
leadership. We pass the buck endlessly. Look at the
shape of this table. Between the Secretary-General, the
Council, the membership and the troop-contributors,
we pass the buck around endlessly.

I am not saying that the United Kingdom has
solved that problem in the Sierra Leone context, but we
have national reasons for wanting to show a very great
determination to end it. The Australians did in East
Timor. NATO did in the Balkans. But that leadership
does not extend into all the functions and
responsibilities of the United Nations or the Security
Council. I think we need to talk a bit more about
leadership and the limits of the United Nations in
carrying out complicated operations when the
leadership function is dissipated among parts of the
international community.

Then there is a stage which we have not really got
to grips with, the stage when something happens to a
peacekeeping operation that changes its basis. Lome
breaks down; the Revolutionary United Front go back
to war. That is a difficult one, because the original
mandates have not taken account of that and have not
really given us flexibility from the original objective to
deal with it. Therefore, we need to build into our
thinking an awareness of the possible need for change.
We do it as we go along. We are flexible as a Council.
We ordain on the day what we have to do. But we do
not necessarily understand each other on that.

Canada talks about conflict management and
training up the international community and particular
countries that are relevant to manage conflict as we go
along. That is management. We have not learned how
to do it in the Council. I think France also pointed to
the fact that clear objectives for a peacekeeping
operation are not always possible. That again I think
has been a lesson in Sierra Leone, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and elsewhere.

I will not go on about other things that Brahimi
brings to us: the broader coordination that is necessary,
from conflict prevention all the way through to post-
conflict peace-building, and, as China has rightly said,
including the ownership of the country itself of the
programme that it is involved in, of the peacekeeping
operation, because it is the ultimate authority to which
we have to return authority when we exit. That is
extremely important. It brings in economic questions,
arms flow questions, mineral resource questions,
demobilization, disarmament and reintegration (DDR)
questions, regional questions and the very function of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
All that has to be looked at again. I do not think we are
broad enough in our approach.

But what did come out of this morning, I think, is
a very clear lesson that the decision on exit has to be
related to a transitional mechanism. We do not just get
out. We hand over to a mechanism that deals with the
next stage. The United Nations Transitional
Administration in Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and
Western Sirmium was an example. Civilian police and
civilian experts are needed for this; a DDR process is
needed for this; and an understanding with the host
country is needed for this. Bangladesh pointed also to
the role of non-governmental organizations and civil
society.

There is also the question of resources, both
money and troops. We need another discussion about
why it is that developed high-tech armies do not want
to do low-tech United Nations peacekeeping. We talked
about it in the retreat. We need to talk about it again. It
is not a matter of double standards. It is a matter of the
nature of different organizations, different armies,
different requirements and different experiences. This
week we had in town the Deputy SACEUR (Supreme Allied Commander in Europe) from NATO. We had a
very interesting small dinner party, talking about the
differences in approach between NATO, on the one
hand, and United Nations peacekeeping, on the other,
which brought those of us who were listening some
lessons that will have to be gone into in greater detail.

Mr. President, you would be disappointed, I
think, if we left this room - and we need to hear what
non-members of the Council have to say this
afternoon - without agreeing on some action that we
need to take to follow up the thoughts that your paper
has inspired. I think the Brahimi report covers a lot of
what we want. I am not sure that we do not need a
special subcommittee of the Council on peacekeeping
operations to take up some of these professional and
detailed points. I think we need, as Namibia has said,
small missions occasionally, perhaps two or three
people going out to an area and bringing back some
firsthand experience, before we pass the mandate. We
have to talk as the Security Council to other parts of
the system, to the economic and social parts and to the
General Assembly and its committees on some aspects
of what we are doing, and we have to explore further
with the Secretary-General his responsibility, and with
the Under-Secretary-General and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations their responsibilities, for
putting into the pot what is not there and what your
paper and your debate are asking for.

We must follow this up. There have been some
suggestions as to what we should do. We must not put
resolution 1327 (2000) on the shelf. We have an
enormous amount to do before your question is
answered, Mr. President, and we have improved the
performance of the Security Council. Thank you for
this debate. I think it has been extremely useful.

