Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): I should like at the outset most particularly to
thank the Secretary-General for his report on the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor. We
also wish to thank Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, for his
briefing on the report and on the latest developments in
the situation in Timor-Leste.

The international community has played an
important role in ensuring peace and stability in Timor-
Leste. We are all duty-bound to preserve our
achievements. Developments over the past three years
have shown that the path on which that country has
embarked has led to even greater success and will
guarantee its development, progress and independence.

The Secretary-General's report - the second
submitted since Timor-Leste's accession to
independence - is of special importance in its
reference to certain key issues. In the military and
security context in particular, it refers to concerns over
the security situation in that country. We share the
Secretary-General's concerns in that regard. The
report's conclusions and recommendations on adjusting
the Mission's plans are therefore especially important.

In this connection, we particularly support the
Secretary-General's request regarding adjustments to
the Mission and the downsizing of its personnel. We
support the revised military strategy to adjust the
military component and to implement a simplified two-
phase programme for the redeployment of personnel, to
conclude in May 2004. We also support the revised
strategy for the police component and believe that,
pursuant to the report, there is a need for another year
to ensure further progress before the Timor-Leste
police is able to tackle all its responsibilities. We feel
that this is a wise and well-rounded idea.

We should also like to express our gratitude for
the ongoing cooperation between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia to which the report refers. We await the
delimitation of the border, scheduled to be completed
by June.

In discussing progress in Timor-Leste, we must
refer to the importance of the economic factor in
development and of the provision of necessary
resources to ensure economic and social development.
We therefore urge all donors to continue to provide
constant assistance to enable that country to move
beyond the current phase of reconstruction and to help
the Government in its efforts to ensure the
implementation of its national development plan.

