Mr. Djani (Indonesia): We also would like to
thank Under-Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his
comprehensive update. My delegation also believes that
addressing the humanitarian challenges in Syria is a
matter of urgency. The humanitarian situation in Syria
requires our utmost attention and priority.

In the north-east and north-west Syria, we remain
concerned about the clashes and displacement, which
continue unabated. It is also extremely troubling
to learn that the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights has confirmed
31 civilian casualties in the north-east due to hostilities
since early October, as well as over 1,000 casualties
in the north-west. Millions of people are in need of
humanitarian assistance. Under-Secretary-General
Lowcock provided us with the numbers, which are
quite staggering. They are not merely statistics to be
put in regular reports - we are talking about people's
lives, and it is important to ensure that those numbers
do not increase. It is also important that we improve
the situation through aid efforts to the greatest possible
extent. Indonesia wishes to highlight three points in
that regard.

First, Indonesia welcomes the decreased hostilities.
However, various incidents continue to be reported. We
therefore appeal to all those with guns to permanently
cease hostilities and attacks affecting civilians. We
need a sustainable solution to the fragile conditions
on the ground. At this stage, we have to appreciate
positive developments of any scale that aim to lessen
the suffering ofthe Syrian people. It is our hope that the
relevant agreements will be continuously maintained
and implemented.

Secondly, my delegation commends the
efforts made by the United Nations humanitarian
team - despite the challenges they face - in
continuing to deliver humanitarian assistance to people
in need. With regard to the renewal of the cross-border
humanitarian response, we noted in Under-Secretary-
General Lowcock's statement that there can be no
alternative to that if the United Nations is to reach
the millions of people in need. Indonesia strongly
believes that we should support the 4 million people
in need of humanitarian assistance who are currently
living in areas supported by cross-border operations.
In addition, my delegation would like to emphasize
the importance of effective and efficient cross-border
assistance with a strong monitoring mechanism. We are
ready to engage in the various activities of the Security
Council, including during the discussions on the draft
resolution on cross-border assistance.

That brings me to my third point, which is on the
critical importance of a common Council response
in addressing the humanitarian situation in Syria.
We might hold positions that sometimes oppose and
contradict one another, but that should not prevent us
from saving people's lives. Dialogue and consensus
in the Council are critical to ensure a well-targeted
humanitarian operation in Syria and to further assist
the Syrian people in rebuilding their lives.

The conflict in Syria will never come to an end
if dialogue does not take the place of violence. We
know that dialogue is indeed challenging without
trust among all relevant parties. Indonesia therefore
commends the hard work of Special Envoy Pedersen in
facilitating dialogue and building trust and confidence
among all parties, along with the valuable support
of the international community. We are following
very closely the progress being made regarding the
intensive discussions in Geneva on the Constitutional
Committee, and we are looking forward to the next
round of discussions at the end of this month.

