Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I have the honour to report
to the Security Council on the work of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2374 (2017) concerning Mali. The report covers the
period from 5 September 2017 to 4 April 2018, during
which time the Committee met twice in informal
consultations and conducted additional work via the
written silence procedure.

After the establishment of the Committee,
preparatory work was undertaken by the Secretariat
in terms of creating the Committee's website in all
languages; preparing the budget ofthe Panel ofExperts;
screening candidates for the Panel; and preparing the
Committee's guidelines.
On 29 January, the Committee adopted the
guidelines for the conduct of its work, and on 1 February,
the Panel of Experts started its work.

On 5 February, the Committee convened its
first informal consultations, during which the four
members of the Panel of Experts were introduced to the
Committee and presented their work plan.

During the informal consultations held on
28 February, the Committee considered the first
interim update of its Panel of Experts, submitted
to the Committee in accordance with paragraph 11
of resolution 2374 (2017). The Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel, followed
by an interactive discussion between the Committee
members and the Coordinator.

Together with other members of the Committee, I
conducted a visit to Bamako on 26 and 27 March. I wish
to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General and his team, as well as the Security Council
Affairs Division, for having facilitated that mission.
The visit provided us with an opportunity to obtain
first-hand information from key counterparts in Mali
and engage with all Malian parties on how the sanctions
regime put in place by the resolution can support peace
and stability, including through the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
In accordance with the Committee guidelines, I will
report, orally and in writing, to the Committee on the
observations and the findings of the trip.

In conclusion, I would like to thank all Member
States for their continued willingness to cooperate
constructively with the Committee and its Panel
of Experts.

