Mr. Guehenno: I will first answer two specific
questions that were put to me by the Ambassador of
Chile and the representative of Mexico.

The Ambassador of Chile asked about the
national development plan. I would say that this plan
continues to provide the road map for Timor-Leste's
development and for support by development partners.
Every month, there is a meeting chaired by the Vice-
Minister of Finance with the development partners to
monitor the progress of the implementation. Apart from
those monthly meetings, there are specific special
meetings that take place to look at the strategy. Most
recently, the Government met with development
partners in Dili in December. That meeting focused on
and supported a number of programmes that support
stability in the long and short terms.

These programmes include reconstruction plans,
with an emphasis on the employment of ex-combatants
and of unemployed youth. Further national capacity-
building programmes will focus on justice, on police
and on public administration. The next major meeting
of development partners should take place in June. I
would stress that, over the past three years, $580
million have been provided by development partners
for the development of Timor-Leste.

At the same time, it has also to be noted that
Timor-Leste remains one of the least developed
countries, with less than $500 per capita income per
year. We very much hope that the development of
mineral resources - about which we had good new
this morning - will open a new era. In the meantime,
continued support by Member States remains essential
to the stabilization and development of Timor-Leste.

The representative of Mexico asked about the
situation of terrorism with respect to Timor-Leste. The
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) is working with the Government of
Timor-Leste and with the relevant specialized branch
of the United Nations to assist the Government in
strengthening its ability to address terrorism. At the
same time, I have to stress that further assistance from
Member States will be essential, including in the
sharing of information and in developing training
capacities. As we all know, in the matter of terrorism,
intelligence gathering is of critical importance and
Timor-Leste needs the support of the international
community in that respect.

As for the situation today of the international
terrorist threat with respect to Timor-Leste, while we
do remain concerned about the risk of terrorism, we
have not seen evidence that suggests imminent specific
threats, although a considerable level of heightened
alert is being maintained, particularly in Dili. We think
that, for the future, what is important, again, is that any
relevant information be immediately shared with the
Timorese authorities.

Let me now turn to the questions and remarks
raised by several delegations, both on the analysis of
the situation and on the recommendations we are
making.

Of course, we did not ignore the good news. This
morning, I referred to the conclusion of the agreements
between Australia and Timor-Leste. I could also have
reiterated what the report says on the good relations
that have developed between Timor-Leste and
Indonesia and which were confirmed by the
representatives of the two countries. This is indeed a
very important element that can help in the future,
including in addressing potential threats.

Nevertheless, we feel it is our duty to look at all
aspects, including the bad news. Nobody likes to revise
their own plans, and if the Secretary-General decided
to put the report before the Council it is because we felt
that it was indeed necessary to put all the facts before
the Council. I think the first consideration for us - and
I would like to stress this - is to close a window of
vulnerability while the Mission draws down and
Timor-Leste builds up. This is not an open-ended
commitment; this is not an open-ended freeze. It would
be the closure of a window of vulnerability that we see
opening with changed security circumstances.

The point was made that the issue is more of a
police issue than a military issue. In our view, actually,
there are two distinct threats. There is, indeed, a
problem that has to be dealt with by police means.
Nobody challenges the need - and I will come back to
this in a minute - to strengthen our efforts to build the
capacity of the Timorese police. At the same time,
when, in the follow-up to the latest incidents, our
troops found 1,000 rounds of ammunition in the midst

of the jungle at an abandoned camp site, we do not see There are no further speakers on my list. The
that as a police operation. We see that as definitely of a Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
military nature. Our concern is that the two threats can of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

combine and our duty is always to provide for the
worst-case scenario. The two threats can be mutually
reinforcing and we see our efforts with respect to the

The meeting rose at 12.45 p.m.
police, on the one side, and the military on the other as
not exclusive, but also mutually reinforcing.

We have been asked for more details on what we
plan for the police. I think, on that, we will be
prepared, if the Council so wishes, to have another
meeting of police-contributing countries to brief them
in detail and to answer any questions that they might
have on what we plan for the police. Let me just say in
this Chamber that what we are doing at the moment is
less ambitious, although we believe quite professional,
than what has been done in other missions - for
instance, in the Balkans. At the moment, the Timorese
police get three months in the police academy, three
months of in-service training and then six months of
thematic training. One of the modules is crowd
management and control. We get some bilateral support
in those various activities. In that respect, I would like
to mention the International Criminal Investigative
Training Assistance Programme (ICITAP), the United
States bilateral initia ve that assists very actively in all
modular training initiatives. All that is important,
necessary and useful. We are not sure that at this stage
it has really built the capacity in a way that allows the
Timorese to deal with the range of contingencies with
which they may be confronted

To conclude, I would just like to note that the
figures that are being discussed should be compared to
what is being done in other theatres of operation. When
I think that the present military force in Timor-Leste is
approximately one sixth of the force that NATO deems
prudent to keep in Kosovo, I think that the adjustments
that we are suggesting reflect just a prudent approach
to a situation where some elements remain murky. The
size and nature of the threat will require further,
continued review. Nevertheless, we believe that is our
duty to always plan for the worst case and that the
recent developments in Titnor do warrant the
adjustments that we have put before the Council.

