Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): I am privileged
to report to the Security Council as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004). I would like to take this opportunity to
express my appreciation to the members of the Security
Council and the Secretariat for the support extended to
the 1540 Committee.

Guided by the 12th programme of work, submitted
to the Council on 31 May, I am pleased to note steady
progress in the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) since our most recent joint meeting, held on
10 May 2013 (see S/PV.6964). Since then, the 1540
Committee and its experts participated in 46 outreach
events organized by various entities and on the main
thematic areas related to resolution 1540 (2004). Those
events provided opportunities to enhance the awareness
ofresolution 1540 (2004) globally and, in many cases, to
facilitate assistance aimed at helping States strengthen
their national capacities to implement the resolution.

The value of direct interaction with States was
demonstrated in the visits to Grenada, Burkina Faso
and the Republic of Korea. Furthermore, bilateral
discussions have been conducted specifically to
develop voluntary national implementation action plans
for Armenia, Montenegro and the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, which were organized by the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and supported by the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs. That has shown, once again, the
importance of the role played by regional organizations
in implementing the resolution.

Croatia and Poland have conducted a novel peer
review process that has enabled the States concerned
to analyse their implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) in a rigorous and frank manner, identify areas
where improvements were needed and close gaps. It
also facilitated the direct sharing of experience and
effective practices. I look forward to hearing a briefing
from the representatives of Croatia and Poland in that
regard. The Committee and all Member States will be
able to draw upon the lessons learned from that new
initiative.

In July, the Committee approached 16 non-reporting
States in an effort to attain universal reporting. To date,
two additional States have provided their initial reports,
bring the number of non-reporting States down to 22.
Also, Committee members and experts have used other
opportunities at outreach events and during meetings
of the First Committee to engage non-reporting States.

Facilitating matchmaking between assistance
requests and offers remains a priority for the
Committee. Assistance requests and related matters are
discussed at almost all our outreach events, including
the Global Partnership working group meetings. Since
the last meeting, Japan and the United Nations Office on
Drugs and Crime (UNODC) have offered Kyrgyzstan
assistance in the legislative and export control areas
in response to a request from that country. The United
States continues its financial support to the regional
coordinator position of the Caribbean Community
(CARICOM). The UNODC offered legislative
assistance and the training of criminal justice officials
for CARICOM. The 1540 Committee's Group ofExperts
has improved the compilation of assistance requests
and offers, enabling a more systematic approach to
assistance matchmaking.

Just days after I took over the chairmanship of
the Committee, I gave a keynote speech on 7 October
at a special session of the 2013 Assembly of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) held in Geneva. That
direct interaction with legislators from around the
world contributed to raising awareness and to opening a
new stage for high-level cooperation between the 1540
Committee and the IPU.

Since 10 May, we have received new notifications
of 24 points of contact, bringing the total to 65 States
and 15 international and regional organizations. In
particular, INTERPOL, the World Health Organization
and the World Organization for Animal Health have
recently registered as assistance providers.

One of the key tasks that the Security Council
requested of the Committee in resolution 1977 (2011)
was to compile various effective practices that States
have employed to prevent the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and their means of
delivery, in accordance with resolution 1540 (2004).
On 6 November, I wrote to all Member States and
international and regional organizations seeking
advice about their effective practices in implementing
the resolution. I would like to appeal to Member States
and international and regional organizations to be
forthcoming in sharing their effective practices, so that
we can develop a useful online resource to support the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004).

On 29 September, the importance ofresolution 1540
(2004) as a key non-proliferation instrument was once
again demonstrated with the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013) on chemical weapons in Syria. That resolution,
while determining the use of the chemical weapons as
a threat to international peace and security, declared
that Member States should inform the Security Council
of any violation of resolution 1540 (2004), so that the
necessary measures could be taken. That decision adds
to the importance of the efforts directed towards the
universal and full implementation of resolution 1540
(2004).

I would like to conclude by reiterating the
Committee's commitment to seeking the full
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004). As we
approach the tenth anniversary of the resolution next
year, there is a substantial agenda before us. I look
forward to the continued active cooperation of all
stakeholders in addressing every aspect ofthe resolution
with a View to preventing the proliferation of WMDs to
and by non-State actors.

