The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Shaikh for his briefing.

The Council has before it the text of a statement
by the President on behalf of the Council on the matter
on the Council's agenda. I thank the members of the
Security Council for their valuable contributions to
the statement.

In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members ofthe Council, the statement by the
President will be issued as a document of the Security
Council under the symbol S/PRST/2017/21.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs of France.

At the outset, on behalf of the French presidency of
the Council, I would like to thank the Secretary-General
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict for their briefings and

their commitment. I reaffirm France's full support for
their efforts.

I would also like to thank Mr. Mubin Shaikh for
his important briefing. His testimony is a indeed a
warning. I also commend UNICEF and civil society
actors for their efforts. Every day, they help us move
the agenda forward.

I would like to thank our Swedish, Italian and
Senegalese colleagues with whom we have worked
closely to ensure that today's meeting complements
the Paris Conference on 21 February. We must
continue along the path to a world without children
who are victims of armed conflict. We have a shared
responsibility to ensure that children are where they
should be - in classrooms and loved by their families,
not on the battlefield.

Because it is a universal moral obligation, for
more than 20 years, the international community
has been working to denounce, end and prevent the
recruitment and use of children by States and non-State
armed groups - a point that was underscored by the
Secretary-General and the Special Representative.
The international community's efforts have enabled
genuine progress to be made. More than 110,000 child
soldiers have been released since 2000 and almost
60,000 between 2007 and 2015.

For many years my country has been committed
to protecting children in armed conflict. Since 1999,
France has promoted the adoption of effective tools
to protect children in conflict situations, some of
them here in this very Chamber. Ten years ago, Paris
hosted an international conference in Paris on the
theme "Free children from war", at which the Paris
Principles - which were noted by the previous
speaker - were adopted. We call on those who have not
yet done so to endorse the principles, as they serve as a
basis for the protection of children in conflicts and the
fight against the appalling violence to which they fall
victim. The Security Council has adopted six resolutions
on this issue, including resolution 1612 (2005), which
is a fundamental new instrument. Its evidence-based
approach is based on quality information and enables
us to neutrally and impartially address such challenges.
The international monitoring and reporting system at
the Secretary-General's disposal plays a major role in
that regard.

In spite of such progress, much remains to be done.
A total of 230 million children still live in countries or
zones affected by armed conflict, where they continue
to be recruited and separated from their families, with
no access to education, care or freedom. It must be
noted that children are now the targets and the tools of
terrorism. They are affected by current asymmetrical
conflicts, and, as annex I to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2017/821) confirms, non-State armed groups
are primarily responsible for those Violations. Out of
15,000 Violations, 11,500 can be attributed to them. The
plight of children in Syria, Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia
and Yemen are a sad reminder that terrorist groups,
in particular, are responsible for that troubling turn
of events.

We also note that recruitment methods have
changed. In addition to being forcibly recruited,
children are radicalized and recruited online. The use,
or rather the exploitation, of children has also changed.
They are now used as human bombs or shields. Girls,
in particular, suffer sexual violence, are recruited as
slaves, sold by human trafficking networks or forced
into marriage and to become pregnant. Let us recall
the fate of Iraqi Yazidi children or the Chibok girls
in Nigeria. Outrage is not enough; words must lead
to action. Since the launch of the children and armed
conflict agenda, the Council has had a key role to play
in that regard.

We must take collective action and, above all,
first gather as much information as possible on such
Violations. The Secretary-General's report is therefore a
vital tool. We also support the Special Representative's
efforts to assess good practices and solutions that
have already garnered results. Secondly, we must take
preventive action. We must build on existing efforts to
prevent Violent extremism, with a View to developing
specific plans to address the new recruitment methods
I have already mentioned, such as combating online
radicalization, indoctrination or forced recruitment on
the ground. In order to ensure more effective prevention,
we can also use the results of awareness campaigns,
such as the Children, Not Soldiers campaign, while
paying particular attention to non-State armed groups.

Education is also a major issue. Let us start
by protecting schools, which are often attacked
and occupied by warring parties, which is why, on
21 February, France decided to endorse the Safe Schools
Declaration. We can no longer tolerate lost generations
of children, like those in Syria, who are excluded in
their millions from any schooling. Where progress has
been made, we must ensure that there are no setbacks,

while remaining vigilant. I refer, for example, to
children who have been used by armed groups in the
Central African Republic; we must ensure that they can
return to a healthy environment.

To inform and prevent, we must thirdly strengthen
our action on the ground. That is what we are doing, in
close cooperation with UNICEF, in Nigeria and Yemen,
so as to facilitate the reintegration of children who have
been associated with armed groups. Armed forces,
including United Nations operations - and I refer in
particular to peacekeeping operations -need to be given
clear concepts of operations that include prevention
and the protection of children. In that respect, the
deployment of child protection advisers is essential. We
trust the Secretary-General to continue strengthening
that dimension within peacekeeping operations.

Action plans signed with the United Nations are
another very important tool. I note with great interest
the idea put forward by the Special Representative
to also work at the regional and subregional levels.
The progress highlighted in the report, as in Mali or
Colombia, often takes place at the regional level.

F ourthly, we must reintegrate children in accordance
with international standards and fight against impunity.
States must take responsibility and ratify international
instruments that contribute to protecting children in
armed conflict. With regard to reintegration, we must
do our all to facilitate the permanent return of child
victims of conflict to their families, while ensuring
that they are monitored, particularly with respect to
their psychological well-being, given the trauma they
have suffered. Civil society - Save the Children, for
example - does a lot in that regard. However, such
policies are the primary responsibility of States.

The fight against impunity is indispensable.
Important initiatives have been undertaken by the
International Criminal Court and several States,
such as Colombia. The greatest possible pressure
must be exerted on those who commit such violence.
With regard to the particularly overwhelming reality
of sexual violence, I reiterate our support for the
Secretary-General's zero-tolerance policy. Justice must
be rendered for such crimes.

The best interests of the child must prevail. What
other project could more fundamentally unite us
than that of our common future - that of children?
We have a collective responsibility, which is why
respecting and strengthening the rights of the child
must remain at the centre of our actions. I count on the
Council's commitment.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Sweden.

