Judge Meron: It is a distinct privilege to address
the Council in the context of this open debate and a
particular honour for me to do so during the presidency
of Poland and under the chairmanship of His Excellency
Mr. Andrzej Duda, President of the Republic of Poland.

This is not simply a professional matter. I was
9 years old when Nazi Germany invaded Poland, the
country of my birth. Overnight, we became refugees,
and most of my family were killed by the Nazis because
we were Jews. When the war ended, I emerged lucky
to be alive but profoundly affected by my experiences.

Although my career has since followed a circuitous
path, the abiding focus has been an attempt to grapple
with the violence, chaos and brutality of war and to
strive to find ways to bring an end to the suffering and
horrific atrocities committed all too often during armed
conflicts. Central to any such effort is the fundamental
need to ensure respect for and adherence to international
law and to the humanitarian principles and values of
human rights and dignity reflected therein.

It is in this context that I wish to express my deep
gratitude to Poland for having provided all of us here
today with this important opportunity to address the
state of respect for international law in the context of
the maintenance of international peace and security,
how it can be strengthened, and the role to be played by
the Security Council in that regard.

I shall focus in my remarks on the third theme
identified in the concept note for today's debate
(S/2018/4l7/Rev.1, annex): upholding accountability, in
particular for the most serious violations of international
humanitarian law and human rights law.

It is thanks in many respects to the ground-
breaking work of the Council nearly 25 years ago that
we are even considering the issue of accountability
for violations of international law today. On 25 May
1993, the Security Council acted under Chapter VII
of the Charter of the United Nations to establish the
first international criminal court of the modern era,
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), a court mandated to try individuals
for serious violations of international law committed
during the conflicts in the Balkans. The following
year, the Council established a second tribunal, the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR), in
the wake of the devastating 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others who
opposed the genocide were also killed. These courts,
in turn, paved the way for the establishment of other
international courts and specialized chambers focused
on ensuring individual accountability for violations of
international law, including the world's first permanent
international criminal court, and clarified and
reinforced understandings of international customary
and conventional law through their jurisprudence. Over
the same period, after a half-century of virtual inaction
following the Second World War, an increasing number
of national authorities have undertaken domestic
criminal trials of individuals alleged to have committed
war crimes and other violations of international law.
As a result of all that, there is an ever-increasing
expectation among communities around the world
that, where atrocities are committed in violation of
international law, accountability will follow. That is a
profound change from only a quarter of a century ago.

However, for all that has been achieved in the past
25 years, there is still a long way to go. International
criminal justice - by which I mean efforts to ensure
principled accountability for violations of international
law whether such efforts take place in international,
regional or national courts - is still very much in its
infancy. At present, it is in a highly vulnerable stage of
development. With pioneering courts such as the ICTY,
the ICTR and the Special Court for Sierra Leone having
closed, the International Criminal Court (ICC) faces a
variety of investigative and institutional challenges.
With the recent increase in the scrutiny of and distrust
for international organizations and global endeavours
more generally, we face somewhat of a period of
contraction in efforts to advance accountability at
the international level after a remarkable period of
expansion. Let me be quite clear about the fact that
inaction and outright intransigence risk undermining
accountability gains in quite a variety of forums.

If efforts to ensure accountability for violations
of international law are to succeed in the long run,
the Security Council and its members, as well as the
international community more generally, must continue
to actively engage in and sustain such efforts - and now
more than ever for the reasons that I have just given.

At the international level that means not simply
expressing support in rhetorical terms but taking
concrete steps to affirmatively contribute to the
work of existing courts such as the International
Criminal Court. Such steps include complying with
judicial orders, arrest warrants and requests for
investigative cooperation and using soft and hard
forms of leverage to convince others to do likewise,
supporting fugitive-related investigations, enforcing
sentences against convicted persons and assisting
with the relocation and protection of vulnerable
witnesses. Such steps also include ensuring that
existing mechanisms are adequately resourced and that
political considerations are not allowed to undermine
the independence and impartiality of the courts in the
conduct of their proceedings.

However, upholding accountability for international
crimes means doing far more than cooperating with
international courts and internationalized special
chambers. International courts were not designed to try
more than a small number of alleged perpetrators, and
they do not offer the immeasurable benefits accorded
by judicial proceedings conducted closer to the
communities most affected by international crimes. For
accountability and an international order based on the
rule of law to truly take hold, it will fall to officials in
national jurisdictions to take on the greater part of that
work. Indeed, it is only through national engagement
on a broad scale and by using every tool at our disposal,
including universal jurisdiction, that we can ever hope
to close the accountability gap.

As the examples that I havejust given might suggest,
upholding accountability is not a narrow or a limited
endeavour. To the contrary, it demands creativity,
innovation and an understanding of its interdependence
with other initiatives if it is to succeed. We have
seen that in recent years at the international level,
where a wide variety of institutional and efficiency-
minded reforms have come to the fore in courts such
as the ICC and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and where the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism for Syria and
the Investigative Team requested by resolution 2379
(2017) in relation to Iraq reflect new models for the
promotion and facilitation of accountability efforts. We
also see that in the exploration of yet more means to
ensure accountability, such as the proposed granting
of jurisdiction over international crimes to a regional
court in Africa.

Yet the aim of upholding accountability is not
satisfied simply by ensuring that those accused of
violating international law are brought before a court
and tried. Without judges who act independently
and impartially and without judicial systems that are
free of political influence and pressure, principled
accountability is not possible. Without robust judicial
systems providing for a vigorous prosecution and
defence, the protection of vulnerable witnesses, fair
procedures, transparent processes and sufficient
resources and capacity for law enforcement and judicial
proceedings, accountability for international crimes
cannot be secured. The goal of upholding accountability
is therefore closely linked to other core aims shared by
the international community with regard to sustainable
development and the promotion of respect for the rule
of law more generally.

I have so far addressed the state of accountability
efforts and the steps that can be taken by many different
actors to close the accountability gap and to strengthen
the rule of law and international criminal justice. Before
concluding, I would like to briefly touch upon the role
of the Security Council in that regard and to offer a
few reflections on steps that the Council may wish to
consider going forward.

First, the Security Council has played a high-profile

role in strengthening the rule of law by advancing the
cause of accountability over the course of the past
quarter of a century, urging and calling on States
time and again to play their part. The Council's vocal
leadership in that regard and its consideration of and
dedication to such issues, as demonstrated by today's
debate, must continue.

At the same time, the Security Council is not
only a leading voice in upholding accountability and
the rule of law. It must also serve as a model itself. In
some respects that is a challenging task. Given that the
Council is an inherently political body, it is perhaps to
be expected that the different situations coming before
the Council may receive differing degrees of attention,
be resolved in different ways or be made subject
to varying priorities. Yet the rule of law depends on
consistency and equality of enforcement, and abhors
selectivity. If one situation involving alleged atrocity
crimes is treated with all due attention and another is
disregarded or left to linger in a decision-making limbo,
does that not fundamentally undermine the values at
the core of the principle of the rule of law? How can the
Council's identity as a political body and its role as a
champion of the rule of law be reconciled?

One possibility would be for the Council to develop
and publicly adopt objective criteria to assess and, where
appropriate, steps to be deployed with respect to, all
credible allegations of international crimes that come
before it passing a certain threshold. Agreement in the
abstract on such an approach would not only enhance
equality of enforcement and reduce perceptions as to the
ad hoc and arguably inconsistent nature of the Council's
actions when confronted with reported atrocity crimes.
It would also reduce the degree to which subjective or
political considerations weigh on, and potentially delay
or divert, the ultimate decision-making process.

Another possibility would be for the Council to
reflect on its role not simply as a political body but as a
representative political body. In accordance with Article
24 of the Charter, the Members of the United Nations
have conferred on the Council primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security
and have agreed that, in carrying out its duties in that
regard, the Council acts on their behalf. Given that, is it
too idealistic to suggest that members ofthe Council are
duty-bound to act on behalf of the broader international
community - that they must, when reaching decisions
on issues of accountability in the context of peace
and security, serve the interests of the United Nations
membership as a whole rather than prioritizing their
own interests or those of strategic allies?

We may also do well to consider - or, perhaps,
reconsider - the appropriate role for political
decision-making more generally when it comes to the
treatment of specific cases or situations. The Security
Council has, in many respects, served as something of
a gatekeeper over the past quarter-century, deciding,
at times after considerable examination, whether a
particular situation or conflict should be made subject
to accountability measures. That role on the part of
the Council was perhaps necessary 25 years ago.
But now that the permanent International Criminal
Court is fully embedded within the international legal
framework, a system for the referral of situations to that
Court by the Council is well established and national
jurisdictions are increasingly demonstrating adherence
to accountability goals, is it not time for something of a
paradigm shift whereby the Council would simply refer
possible violations of international law to appropriate
judicial actors for further action rather than risking
stalemate in debate about whether or not egregious
atrocities occurred in any particular situation or who
might be responsible?

Such a paradigm shift would not only enhance
accountability but would also reflect and increase
confidence in the ability of courts to assess evidence
fairly and independently in determining whether a case
should be tried, and enhance the Council's efficiency
and credibility through demonstrating consistency in
its approach to accountability.

As those examples suggest, the means and processes
by which the Council reaches decisions concerning
accountability are perhaps just as important as the
subject matter of those decisions when it comes to their
potential to strengthen respect for the rule of law and
for an international order founded thereupon. As we
approach the twenty-fifth anniversary of the founding
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia in just a few days, I commend the Security
Council, its President and members for their openness
to considering these and other ideas advanced during
today's debate, and for their continued leadership when
it comes to ensuring accountability and upholding the
rule of law.

