Mr. Bandora (United Republic of Tanzania): My
delegation joins others in commending you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of November. We similarly wish to commend
the Council for its continued interest in the situation in
Burundi, and we thank Assistant Secretary-General Fall for
the extensive briefing he gave the Council.

For our country, this meeting carries a special
significance coming as it does on the last day of the
national mourning following the demise of our founding
President, the late Mwalimu Julius Kambarage Nyerere
who, in his capacity as Facilitator, tirelessly worked in
pursuit of a peaceful settlement to the problems facing
Burundi. The most fitting tribute the Council can bestow on
his memory is to rededicate itself to the resolute search for
a lasting solution the conflict in that country.

The situation in Burundi remains tense and
challenging. It remains a situation characterized by violence
and human suffering. It remains challenging to Burundi
itself, to the subregion, to Africa, to the international
community and, in this case, to the Security Council.

The Council is convening against the background of
two major developments, namely, the death of the
Facilitator of the Burundi peace negotiations within the
framework of the Arusha talks and the deepening crisis in
that country. It is therefore incumbent upon the Council
to take stock of where the efforts for a negotiated
settlement in Burundi stand and what can be done to
reinforce them in a manner that will reinvigorate and push
the peace process begun at Arusha further.

On 21 June 1998, when the all-party talks began in
Arusha, the participants in the Burundi peace negotiations,
including all the parties to the Burundi conflict, signed a
declaration of principles and intent. In the declaration, the
signatories committed themselves to engaging in serious
negotiations until a just and lasting solution to the crisis
in their country was reached, to resolving the crisis
through peaceful means and to putting an end to all forms
of violence; and they declared a suspension of hostilities.
In the declaration, the parties also identified and agreed
on five bodies of issues which were to be discussed and
decided to establish a committee to deal with each issue.
For the record, the five broad areas of negotiations were,
first, the nature of the conflict in Burundi, the problems
of genocide and exclusion and their solution; secondly,
democracy and good governance, constitutional
arrangements, questions of justice and the fight against
impunity, the judiciary, the system of administration and
transitional institutions; thirdly, peace and security for all,
issues of public security and defence, cessation of
hostilities and permanent ceasefire arrangements; fourthly,
rehabilitation and resettlement of refugees and displaced
persons, economic and social reconstruction and
development; and, fifthly, guarantees on implementation
of the agreement emanating from the Burundi peace
negotiations.

Since the convening of the second and substantive
session of the negotiations in July 1998, and the
beginning of work by the committees, considerable work
has been done. The principle of negotiation is firmly
established, and the parties have managed to sustain the
Arusha mechanism for those negotiations. Armed
hostilities have, unfortunately, not ended but the
negotiations have continued.

The countries of the region have taken note of the
disposition of the Burundi parties - in particular of the
Government - to negotiate, and has supported them. It
is in this regard, and in recognition of the progress made,
that the region collectively decided to suspend the
sanctions against Burundi in January this year.

As a neighbour of Burundi, our overriding interest
is in seeing to it that the Arusha process, which was so
painstakingly put together and which has made

 

appreciable progress until now, is sustained and steadily
brought to a comprehensive conclusion.

There will be accusations, as there have frequently
been against my country, that we support and harbour
armed elements operating against Burundi. This is an
allegation we reject most vigorously. We have stated time
and again that Tanzania has no interest in supporting armed
attacks against Burundi or in harbouring, training or arming
its opponents. We know we would be the very victims of
such a policy. In addition, my Government has challenged
the Burundi authorities to provide proof of their allegations.
To date, no such evidence has been forthcoming, and it will
not be, because the accusations are false and baseless. This
notwithstanding, Tanzania is determined, as a responsible
neighbour, to continue to honour its international
obligations relating to the hosting of refugees and, together
with the rest of the region, to strive for peace in Burundi.
Their peace is also our peace.

Considerable progress had been made by the
conclusion of the fourth session of the peace negotiations
held at Arusha in July of this year. Indeed, we are informed
that two of the committees have finished the bulk of their
work. The follow-up consultations between the
Government, the National Assembly, the Union pour le
progres national (UPRONA), the Parti pour le redressement
national (PARENA), the Front pour la democratie au
Burundi (FRODEBU) and the Conseil national de defense
de la democratie (CNDD) - which were held at Dar es
Salaam from 30 August to 12 September 1999 - were able
to thrash out a number of issues in detail. The follow-up
consultations that were scheduled to convene in mid-
October could not be held due to the passing away of the
Facilitator, Mwalimu N yerere.

This is where we stand today. How, then, does
Tanzania see the way forward? To us, the Arusha process
has been able to give a framework to the Burundi parties to
begin on the difficult but inescapable road to dialogue and
accommodation. Tanzania believes that the search for peace
and stability in Burundi is not a utopian effort. It is within
the reach of the parties, if the progress made so far at
Arusha is consolidated and expanded. We therefore see the
way forward as follows.

First, as the negotiations process has reached a critical
stage, it is important not to lose the momentum. It is quite
possible that in this state of flux attempts could be made to
create an impression that little of substance has been
achieved and that, since a new facilitator is being sought,
the process must be reconstituted anew and, worse still,
restarted. We should not allow this to happen. We should
instead ensure that the process of transition to another
facilitator is managed in a manner that ensures the
consolidation of the gains made in the process and its
continuity.

Secondly, we see no reason why the negotiation
process within the committees should not restart
immediately. For even during the facilitation of Mwalimu
Nyerere, the nitty-gritty of negotiations was done in those
committees, which were established by the parties
themselves. The committees, headed by individuals of
great experience and integrity drawn from around the
world, exist, and each has a specific mandate. The
facilitator comes in as an overseer to the process and as
a convener of the plenary sessions. In addition to the
committees, there exists a structure of experts that has so
far supported the work of the committees and assisted the
facilitator. We see no reason why these too cannot
continue to render services to the process even as the
consultations to designate a new facilitator continue.

Thirdly, in addition to the formal structure of the
committees, the major parties initiated informal
consultations to complement the Arusha process. Again,
there is no reason why that arrangement - which, at any
rate, is not dependent on the facilitator - cannot
continue.

Fourthly, as we aim at re-invigorating the process of
negotiation, we are also concerned at the increasing level
of armed activity in Burundi and the negative
consequences this is having on peace and security in that
country and on the negotiating process itself. It is
therefore important to see how best the armed elements
can rapidly be brought into the negotiating process as it
proceeds. We need to speed up the consultations in these
areas so as to bring an end to the violence in Burundi.

Fifthly, the Facilitator, the late Mwalimu, was
designated by the region. As we speak, consultations are
under way within the region on the designation of a
successor facilitator. A regional summit planned to take
place towards the end of this month will hopefully
finalize this matter. The region is fully aware that in
designating the new facilitator it will have to consult
extensively and to seek the concurrence of the Burundi
parties, as well as of the international community at large,
on the choice. The region is determined to ensure that an
individual of stature who can inspire the full trust and
confidence of the parties and who is capable of exercising

 

effective and undivided superintendence over the
negotiating process is designated as facilitator.

What, then, do we think the United Nations Security
Council should be doing? My Government believes that an
agreement in Burundi is possible only if the parties can be
further nudged down the path of negotiation. We believe
that the ground covered is considerable, even as we
recognize that fundamental differences still stand in the way
of that agreement. It is therefore important for the Council
to come out unequivocally in support of the Arusha process
and to continue to encourage the parties to persist in
dialogue and to remain committed to the principle of a
negotiated settlement. In this respect, the United Nations
must remain positively implicated in the ongoing
consultations on a way forward in the Great Lakes region.

Secondly, Tanzania believes that the Security Council
must itself maintain and urge sustained support for the
facilitation process and should also provide it with
resources. I wish, in this regard, to express the gratitude of
my Government, on behalf of the facilitation, to the
countries and organizations that have until now extended
financial and other support to the Arusha process. Such
support has enabled many actors to take part in the Arusha
talks, particularly the small parties in Burundi.

Thirdly, and lastly, my Government believes that the
United Nations must make contingency preparations for
the outcome of the Arusha process. We have learned in
other situations how tragic it can be if we are not
prepared. Burundi will need to be supported in the area of
reconstruction and in building the institutions that will
oversee the implementation of the peace process. The
people of Burundi will need assistance as they rebuild,
deal with the internally displaced and welcome and
resettle those who are in exile as refugees. Above all,
they will need the constant encouragement and support of
the international community as they heal, rebuild trust and
reconstruct a united and peaceful Burundi.

