Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary aligns itself
with the position expressed by the observer of the
European Union. Allow me to add some further
remarks in my national capacity. We would first like to
thank the Chinese presidency of the Security Council
for organizing this open debate.

According to an old saying in Hungary, those
whose death is falsely claimed will live long. The
multilateral system and the rules-based international
order established after the Second World War endure,
and our work here at the United Nations is a testament
to that. Nevertheless, one cannot hide the fact that the
multilateral order and the United Nations itself are
under pressure from emerging or recurring challenges
and need to adapt. Reform of the United Nations is
inevitable. Hungary shares the View that the current
transformational changes that the Organization is
undergoing have the potential to make it more able
to deliver on its mandate, thereby contributing to
enhancing multilateralism.

We are pleased to see that some parts of the
Secretary-General's ambitious reform agenda have
already entered into the implementation phase, and
we hope that the remaining elements will soon follow.
Since we are in the Security Council, we must not forget
that the reform of this principal organ of the United
Nations is also long overdue. The modernization of the
United Nations cannot be complete without adapting
the main executive body of the United Nations to the
challenges of the twenty-first century. Besides the
commitment of the new leadership of the Organization,
Member States themselves must also be ready for the
change at the United Nations. Stronger cooperation
among the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, as well as with
the Chairs of the subsidiary bodies, could play a truly
important role in strengthening multilateralism. As
United Nations Ambassadors, we like to talk about
multilateralism and multilateral diplomacy but we
must also be better at practising it, at dialogue and at
really listening to each other. We should also break the
silos in our mindset and learn to better trust and better
cooperate with each other.

We must address the multidimensional root causes
of conflict through prevention, mediation, the protection
of human rights and sustainable development. Hungary
remains committed to preventive diplomacy, as well
as building trust and reconciliation. I believe that
multilateralism is in fact about inclusion, providing
everyone with a seat at the table to participate, follow
and resolve our disputes together and to learn from
each other on the way. The contribution of women to
establishing and strengthening multilateralism must be

recognized. Some pioneering women representatives
were present at the foundation of the United Nations
itself. However, still today gender equality and parity
need to be achieved here at the United Nations and
beyond. We acknowledge the Secretary-General for his
leadership in achieving gender equality in senior-level
positions at the United Nations.

Hungary is a committed supporter of the effective
functioning of the Human Rights Council. However, due
to the overpoliticization, selectivity, polarized nature
of positions and unmanageable workload, the Human
Rights Council is increasingly less able to fulfil its
tasks. In speaking about strengthening multilateralism,
we must mention the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Paris Agreement. Hungary has
been committed to the 2030 Agenda from the very
beginning. Our first voluntary national review on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals
focused on the Goals on water and sanitation, energy
provision, sustainable cities, responsible consumption
and production and the balance of ecosystems. The
Hungarian Government is strongly committed to
addressing climate change, and we supported the early
entry into force of the Paris Agreement by being one of
the first countries to ratify it.

Hungary strongly supports the fight against
terrorism. We believe that the role of the United
Nations and multilateralism should also be better used
and strengthened in that regard. We believe in the
need for universal adherence to and implementation of
the rule of law at both the national and international
levels and its commitment to an international order
based on the rule of law and international law, which,
together with the principles of justice, is essential for
peaceful coexistence and cooperation among States.
The international community therefore observed the
twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute earlier this year. The Statute has stood the test
of time, having established the International Criminal
Court, which has contributed not only to holding the
perpetrators of the most serious crimes accountable but
also to assisting the victims of such crimes.

In today's interconnected and globalized world,
multilateral solutions have no real alternatives.
Multilateralism will survive, but perhaps with new,
renewed or reinvented international multilateral
institutions, pushing us out of our comfortable situations.
That could be beneficial if, by standing firmly by
our principles, we are sufficiently flexible to use the
opportunities presented by the shifting landscape.

