Mr. Olguin Cigarroa (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): I
wish to convey my warm greetings to you, Mr. President,
and express my appreciation for the invitation to
participate in today's debate, which we consider to be
of a high relevance.

The purposes and principles of the United Nations
Charter, subsequently developed in General Assembly
resolution 2625 (XXV) and supplemented with the
consistent practice by States, represent a legal and
political heritage that is in full force and which must be
protected. In the purposes and principles of the Charter,
contained in Articles 1 and 2, respectively, there are
three fundamental concepts.

The first of these is universality, since the purposes
and principles are universal and maintain the basic
structure of the international system. The progressive
development of international law has been built on
the basis of these purposes and principles. And the
particularities and special contexts can in no way
relativize the universal scope of the purposes and
principles. Therefore, when they are violated, it is
necessary that the international community express its
concern.

The second concept is the comprehensive-body-of-
law nature of the purposes and principles, insofar as
they are systematized irrevocable and enforceable rules
and customary standards. Jurisprudence and, above all,
the unerring practices of States strengthen the political
will to be bound by and act on them.

Thirdly, we emphasize the preventive dimension.
Several factors can contribute to a dangerous
disaffection for the purposes and principles and, to
avoid that result, it is essential to act early. From
this perspective, the work of the Security Council is
crucial, since remaining indifferent to these signals
means putting international peace and security at risk.
Similarly, the concerted work of the different organs
of the system can be key in preventing destabilization
and conflict cycles, as can also be the interaction with
regional organizations in the framework of Chapter
VIII of the Charter. Moreover, we should remember
that the General Assembly has preventive capabilities
in accordance with Articles 11 and 12 of the Charter
and the action of the Secretary-General and of the
different modalities of missions.

During its recent membership of the Council,
Chile took up the peace, security and development
triad, asserting that it was imperative to understand
crises from a broader point of view, including essential
concepts such as cohesion, inclusiveness, human rights
and respect for differences, in order to address the root
causes ofconflict. In this context, our country proposed
the topic of "Inclusive development for the maintenance
of international peace and security" for the open debate
at the Council chaired by Chilean President Michelle
Bachelet Jeria on 19 January 2015 (see S/PV.7361).
The facts reveal that there is a correlation between
lack of inclusion and cycles of conflict and destruction
of the social fabric, forming an objective threat to
international peace and security. We have to act in this
field in a direct way to prevent destabilizing processes
and thereby safeguard the purposes and principles of
the Charter, which should be protected, as they provide
the basis for peaceful coexistence and cooperation.

We conclude by reiterating our appreciation to the
Venezuelan presidency for convening today's meeting.

