Ms. Faizunnesa (Bangladesh): Iwould like to thank
you and your delegation, Mr. President, for organizing
today's open debate and for the informative concept
note (S/2016/416, annex). Bangladesh aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the representative
of Kuwait on behalf of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation.

Terrorism and violent extremism thrive on a set of
corrosive narratives and ideologies. The true essence
and understanding of any religion, nurtured and
practiced over centuries, can hardly justify the skewed,
fragmented and exploitative narratives propagated by
terrorists and violent extremists. The international
community must remain invested in preserving and
promoting the core, mainstream message of peace,
mutual respect and tolerance that lies at the heart of
all religions. The misguided appeal of the messages of
terrorists and violent extremists demands a cautious,
context-specific and well-calibrated approach, marked
by the active participation and ownership of religious
leaders and establishments, civil-society organizations
and the media, among others. It must be underpinned by
a broader pursuit of a culture of peace and non-violence
across the entire social spectrum.

We also need an objective assessment of the
sense of deprivation, discrimination and exploitation
at the national and international levels that terrorists
and violent extremists tend to use to justify their
self-serving agenda and means. It will be critical
to demonstrate sincere and meaningful efforts to
address such grievances with no discrimination or
equivocation. It is unfortunate that the empowering
tools of information and communications technology
have assumed an unwelcome dimension in the hands
of terrorists and violent extremists. Terrorists' smart
use of social media and other online platforms has
enabled them to suitably package and disseminate their
messages, establish links with potential sympathizers
across borders, recruit foreign terrorist fighters and
often conduct their organized criminal activities with
impunity.

In Bangladesh, we remain committed to addressing
such emerging threats and challenges in a focused and
determined manner and to building on our achievements
in tackling terrorism and violent extremism, including
through broader community engagement and enhanced
capacity-building at the institutional level. In the light
of our experience in that regard, we would like to
emphasize five specific points.

First, the international response to terrorist and
violent extremist narratives must be comprehensive
and go beyond simply securitizing the discourse.
In View of the various dynamics of radicalization,
violent extremism and terrorism, we need nuanced
responses, short- and long-term initiatives, hard
and soft approaches and inclusive and participatory
mechanisms for customizing responses in accordance
with local needs.

Secondly, there must be a robust, consensus-based
understanding among law-enforcement and prosecution
authorities, information-technology companies,
social-media administrators and human rights actors
that can ensure appropriate filtering of and sanctions
against online terrorist and violent extremist narratives
and outlets, while respecting people's rights to access,
privacy and freedom of expression.

Thirdly, we must focus on education at various
levels, ifwe are to embed the right narratives of religion,
culture and identity as part of global-citizenship
education initiatives. We must be vigilant with regard
to the creeping intrusion of violent extremist messages
and propaganda into higher education. We emphasize
the importance of continuing to work on developing
curriculum standards for the religious education of the
various denominations.

Fourthly, it will be crucial to give due consideration
to the impact of terrorist and violent extremist ideologies
on women in affected communities. We must revisit the
traditional approaches, in which women are seen as
victims of terrorism and violent extremism, and further
explore their potential roles as agents of prevention,
resilience and change at the community level - and
even as perpetrators.

Fifthly, an effective strategic response aimed at
countering terroristandviolentextremistnarratives must
reject any form of racial or xenophobic - particularly
Islamophobic - attitudes and categorization. We are
particularly concerned about the added vulnerability of
migrants and others in need of international protection,
a problem that deserves further consideration at the
global level.

In conclusion, my delegation would like to
emphasize its support for any initiative by the Council,
in coordination with the General Assembly, aimed at
developing a comprehensive international strategy to
address, with a sense of urgency, the deepening threats
of terrorist and violent extremist ideologies.

