Mr. Carrillo Gomez (Paraguay) (spoke in Spanish):
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the delegation of the Republic of Paraguay, which
appreciates the initiative of the French presidency of
the Security Council in convening today's open debate.
We thank the Secretary-General and the Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict for
their briefings.

Universalizing our commitments on the protection
of children in armed conflicts will be fundamental to
the international community's ability to respond in a
comprehensive and coordinated manner to every aspect
of that scourge. The delegation of Paraguay therefore
urges Member States, first of all, to ratify or accede
to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the
Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in
armed conflict, the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court and its amendments, and the Protocols
Additional to the 1949 Geneva Conventions relating
to the protection of victims of international and
non-international armed conflicts. We also urge all
members of the international community to refrain
from any act that is contrary to the aims and purposes
of those international instruments.

Paraguay highlights the relevance of the 2007
Paris Principles and Commitments to protect children
from unlawful recruitment or use by armed forces or
armed groups and the Safe Schools Declaration for the
protection of children in armed conflicts, endorsed in
Oslo in 2015 and to which we adhere. We urge Member
States to accede to those instruments and take concrete
action to implement them.

At the same time, Member States and the United
Nations system must collaborate closely with States
in conflict and post-conflict situations to strengthen
their institutional capacities and tackle the challenges
posed by children's involvement in armed conflicts. To
that end, the Governments of Paraguay and Colombia
are cooperating on the implementation of the Peace
Agreement between the Government of Colombia and
the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-
Ejercito del Pueblo through a cultural exchange
programme to prevent the recruitment and use of minors
by armed groups and foster social inclusion, peaceful
coexistence and intercultural dialogue through music.
As part of that cooperation initiative, Paraguayan
teachers have organized training activities in Colombia
for teachers and students of the harp in San Jose de
Guaviare and Puerto Carrefio in Vichada department.

The design of institutional frameworks for
reintegrating boys and girls who are the victims of
armed conflict, or for caring for refugee children,
must provide for children's comprehensive protection.
The priority must be a focus on the best interests
of the child, implemented through legislation and
special jurisdiction, with specialized courts, judges,
prosecutors and public defenders and the advice of
interdisciplinary professionals on all cases involving
children in any capacity. In Paraguay, a network of
municipal departments supports that system through
preventive efforts for protecting, promoting and
supervising the best interests of the child, as well as
implementing measures for child protection and support
such as giving children and their families guidance
and support and providing schooling and health care,
including psychological help.

Lastly, with regard to the Security Council, special
protection for children in armed conflicts must be a
priority and a clear and explicit part of peacekeeping
operation mandates. The Council must incorporate
prevention mechanisms and protocols into mandates
with a view to aiding victims and ensuring that those
who recruit or use children in armed conflicts are
held accountable.

