Mr. Eldon (United Kingdom): Mr. Foreign
Minister, it is very good to see you in the Chair again
and a great honour to have you here.

Before welcoming the High Representative, I
should also like to welcome the new Permanent
Representatives of Tunisia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The United Kingdom delegation looks
forward to working with them closely in the future.

I must also apologize to Mr. Petritsch for not
being able to be here for his briefing, but life is getting
like that at the United Nations and in the Security
Council these days. I have nevertheless had a full
account, and I want to underline that we regard the
briefing today as a very important contribution.

I think it is noticeable that since Mr. Petritsch was
with us last, there have been a number of significant
achievements, and we congratulate him on those,
particularly the implementation of the Brussels Peace
Implementation Council commitments. The work of his
office is clearly making an impact, and I would very
much like to support his sentiment, expressed earlier
today, that we must finish the job and finish it properly.
As Mr. Petritsch said, four months on from the
November general elections, we now have new and
moderate Governments in place at State level and in
both entities. This is a very significant achievement.

We also very much welcome the progress on the
communications regulatory agency, the State court and
the independent judicial commission.

What the High Representative has said about
increased refugee return is also a very good sign, and it
is a particularly good sign that returns are beginning to
take place in areas such as Srebrenica. But more
progress is needed in that area, and I would welcome
the High Representative's views on what more might
be done to get the refugees back. That is only one of
the further tough challenges ahead, particularly for the
State-level Government. The first of those further
challenges will be the passing of a new elections law.
The initial signs in that area look promising, and we
must all make every effort to build on the progress that
has been made so far.

We also support the High Representative's
general approach, including his removal of Mr. Jelavic,
which should target the troublemakers and the Bosnian
Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ). But at the same
time, it will also be important to reach out to the
Bosnian Croat community. Again, it would be very
helpful to know whether the High Representative has
any particular ideas on this sort of outreach effort
which he would wish to share with us today. We would
also encourage the Office of the High Representative to
work closely with other regional Governments,
particularly the Government in Zagreb, in this area.

Several delegations around the table have
mentioned the special agreement between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska. It is
very important that any further details in the annexes to
that agreement, which have yet to be completed, should
be approved by the High Representative. In particular,
the issue of military relations between the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia and the Republika Srpska must
become fully transparent. It is also essential that the
High Representative should continue to engage
President Kostunica in the process of Dayton
implementation. The next step must be the signature of
the State-level agreement between the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and Bosnia.

I have deliberately avoided making a full
statement, partly because it is our hope that this
meeting will be interactive in character, because that it
is the way these things are most useful, but partly also
because the representative of Sweden will be speaking
later today on behalf of the European Union, and my
delegation fully associates itself with what the
representative of Sweden will say in his presidency
capacity.

But I want to conclude with a word of support
from the United Kingdom with regard to what
Mr. Petritsch said about the question of bringing
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) indictees to trial. That is a crucially
important element, and when the Prime Minister of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was here earlier this
month I made the same point to him then. I know that
he took it on board. The more cooperation can be
extended to the ICTY, the quicker the trials can begin;
and the quicker all the indictees find their way to The
Hague, the better it will be for us all.

