Mr. Tenya (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation
welcomes the convening of this meeting and thanks
Mr. Parfait Onanga-Anyanga, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA),
for his briefing. We also welcome the participation of
Mr. Bedializoun Moussa Nebie and Brigadier General
Herminio Teodoro Maio.

Peru notes with concern that the efforts to restore the
presence of the State and promote internal reconciliation
have not yet succeeded in consolidating adequate
responses to the serious deterioration of security in
much of the country and to the dramatic humanitarian
situation of its population. Most of the country is living
in a state of permanent conflict as a result of an increase
in inter-ethnic violence, access to weapons and the
struggle for control of natural resources waged among
armed groups, as well as the promotion of messages
inciting religious violence, hatred and stigmatization.
That has led to the continued attacks on the civilian
population, MINUSCA personnel and humanitarian
workers, which have spread to the country's capital.
The Central African Republic is today one of the most
dangerous and difficult environments.

In that context, we highlight the vital joint efforts
that MINUSCA and the European Union are carrying out
in training Central African military and police forces,
such as projects on the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration of ex-combatants and security sector
reform. It is essential to provide those forces with the
necessary operational and logistical support.

The difficult socioeconomic reality also
contributes to the country's instability. That is why it
is critical that the international community back the
Government's efforts as embodied in the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan and the Mutual
Engagement Framework. We especially believe that
it is crucial to generate employment, particularly for
young people, in order to prevent their recruitment
into violent groups. In that regard, we highlight the
role of the panel of facilitators of the African Initiative
for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African
Republic in promoting dialogue between armed groups
and civil society.

It is also essential to create synergies between the
United Nations and relevant regional organizations and
neighbouring countries with a view to coordinating
efforts in favour of political processes and border crime
control. In that regard, we welcome the joint visit of
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix and Mr. Smail Chergui to the
Central African Republic in April, and we agree with
the Secretary- General on the need to revive the bilateral
joint commissions of the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, Chad and the Sudan.
Those efforts should be complemented by a robust
judicial system, which is why we recognize the efforts
of the Central African authorities to operationalize their
judicial institutions, especially the Special Criminal
Court and the national human rights commission, with
a view to generating strong action against various types
of abuse, including cases of sexual violence and the
involvement of children in the conflict.

Peru wishes to highlight MINUSCA's sensitive
functions in an adverse and complex environment. We
believe that its operational capabilities - as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
MINUSCA mentioned earlier - must be strengthened,
and we therefore stress the need to ensure the safety of
the Blue Helmets on the ground. In that regard, we look
forward to the results of the Mission's strategic review.

To conclude, I stress the importance ofundertaking
an inclusive political process by the Central African
authorities involving men and women of different
social, economic, ethnic and religious backgrounds. The
solution to the crisis in the Central African Republic
can be found only through dialogue and national
reconciliation among the Central Africans themselves.

