Mr. Kayinamura (Rwanda): At the outset, Rwanda extends its congratulations to you and your team, Mr. President, for assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the month and thank you for organizing this important debate, ahead of the celebrating the seventy-fifth anniversary of the United Nations. We also welcome the new members of the Security Council and wish them success. We appreciate the contributions made by the outgoing members of the Council. We align ourselves with the statement delivered by the representative of Azerbaijan on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. The list of speakers, from yesterday to today, testament to how important this topic is. We appreciate, Sir, that you have extended this meeting until today to give Member States a chance to take the floor. Most points have been mentioned, but allow us to stress a few points. The authors of the Charter of the United Nations were not mistaken when they began this great document by recalling the horrors and pains of the scourge of war, which we unfortunately forget from time to time. They did not envisage how much the international system would evolve, but their bitter experience convinced them that multilateral cooperation was the only way to save humankind from destruction. They were right. That is the true spirit of this Organization. The purposes and principles of the United Nations Charter enhance that vision and practice of multilateral cooperation by engaging and encouraging States to pursue cooperation over isolation, peaceful settlement of disputes over war and the pursuit of a common vision in which Member States can relate as equals. Indeed, the formation of the United Nations and its evolution over the years have shown us that multilateral cooperation is central to peace and security in the world. The role of the United Nations is being questioned and international treaties are being challenged. That means that, at times, multilateral cooperation is at a crossroads, perhaps at a time when we need it most, with contemporary challenges, including climate change, terrorism, poverty and inequalities, which all require a multilateral system to move them forward. No one doubts that no country can address those challenges alone. A stronger United Nations, reflecting the realities of the contemporary world, will allow it and its Member States to meet those challenges today and in the years ahead. There are many achievements of which we can be proud as we look back on the past 75 years. The world is a better place in many ways. We see progress in the areas of peace and security, economic development, human rights, social development, health and many other sectors. Indeed, if it was not for multilateral cooperation, we may not have recorded as much success. But there is still a long way to go. The world is a dynamic place and history is always evolving. New challenges have emerged over the years and require us to adapt to them. To that end, allow Rwanda to make a few points. First, while we all pursue our national interests, at the core of it all we need to build on the fact that the people we serve have common aspirations. They want to live in a peaceful, sustainable and dignified world. Let us build on the mutual aspirations of our peoples, rather than focus on small goals. Therefore, there is a need to strengthen international relations, based on international law, and the United Nations remains the best forum in which to discuss those issues. Secondly, there is a need for all Member States to uphold the Charter in the maintenance of international peace and security. We must also strengthen multilateral cooperation. Most contemporary challenges - be they terrorism, climate change, transnational organized crimes and many others - will be effectively addressed if we work together. Thirdly, our world has been integrated and globalized far too deeply for us to dismember ourselves and try to fix things alone. In that regard, the United Nations will become even more relevant in the years to come. We all therefore need to renew our commitment to the rules-based multilateral system. Fourthly, the primary body responsible for maintenance of international peace and security is the Security Council. It also needs to make wider and more effective use of the procedures and frameworks available to settle disputes. Finally, Rwanda reaffirms its commitment to the principles of the Charter, and we will continue to play our part to enhance multilateral cooperation in the pursuit of a just, peaceful and prosperous world for us all.
