Mr. Hasmy (Malaysia): We are meeting this
evening to take action on the draft resolution on the
humanitarian situation in and around Kosovo. My
delegation is pleased to have played a role, together with

 

Bahrain, in helping move the process forward, culminating
in this formal meeting of the Council. We are grateful for
the solid support shown by members of the Council,
especially those who have contributed important input and
sponsored the draft resolution. We are equally grateful to
those countries outside of the Council that have joined in
sponsoring this draft resolution.

My delegation is strongly of the view that, in the wake
of the humanitarian tragedy unfolding in and around
Kosovo, it is timely for the Council to pronounce itself on
the subject. We feel that the Council should have been able
to adopt a draft resolution on the humanitarian issue, after
weeks of paralysis in the Council, even as the international
community watched in anguish the plight of the refugees
and internally displaced persons.

We are, of course, equally concerned over the ongoing
conflict in Kosovo. We share the views already expressed
by other members of the international community on the
need for an early political settlement. Nothing would have
pleased my delegation more than the Council's adopting a
resolution which addressed the Kosovo issue in a
comprehensive fashion. Efforts are being made by many
international actors, including the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, in that direction. It remains our earnest
hope that these efforts will yield tangible results and that
the Council will be in a position to address the issue in a
comprehensive manner as soon as possible. We remain
convinced that the issue can be finally resolved only by
way of a political solution.

In the meantime, it is also our conviction that the
Council can, and ought to, play a meaningful role by
pronouncing itself on an important aspect of the Kosovo
crisis - namely, the humanitarian situation, which is
characterized by the exodus of hundreds of thousands of
refugees and internally displaced persons, who are in a very
desperate and traumatized condition in and around Kosovo
and other parts of Yugoslavia.

We are of the view that, while there remain
fundamental differences among Council members on the
political and other aspects of the Kosovo problem, there is
universal concern among Council members on the
humanitarian tragedy which continues to unfold in and
around Kosovo. It is in cognizance of this widely shared
concern that the initiative has been taken to bring the issue
to the Council for formal action, as a concrete step in the
efforts to bring the Kosovo issue to the Council by the
least contentious aspect, which should command the support
of all members of the Council.

Formal action by the Council on the humanitarian
issue in and around Kosovo would be a clear expression
of the serious concern of the Council about the
humanitarian tragedy which unfolded weeks ago. It would
also be an important and positive response to the appeals
by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and the Secretary-General for international humanitarian
assistance to alleviate the plight of the refugees and
internally displaced persons, not only in and around
Kosovo, but also in other parts of Yugoslavia. It would be
a welcome expression of the Council's strong support and
encouragement of the ongoing efforts made by
international organizations that are operating in the region.
At the same time, the adoption of the draft resolution
would be a strong and unequivocal expression of support
for the refugees and internally displaced persons,
particularly in respect of their right to return to their
homes in security and in dignity.

The Council has not been able to address the issue
of Kosovo in any meaningful way for a long time now
due to a lack of consensus, which, regrettably, led to
action being taken outside the Council. This draft
resolution represents the first serious attempt on the part
of some Council members to bring the Kosovo issue back
to the Council in the earnest hope that it could pave the
way for the forging of a consensus on the more difficult
aspects of the Kosovo problem, thereby reasserting the
role of the Council on this issue. In submitting this draft
resolution, the sponsors are impelled by a desire to make
a contribution to galvanizing international action in
addressing the enormous humanitarian tragedy in and
around Kosovo. Equally importantly, it represents a
modest contribution by these members towards unifying
the Council. We earnestly hope that this will indeed be
the case.

