Mr. Thomson (Fiji): 1 have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Small Island Developing States
(SIDS) represented at the United Nations, namely,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the
Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tuvalu, Tonga, Vanuatu and my own country,
Fiji. I wish to start by thanking Brazil, as President of
the Security Council, for convening this open debate.
The Pacific SIDS have long understood that peace,
security and development go hand in hand. I am
therefore glad for the opportunity to add our voice to
this important discussion.

Small island developing States like those in the
Pacific that have experienced violent conflict know
first hand the interdependence of security and
development. Accelerated sustainable economic
development activities such as focused investment to
create jobs, building and maintaining critical
infrastructure and addressing environmental
degradation help to prevent a relapse into conflict, and
are the only way to guarantee long-term sustainable
peace. Such development, along with security, is
integral to peacebuilding activities.

More generally, development provides countries
with increased resilience to, and greater capacity to
cope with, political, economic and environmental
shocks to the State. The Pacific SIDS cannot
effectively cope with global shocks owing to their
particular vulnerabilities, including unique geographies
and the lack of both technical capacity and large
diversified economies. Global unsustainable
development impacts can also weaken resilience to
external shocks and threaten security. For example,
global unsustainable fishing practices in Pacific waters
severely undermines food security in our region. In that
regard, we welcome the General Assembly's adoption
of resolution 65/150, on the protection of coral reefs
for sustainable livelihoods - a resolution that all
Pacific countries promoted. We look forward to these
important issues being addressed next year at the
United Nations Conference on Sustainable
Development in Rio de J aneiro.

For the Pacific SIDS, the adverse impacts of
climate change pose the greatest shock risk and the
most imminent threat to our development and security.
Rising waters, more intense storms, global and local
food shortages and freshwater scarcity endanger many
of our islands. The report of the Secretary-General on
climate change and its possible security implications
(A/64/350) calls climate change a threat-multiplier.
This is true. But climate change is also a threat in and
of itself, creating instability where none before existed.

Based on projections of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, the United Nations High

Commissioner for Refugees deems it very likely that
rising sea levels and increasing extreme weather events
will cause low-lying island States like some of the
Pacific SIDS to be entirely uninhabitable long before
their full submersion. The resulting and inevitable
displacement from these island States can lead to
serious security problems for the displaced peoples as
well as the receiving community. For some Paciflc
island States, climate impacts, especially sea level rise,
may even threaten and call into question current
conceptions of sovereignty. This issue is unprecedented
and demands the specific attention of the Council.

At the same time, climate change undermines our
economic development by demanding an ever-
increasing share of our financial resources to adapt to
its negative impacts. There is an urgent need to
increase efforts to improve the development prospects
of vulnerable countries in order to safeguard their
resilience to the impacts of climate change, as well as
the need to fund urgent adaptation projects. This must
go hand in hand with global efforts to rapidly reduce
carbon dioxide emissions. Past emissions have already
committed us to dangerous levels of temperature
increase, and the world is at great risk of non-linear
and destabilizing impacts that threaten global peace
and security.

To mitigate the prospects of conflict and
insecurity, the Security Council must urgently address
the security implications of climate change. In 2009,
the General Assembly unanimously adopted resolution
63/281, which called on all relevant organs of the
United Nations to intensify their efforts in considering
and addressing climate change, including its possible
security implications. As the United Nations body
holding primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
is duty bound to substantively address this issue. We
reiterate our call on the Security Council to urgently
begin consideration of the threats to international peace
and security posed by climate change, and to consider
actions it could take to respond to these growing
threats.

As the Secretary-General highlighted this
morning, we must focus more on the climate change-
security-development nexus and on the fact that
managing climate risks is necessary to achieving
security.
