Mr. Wittig (Germany): I would like to join
colleagues in welcoming to the Security Council
Foreign Minister Jeremic' of Serbia, the new Foreign
Minister Hoxhaj of Kosovo and Special Representative
Zannier. I would like to thank Mr. Zannier for his
comprehensive briefing. We appreciate the contribution
made by the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and commend the
dedication and service of his staff.
The reporting period has been marked by
significant political events. Kosovo went through a
difficult political period after the Constitutional Court
ruled on the procedure for the election of the President.
Germany notes with satisfaction that these difficulties
have been successfully overcome by democratic means
based on a dialogue between the ruling coalition and
opposition parties. There is now an opportunity to shift
attention to the important challenges facing Kosovo.
Let me comment on three aspects contained in the
report of the Special Representative.

First, Germany welcomes the launch of the
dialogue between Pristina and Belgrade, which aims at
promoting cooperation, achieving progress on the path
to the European Union and improving the lives of
people in the region through practical arrangements. As
facilitator of the dialogue, the European Union hosted
the first three meetings in Brussels, which were
conducted in a positive and constructive atmosphere.
They showed that there is potential for reaching
agreement between Pristina and Belgrade on much-
needed arrangements in a number of areas, among
which are a civil registry, cadastral data,
telecommunications and electricity. This potential must
be fully realized for the benefit of the people in the
region. We call on both sides to continue the dialogue
in good faith and produce tangible results as soon as
possible.

Secondly, with regard to the security situation in
Kosovo, Germany is pleased to note that the overall
situation remained relatively calm during the reporting
period. This also holds true for the situation in the
north of Kosovo, where only one incident in the past
three months was reported. This is encouraging.
Nevertheless, challenges remain and we share the
assessment of the Secretary-General that solutions to
practical issues found through dialogue between
Pristina and Belgrade will help to alleviate the
persistent underlying tensions in the northern part of
Kosovo. We echo the call made by the Secretary-
General on communities in the north to avoid taking
any unilateral action that could undermine the situation
on the ground and exacerbate those tensions.

My third point concerns the report of the
rapporteur of the Parliamentary Assembly of the
Council of Europe, Mr. Dick Marty, on alleged
inhumane treatment of people and illicit trafficking in
human organs in Kosovo. Let me stress that Germany
continues to take this report very seriously. A full
investigation is necessary of the allegations contained
in the report of despicable crimes committed against
Serbian nationals during and after the armed conflict in
Kosovo. We have already stated that, in our View, there
is no doubt that the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) has the capacities,
competence and jurisdiction to carry out those
investigations. EULEX has an independent and fully
functional Witness Security Unit, which can be scaled
up if necessary. EULEX has Germany's full support
and confidence. As stated in annex I to the quarterly
report of the Secretary-General (S/2011/28l), EULEX
has opened a preliminary investigation and its
prosecutors have met with Mr. Marty to discuss his
findings. The Government of Kosovo is ready for full
cooperation. EULEX has established good cooperation
with the authorities in Belgrade and Tirana. EULEX
prosecutors have already met twice with the general
prosecutor of Albania on this matter.

Let me conclude by underlining that Germany
will continue to promote Serbia's and Kosovo's joint
and shared European future.

