Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me first thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Tadamichi
Yamamoto and Ms. Sima Samar for their insightful
briefings, as well as the Permanent Representative of
Afghanistan for her statement. We also thank Special
Representative Yamamoto and the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) for
their ongoing efforts to promote peace and stability
in Afghanistan. We will continue to support those
efforts actively.

Special Representative Yamamoto's briefing and
the Secretary-General's recent report (S/2019/493)
illustrate the challenges but also the opportunities
that Afghanistan will face in the next few weeks and
months. As second-largest donor and troop contributor,
Germany remains firmly committed to Afghanistan.
Of course, we also look forward to providing UNAMA
with a strong and concise mandate in September.

As Special Representative Yamamoto said, the
road to peace is still a long one. However, at the same
time, the current momentum in the peace process to
find a negotiated settlement creates an opportunity
that must be seized. We applaud the courageous efforts
of the Afghan Government and the international
initiatives in that respect. It is now urgent to move
forward to intra-Afghan talks, which must include
the Afghan Government and the Taliban, as well as
other key Afghan stakeholders, including the sizeable
representation of women.

Germany stands ready to contribute to these
efforts. In close consultation with the United States
and other partners, over the past couple of weeks
Germany has explored the possibilities of holding an
intra-Afghan dialogue conference together with Qatar
in Doha. The aim of that dialogue would be to catalyse
a comprehensive intra-Afghan negotiation process. We
have received great support for our proposal from the
Afghan Government, as well as from other key political
actors and civil society representatives in Afghanistan.
Obstacles remain, but we will continue our efforts. We
are grateful for the support of Special Representatives
Yamamoto and the Member States around this table.

A political process in Afghanistan has a chance
of success only if the international community acts
in unison and sends the clear message to the Afghan
parties, including the Taliban, that it is time to talk about
a common future. In the end, only Afghans themselves
can forge a broad and sustainable agreement. That will
require a lot of work, time and compromise on all sides.

The meaningful inclusion of women will remain
essential during those talks. In that context, we
welcome the participation of women in the loya jirga
and through their own consultative process. We
reiterate the importance of increasing the full and
effective participation and leadership of women in
decision-making, including overall peacebuilding
strategies at the national and sub-national levels.

A sustainable peace process must ensure the
continuity and stability of State institutions and the
Constitution, as well as the protection of human and
women's rights and freedoms. The Security Council
can play an important role in clearly communicating its
expectations in that regard.

I would like to make some brief remarks about
the upcoming presidential elections. In order to avoid
a constitutional vacuum, it will be important that
presidential elections are held in a timely, fair and
democratic manner. It is crucial to draw the right lessons
from the parliamentary elections in that context.

I have two final comments on issues that were
raised in the earlier presentations and briefings.

First, the effects of climate change continue to
hit Afghanistan in a very severe way. Be it droughts
or flash floods, they are all symptoms of a larger
problem that affects all of us. But, in a country hit
by violent conflict and poverty, its consequences can
be even more devastating and further aggravate the
security situation. On 4 June, Afghan Deputy Foreign
Minister Zaman took part in the Berlin Climate and
Security Conference and underlined the importance
that Afghanistan attaches to the problem.

Finally, as mentioned by both the Special
Representative and the Permanent Representative
of Afghanistan anti-corruption measures should be
expanded in line with the Geneva Mutual Accountability
Framework and the post-Geneva process. The recent
UNAMA report on Afghanistan's fight against
corruption outlined some welcome steps and remaining
challenges in terms of law enforcement in that regard.

