Mr. Sauer (Finland): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today's debate on the
working methods of the Security Council.

Finland also commends the valuable contributions
of the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency
group, and we align ourselves with the group's statement
made earlier by the representative of Switzerland.

We would also like to thank Mr. Ian Martin for his
briefing and acknowledge Security Council Report as
an institution that has provided significant data on the
Security Council - a recent example being the report
on working methods published last month.

We commend the work of the Security Council
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions and hope to see further progress
under Kuwait's presidency of the Council. In that
regard, we should build upon the work of Japan that
resulted in the revised note by the President S/2017/507.

The preparation of newly elected members to serve
on the Council is one important aspect also considered
in note 507. We believe that it is essential to support
incoming members in preparing for their tenure in a
comprehensive and effective manner. Finland, in close
cooperation with Professor Edward Luck of Columbia
University, and other partners, such as the Security
Council Affairs Division of the Department of Political
Affairs of the Secretariat, has for the past 15 years
supported the preparation of non-permanent members
to the work and practices of the Council by hosting an
annual workshop. The Hitting the Ground Running
retreat has also earned its place as a central forum for
informal discussions, specifically on the Council's
working methods. In addition to encouraging earlier
elections and introducing more informal meeting
formats, important discussions on co-penholdership
and elections of Chairs of subsidiary bodies have also
been taken forward at the retreat. Finland stands ready
to continue and further develop this well-established
practice in future.

We support increased interaction and cooperation
between the Council and non-Council member States
as well as United Nations actors, regional organizations
and non-governmental organizations. We welcome
inviting non-governmental organizations as briefers.
Holding informal briefings for all Member States on
the programme of work by the President of the Council
also increases the flow of information. Open debates,
informal interactive dialogues and Arria Formula
meetings can be useful forums as well.

Increased interaction within the Council is
important. All members should be given an equal
chance to participate in the work of the Council. How
to further develop the concept of the penholder and
co-penholder is important.

In conclusion, Finland is a member of the Group
of Like-Minded States on Targeted Sanctions, and
was also one of the sponsors of the high-level review
of United Nations sanctions. We continue to seek
to improve due-process guarantees with regard to
Security Council sanctions and to support efforts by
the Council to enhance the fairness and transparency
of its sanctions regimes. Fair and clear procedures
make United Nations sanctions regimes more effective
and credible. The establishment of the Office of the
Ombudsperson for the Da'esh and Al-Qaida sanctions
regime was a considerable achievement. It is worrisome
that the post of the Ombudsperson has been vacant
since August. We therefore urge the Security Council
to complete the appointment procedure without delay.

