Mr. Kovanda (Czech Republic): The Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), has
received yet again a clean bill of health from the Co-
Chairmen of the International Conference on the Former
Yugoslavia (ICFY) concerning its maintaining a sealed
border with the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and
concerning its cooperation with the ICFY Mission
monitoring that border.

This would be reason enough for the Security Council
to pass resolution 1015 (1995), which has extended the
sanctions relief first effected by resolution 943 (1994). In
addition, though, we have taken good note of the posture of
reticent onlooker that the FRY authorities adopted during
recent Croatian military activities aimed at reintegrating
parts of Croatia's territory that had been under the control
of Croatian Serbs bent on secession. This is a posture we
greatly appreciated, even more so since the brunt of the
humanitarian aftermath of Croatia's military action, in the
form of hundreds of thousands of Serb refugees, has fallen
largely on State and local authorities of the FRY.

More recently, the FRY and President Milosevic
personally were critically instrumental in agreeing to a set
of peace principles in Geneva concerning Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The promise of Geneva has in the most recent
days been augmented by an accord on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which we hear was actually based on
propositions of President Milosevic.

There is for us, at least, auspicious symbolism in these
developments taking place just as we in the Czech Republic
have started celebrating a month of Bosnia and Herzegovina
under the auspices of Presidents Havel and Izetbegovic.

Furthermore, these developments vindicate the policy
of this Council, which in resolutions 942 (1994) and 943
(1994) first sought to underscore the then emerging
differences between Serbs of the FRY and Serbs of Bosnia
and Herzegovina by differentiating its treatment of the two,
by relaxing sanctions on the former while tightening them
on the latter. At that time last year, the Council took a
gamble and the voting was nowhere near the unanimity
we witnessed today. This gamble has paid off.

The resolutions that followed 943 (1994) extended
or shortened the time period for relaxing sanctions
depending on how we perceived the behaviour of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. My delegation has even
on previous occasions argued that a longer period of
relaxed sanctions would be appropriate, and the half year
for which sanction relief has been authorized today is in
our view very proper.

This is why the Czech Republic was happy to co-
sponsor resolution 1015 (1995). We recognized that this
resolution might well be the last of its kind, inasmuch as
in six months we might be facing a different situation
altogether. Needless to say, that depends more on future
actions of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia than on the
Security Council.

