Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretary-General Ladsous and the four Police
Commissioners who have joined us here today. I wish
to thank all Police Commissioners serving around the
world, as well as the 13,000 United Nations police.

In listening to the briefings, I was quite struck by
how much each of the four Commissioners, who in turn
represent the other Commissioners, have in common,
but also by how very different each of their appeals
to us are. Specifically, I noted just how unique each
mission is and how we cannot take a solution that works
for one mission and apply it to another.

Commissioner Munyambo described the hugely
important task that peacekeepers in South Sudan are
performing by protecting the protection-of-civilians
sites - 200,000 people living at sites were never
envisaged when the mandate was created in the first
place. Now, suddenly, the police in South Sudan have
had to adjust and take on that task.

Commissioner Makotose, as the sole female

United Nations Police Commissioner - who works
in the Darfur mission, where sexual violence is, sadly,
quite widespread as a weapon of war - described

the impact of having women occupy 19 per cent of
the individual police officer slots as part of African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
how that changes the way the communities interact
with the Operation and the way women and children
come forward. She also described something that we
maybe are less conscious of, that is, the extent to which
the women who serve in these missions, in, relatively
speaking, a higher ratio than what we are used to seeing,
serve as role models for young girls in the communities
where they serve. That is incredibly important.

Commissioner Monchotte has worked in a Haiti
Mission that has experienced incredible ups and downs
over the years, and the most devastating moment, of
course, was the 2010 earthquake, where so many United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
officers, including the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, lost their lives serving the people
of Haiti. Yet against that backdrop, MINUSTAH and
the police have steadily gone about their business,
taking a country that, as we know, had 6,700 equipped
and trained police when MINUSTAH deployed, which
will have next year up to 15,000 trained and equipped
police. I also imagine they will have a different depth
oftraining than had been available before MINUSTAH
arrived in Haiti.

Commissioner Yacouba in Mali, by far the most
dangerous, deadliest mission in the whole world, has
made an appeal to us for support for intelligence-based
policing. As we noted in the meeting that the Senegal
delegation organized last week (see S/PV.7802) on
asymmetrical threats, this is an extremely important
appeal. That is because that in so many of the
missions that exist now in very complex and warlike
environments, the peacekeepers and the police are
often blind to the threats out there and do not have the
information and intelligence they need. I hope that we
as a Council heed his appeal.

The challenge, as we as a Council talk about
United Nations police, is that their mandate is unlike
the mandate of any other police force. Therefore, the
backgrounds the Commissioners and their officers have
are very different in national settings. We as a Council
expect United Nations police not just to support host
Governments in maintaining law and order, but, as we
have heard, to help restore the rule of law in places
where armed groups act with impunity. We also expect
United Nations police to kind of act as development
advisers, working with Governments to rebuild national
police forces, as we have seen work in Haiti.

Therefore, this year's external review of the United
Nations Police Division, along with an evaluation of
United Nations police from the United Nations Office of
Internal Oversight Services, were together an important
and comprehensive assessment of how Member States
and the Secretariat together can improve a mission
with few precedents to draw upon. I think others have
already and will discuss all the challenges they are
facing, drawing upon in their testimonies today. Ijust
want to focus on two: the training and capabilities that
United Nations police bring to their deployment, or the
lack thereof in some cases, and the Security Council's
lack of strategic guidance for them when we send them
into the field.

First, briefly on training and capabilities, one key
problem that as Commissioners they must deal with
every day is the perpetual mismatch between supply
and demand for United Nations police. The United
Nations Police Division at Headquarters is under
pressure to find enough United Nations police to match
the Council's requests - the figure that we put in our
mandates. But unlike militaries, which may have units
stationed in barracks waiting for a new contingency in
each of our countries, police departments in all of our
countries are using their officers to conduct everyday
law enforcement. There is not generally a standing pool
of officers waiting to get the call. A police department
sending a formed police unit, especially to the United
Nations, loses 140 to 160 officers to patrol their streets.
That is why the United States is really and truly grateful
to police-contributing countries for their commitments.
But for the Police Division finding any new police
experts or formed police units for peacekeeping
missions is an extremely time-consuming task. The
result is that the Police Division, I think it is fair to
say, often focuses more on meeting their numbers,
getting police contingents to 100 per cent of authorized
strength, rather than being able to afford to look at
whether the officers have the training and skills to
actually meet the particular mission's goals.

In that regard, I would quote the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan Police Commissioner who issued
an appeal here today for more officers, as he put it, with
the skill set and the mindset suited to the environments
where the police are being deployed. Predeployment
assessments are done by the Police Division, as we
know, but those assessments may not align with the
skills that United Nations missions actually need. We
hear that from the Police Commissioners whenever we
travel in the field.

One of the things the external review showed
is that the Police Division tests for three basic
skills - linguistic capacity for a particular mission,
firearm proficiency and driving competency. Those
are very important skills, but they are not necessarily
tailored for any specific sui generis set of circumstances
like the very varied circumstances we have heard about
today. It turns out that approximately 55 per cent of
candidates put forward to serve with United Nations as
police fail even that three-pronged test.

But what peacekeeping missions and Police
Commissioners really need to know is whether a police
contingent can handle far more complex tasks, like
responding to a terrorist attack in a town centre in
Mali or explaining to new police recruits how to treat
suspects in an interrogation, such as in the Central
African Republic. And the Secretariat is not in a
position to provide that training to police units that do
not already have it. That is a real issue. The issues are
so daunting and so systemic that it is tempting to be
intimidated and to just go on with our business as we
have been doing, but let me offer one place to start.

United Nations Member States and the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO) need to go beyond
the basic proficiency test and increase focus on which
skills each Mission needs, not just meeting numerical
targets for force strength. The Police Division and the
broader Secretariat should not expect contingents that
pass the basic United Nations assessment test - again,
linguistic, firearms and driving - to be ready to tackle
the tasks in police mandates.

That is common sense but it has not happened
enough, in part because the pool of eligible recruits
in each of our countries is not large enough. So we
Member States must bring intentionality to expanding
our national pools of recruits to include officers with
relevant skills. I know that we have already seen a
number of countries placing a real emphasis on trying
to recruit women nationally so that DPKO has more
women police officers from whom to recruit. But if we
ask the Secretariat and the Police Division to do more,
that alone will not work unless the Member States that
comprise the United Nations set about actually looking
at the skills that are needed and recruiting such people.
That brings me to my second and final point,
which involves mandates. We States members of the
Security Council need to be more strategic about
how we deploy United Nations police. In theory - I
stress theory - United Nations police should be able
to help facilitate the withdrawal of a peacekeeping
mission. They can bridge the gap between an armed
international military presence and the handover of
responsibility for security to local authorities. United
Nations police could be a peacekeeping mission's
exit strategy, stepping in after peacekeepers restore
a basic level of security, then building up a host
country's law enforcement capabilities. Depending on
the circumstances, one could even imagine a world
in which troop numbers decline and police numbers
increase. Then we could draw down police as a host
country's police and security services are able to take
up the baton for law enforcement and stabilization.

But that is not what we do today. We typically
work with the Secretariat to assign a fixed number of
police to a mission, and then provide the police with
a list of tasks to complete. Resolutions do not specify
when police divisions should focus more on protection
than on advising. We rarely consider surging police to
allow for troop withdrawals. Of course, it is hard to
use United Nations police strategically when serious
gaps remain in their skill sets - which speaks to my
first point - but part of the problem, too, is a lack of
awareness among those of us in the Council about the
role of United Nations police.

Here I would like to make an admission, which is
that I could certainly spend more time thinking about the
role of United Nations police in peacekeeping. I would
ask my colleagues around the table to think back to the
last time that they reviewed a peacekeeping mandate.
How closely did they think about the performance of
that Mission's police component? How closely did any
of us think about the task that it was performing, about
the division of labour even between formed police units,
individual police oficers and so on. We can bring more
intentionality to that task. Doing so matters, because
countless civilians are relying on United Nations police
to keep them safe.

I will close with just one example. Earlier this year,
United Nations police in the Central African Republic
deployed to secure polling stations through successive
rounds of voting in the Central African Republic's
elections. At one polling place, the Baya Dombia
school, a rocket-propelled grenade was fired at a crowd
waiting to vote. United Nations police were on hand
to help secure the polling site after the attack and they
immediately commenced an investigation into who had
perpetrated the attack. Hundreds of voters, reportedly,
stayed at the school chanting "We will vote, we will
vote". In that case, the United Nations police made sure
that violence did not keep those voters from making
their voices heard. And United Nations police can play
an incredibly important role in promoting security. We
on the Council need to dedicate ourselves with greater
fervour to helping enable police to do so.

