Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I congratulate the
Russian Federation on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of September and
wish them every success with their timely and relevant
agenda of critical issues. My delegation conveys its
thanks to Poland for its outstanding work as President
of the Council last month.

We thank the Russian presidency for convening this
important debate on the situation in Afghanistan, as well
as the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tadamichi Yamamoto; the Executive Director of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Mr. Yury
Fedotov; and Ambassador Djani, in his capacity as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1988 (2011), for their comprehensive updates. We also

appreciate the statement delivered by Ambassador
Adela Raz, Permanent Representative of Afghanistan,
for its insights on the prevailing critical situation.

The recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2019/703) provides a realistic assessment and
important update on the work of the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA). This
debate is also taking place on the eve of important
events that will determine the fate of Afghanistan in
the immediate and long-term future of the country. The
results of the 28 September presidential elections will
be crucial and have a profound impact on the dynamics
of and prospects for Afghanistan's development. We
hope that they will be conducted in a peaceful and
transparent way to consolidate Afghan society. We
agree with Special Representative Yamamoto that
any threat or actual terrorist attack to undermine the
process is unacceptable.

We welcome the efforts of the various stakeholders
to advance the peace process and conduct relevant
negotiations with the Taliban. At the same time, we
strongly believe that only successful direct dialogue
between the Government of Afghanistan and the
Taliban could ensure a long-term viable settlement of
the devastating conflict. Terrorist attacks should cease
and must not be used as a political tool.

Despite the effective measures taken by the
international community and the Government, the
security situation continues to be complex. We are
particularly concerned that Da'esh in Afghanistan
remains combat-capable and continues to step up
its presence in various provinces of the country.
Increased terrorist activity in the north of Afghanistan,
near its borders with the Central Asian States, is of
special concern to us. In that regard, the effective
implementation of the third phase of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia
is vital.

We also see the need to prevent violence against
women and children in Afghanistan, as well as the
growing number of deaths caused by terrorist attacks
and massive air strikes conducted by the army. As
indicated in the report of the Secretary-General, women
and children accounted for approximately 42 per cent
of the overall number of victims.

Kazakhstan attaches particular importance to the
role of women in conflict resolution. In that regard, we
organized a regional conference, entitled "Empowering
women in Afghanistan" in September 2018 in our
capital. The conference focused on sustainable
economic growth by empowering Afghan women,
including in the business sector, reinforced by regional
cooperation, with an increased focus on education.

The role of regional and international
organizations - such as INTERPOL, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and its Central
Asian Regional Information and Coordination Centre
for Combating Illicit Trafficking of Narcotic Drugs,
Psychotropic Substances and their Precursors - are
even more relevant in the light of the fact that drug
production in Afghanistan is one of the main sources
for financing terrorism.

In his report, the Secretary-General underlines
that securing Afghanistan's economic future will
require the incremental development of its private
sector, accompanied by improved investor confidence
and enhanced trade and infrastructure connectivity
with regional partners. We therefore call on donors to
increase their contribution to peace and development in
and around Afghanistan.

To that end, Kazakhstan is continuing to work on
establishing, in Almaty, an interregional hub for the
Sustainable Development Goals under the auspices
of the United Nations. We hope that that structure
will contribute to better connectivity and coordinated
support for Afghanistan and other countries in the region
and beyond, with a view to accelerating the achievement
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.

Finally, my country is pleased that the Government
of Afghanistan, UNAMA and the international
community have continued to maintain a close
partnership, which is vital to ensuring sustainable
peace and stability in the country. Kazakhstan will
continue to support the brotherly people of Afghanistan
in fulfilling their aspirations for peace, prosperity
and security.

