Mr. Duval (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes the initiatives that you, Mr. President, have taken
this month. They represent a step towards the more
vigorous commitment of the Council and its members to
Africa. Today, several speakers have stated that the primary
challenge facing us is that of transforming those
commitments into concrete actions and, as Ambassador
Greenstock has just stressed, of making our action in Africa
more effective.

We also welcome the debates that have taken place on
thematic issues confronting Africa, such as AIDS, refugees
and internally displaced persons. Those meetings
emphasized the importance of human security in the
mandate and the work of the Council and demonstrate that
if they are to lead to action, such public meetings must
provide the opportunity for us to hear and to be heard. In
this regard, this month has taught us many lessons.

Canada welcomes the participation of the Facilitator
for Burundi, Mr. Mandela; the Facilitator for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sir Ketumile Masire;
the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), Mr. Salim Salim; and President Chiluba, one of the
principal architects of the Lusaka Agreement. Indeed, this
has been an important phase in the establishment of a
closer relationship, more focused on cooperation, between
the Security Council and the OAU, as well as between the
Council and the heads of the regional and subregional
initiatives for peace and security in Africa.

We eagerly await the speedy adoption of the draft
resolution, on which we have reached agreement in the
course of this month, to provide for a peacekeeping mission
in Sierra Leone. The new mandate of the United Nations
Observer Mission in Sierra Leone is a model to follow for
forthcoming missions that will require vigorous
peacekeeping and a commitment to acting firmly and to
deploying troops on the basis of needs in the field. This
is also the first mission which has a significant
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration element,
which demonstrates that, when there is a need to do so,
the members of the Security Council are able to draw
lessons from past experienceln the same spirit, we are
grateful to the Secretary-General for his initiative to
establish a demining centre, which is considered to be an
important measure for protecting civilians.

We have been honoured by the presence of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Mrs.
Ogata, who rightly emphasized the importance of the role
of the Security Council when it is called on to respond
quickly to the needs of millions of displaced Africans.
The fate of populations affected by war depends directly
on our action or inaction. The international community
must adopt more energetic measures to eliminate the
deep-rooted causes of population displacement. Canada
unreservedly supports the mission of Mr. Mandela and the
Foreign Minister of Namibia, who, in their statements to
the Council, emphasized that all those involved in
conflicts in Africa must commit themselves to respecting
peace, democracy and human rights. That responsibility
cannot be shirked.

The establishment of lasting peace requires all those
involved in conflicts - Governments and others - to
bear responsibility for protecting refugees and displaced
persons within their territories and for establishing
conditions to facilitate their return. They must also allow
all those who so require to have safe and unimpeded
access to humanitarian assistance and they must guarantee
the safety, security and freedom of movement of United
Nations and associated personnel.

Canada is deeply concerned by the numerous attacks
against United Nations personnel, in particular those who
are locally recruited and those responsible for
humanitarian assistance. We have seen such acts of
aggression over the past few months in Angola, the Sudan
and Somalia. The dramatic increase in the number of such
victims among humanitarian personnel requires us to take
urgent action to provide for their protection. Practical
measures must be undertaken to provide for the protection
of civilian and humanitarian personnel, and the
perpetrators of criminal actions must also be brought to
justice. All those who Violate human rights and

 

humanitarian law must be brought speedily to justice if we
wish to eliminate the culture of impunity.

We welcome the firm support of the members of the
Council for the efforts being made to implement the
Council's sanctions against UNITA. It is critical for the
Council to consider, speedily and in depth, the
recommendations of the expert panel. Over the course of
the month, we have drawn the Council's attention to the
relevant information that we have obtained in Angola on
the current situation of UNIT A and its operating methods.
This information was communicated to the expert panel of
the Angola sanctions Committee, which will take it into
account in making recommendations on ways to strengthen
the effectiveness of the sanctions imposed by the United
Nations.

We have also informed the Security Council of the
information we have obtained on the two United Nations
aircraft that were shot down and on those accused of the
crime. We urge the Council officially to identify those
responsible for these criminal acts and to ensure that they
be brought to justice.

Canada is convinced that the new Facilitator of the
Arusha peace process, former President Nelson Mandela,
will succeed in persuading all the parties, including the
rebel groups, to conclude a peace agreement. We reiterate
our support for a negotiated political solution, which we
feel to be the best way to establish a lasting peace so that
Burundi may enjoy lasting and long-term development and
development assistance may be effective.

Canada condemns the policy of the Government of
Burundi of displacing populations and forcing them into
camps to which humanitarian personnel have limited access.
This is a fundamental violation of the rights of the citizens
of Burundi. These camps must be dismantled and all the
parties to the conflict must guarantee unimpeded and safe
access to the victimized populations and the protection and
respect of refugees and internally displaced persons. All
those who wish to return home in safety must be allowed
to do so.

The open meeting on the Democratic Republic of the
Congo allowed the peace process to be relaunched. It is
critical that members of the Council involve themselves in
this effort. In the course of their statements at that meeting,
speakers emphasized the importance of implementing the
various elements of the Lusaka Agreement as quickly as
possible. We also hope that the Facilitator of the inter-
Congolese dialogue will have the resources necessary to
begin his work. His role will make a major contribution
to efforts designed to guarantee stability and democratic
and institutional development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.

The conclusions of the independent inquiry into the
United Nations actions in Rwanda highlight the
responsibility to respond effectively and speedily to
protect populations exposed to imminent danger, as well
as that which falls to the international community. The
responsibility to implement the ceasefire and all the
provisions of the Lusaka Agreement devolves first and
foremost, however, to its signatories. Nevertheless, an
international peacekeeping presence is required to assist
the various participants successfully to conclude this task
and to strengthen confidence in the peace process.

The Council is in the process of elaborating a draft
resolution on the second phase of the United Nations
Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUC). My delegation reaffirms its conviction
that missions in unstable areas, such as the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, must have strong mandates and
sufficient resources. Although we are satisfied by the
consensus established among the members of the Council
that the next phase should fall within the framework of
Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter, the troop
numbers proposed by the Secretary-General seem
insufficient to us for the Mission successfully to fulfil its
mandate and to secure the safety of personnel.

Once again, we wish to emphasize the importance of
providing support, particularly financial support, for the
Joint Military Commission and of encouraging the rapid
harmonization of its activities with those of the Mission.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, we want to congratulate you, Sir, and
to thank you for your efforts this month.
(spoke in Spanish)

We wish to pursue this very creative work with the
Ambassador of Argentina.

