Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this important debate. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his statement and Under-
Secretary-General Patricia O'Brien for her briefing. I
welcome the participation of the Permanent
Representative of Somalia, Mr. Duale.

While we are deeply concerned about the
persistent acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia, I
wish to state that the piracy and armed robbery off the
coast of Somalia are symptoms of a problem: the
protracted strife, the breakdown of effective
institutions of governance and the refusal of armed
groups to join the political process. These continue to
fuel the conflict and insecurity on mainland Somalia.
Only yesterday we witnessed another act of blatant
terrorism in Mogadishu, resulting in the death of many
innocent civilians, including six members of
parliament. We express our condolences to the families
of the victims and reiterate our support for the
Transitional Federal Government and the people of
Somalia at this difficult time. The terrorist bombings in
Kampala on 11 July, which claimed more than 80 lives
and for which Al-Shabaab claimed responsibility, are a
stark reminder of the need to ensure that Somalia is not
used as a breeding ground for extremism and terrorism.

We commend all countries and organizations that
have deployed naval assets off the coast of Somalia,
which has checked incidents of piracy and mitigated its
negative effects. Uganda welcomes efforts aimed at
finding additional and practical ways to combat piracy
off the coast of Somalia. The Secretary-General's
report (S/2010/394) provides a number of options,
forming a basis of a discussion by the Council in this
regard. As we consider the options that would best
serve the purpose of prosecuting and imprisoning
persons responsible for acts of piracy off the coast of
Somalia, it is important that we take into account three
key issues.

The first issue is the responsibility already borne
by the region as a result of the conflict in Somalia. In
the 20 years that Somalia has been in conflict, millions
of Somalis have fled their homeland and sought refuge
all over the world. The majority, however, are refugees
in the countries in the region, including Uganda. Some
have integrated within the host communities, while
some are still in refugee camps. In addition, the
countries in the region have contributed to the fight
against piracy. It is therefore important that any option
agreed upon that involves countries in the region
should ensure sufficient and sustainable resources so
that the countries in the region are not overburdened.

The second point we should take into account is
the fact that piracy is an international problem that
predates the conflict in Somalia. While piracy is now
concentrated off the coast of Somalia, it poses
challenges for all countries through the disruption of
international trade and humanitarian supplies and
fuelling insurgency and international terrorism.
Currently, there is an international legal framework to
address the problem of piracy. The 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was partly
aimed at addressing the challenges posed by piracy. It
provides for responsibilities and ways of dealing with
the prosecution and imprisonment of those convicted
of the crime of piracy.
The 1988 Convention for the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime
Navigation, the International Convention against the
Taking of Hostages and the United Nations Convention
against Transnational Organized Crime complement
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
It is within the provisions of these international
instruments, as well as regional and national accords,
that piracy and the crime of armed robbery at sea are
being handled. Therefore, any options that the Council
eventually agrees upon should complement these
existing arrangements.

We concur with the Secretary-General that
whichever options may be favoured by the Security
Council, assisting Somalia to develop the capacity to
prosecute and imprison those convicted of acts of
piracy will be essential in combating piracy in the long
run.

The third issue is the urgent need to address the
root causes of piracy. We are convinced that while
efforts aimed at combating piracy off the coast of
Somalia are commendable, it is necessary to address
the root cause of piracy, which is instability on the
mainland. This calls for enhanced support to the
Djibouti peace process, the Transitional Federal
Government and the people of Somalia in rebuilding
State institutions. More resources are also needed to
drastically improve the harsh social and economic
conditions in Somalia. It is also important that the
spoilers and others opposed to the peace process are
dealt with firmly.

The search for peace and stability in Somalia is
not just a Somali or even an African issue. It is a
collective responsibility in which the United Nations
and the wider international community have key roles
to play.

