Mr. Lowcock: The humanitarian crisis in Yemen has never been worse. I want to be clear on that point. Famine is again on the horizon. Conflict isagain escalating. The economy is again in tatters. Humanitarian agencies are again nearly broke. And then there are the new problems. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is spreading out of control. And we have the sorry saga of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. I promised when I briefed the Security Council the week before last that I would update Council members on the FSO SAFER today. There has been no progress. As I told the Council last time, the thing that worries me most about the FSO SAFER is that, if it explodes or leaks, the oil spilled could, the technical experts have told us, put the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef out of action for weeks - or even months. Some Council members will remember that in late 2017, and again in late 2018, I warned that the coalition blockade and then their mooted attack on Al-Hudaydah were likely to plunge Yemen into famine. Those warnings were heeded. The worst was avoided. It would then be the unhappiest of ironies if the failure of Ansar Allah to allow us to deal with the tanker were to be the cause of the loss of the ports. The consequences would be just as I warned in 2017 and 2018. I hope wiser counsel will prevail. The rhetoric on Yemen is often reassuring, yet the actions are relentlessly ruinous. I will brief the Security Council today on five issues: the protection of civilians, humanitarian access, funding, the economy and progress towards peace. With respect to the protection of civilians, hostilities are intensifying across the country. There are now 43 active front lines in Yemen - as compared to 33 in January. The number of conflict incidents causing civilian harm increased in the second quarter of the year - for the third quarter in a row. On 15 June, at least 12 civilians were killed in an attack on a vehicle in Sa'ada. On 12 July, an attack killed nine civilians in Hajjah. Three days later, another attack killed 11 civilians in Al-Jawf. Available information indicates that those attacks were all air strikes. I am particularly concerned at escalating hostilities in Ma'rib, including recent shelling incidents. Mr. Griffiths has already talked about that. Nearly 1 million people are displaced and sheltering in and around Ma'rib. If there is an assault on the city, we will almost certainly see waves of already vulnerable people fleeing the area. I call on all the parties to do everything possible to de-escalate the violence now, both in Ma'rib and across the country. Yemenis need a nationwide ceasefire. Secondly, with regard to humanitarian access, overall, efforts to improve the operating environment in the north, where we have most of the problems, are making progress. There is of course more to be done. In the coming weeks, we will work with everyone to build on the good practices we have seen recently on approving project agreements and other issues. We also want to see the long-planned World Food Programme pilot begin for biometric registration of food-aid recipients. After delaying for several weeks, the coalition has now agreed that the technical equipment can be shipped to Yemen, which is welcome. I urge the Ansar Allah authorities to move quickly to implement the pilot. Meanwhile, in the south, we continue to have serious concerns, with an uptick in violent incidents targeting humanitarian assets and local authorities adding new bureaucratic requirements for aid agencies. My third point is funding for the aid operation, which is, frankly, on the verge of collapse. We have already seen severe cuts to many of our most essential activities. We used to provide food to 13 million hungry people every month in Yemen. Because of funding cuts, only 5 million of those people are still getting full rations. Eight million have had their rations cut in half. Similar cuts are affecting millions of people who rely on aid for water, health care and other needs. Aid organizations have so far received about 18 per cent of what we need for this year's humanitarian response plan. What had been, in recent years, one of the better-funded humanitarian operations around the world is now one of the most underfunded. In August, that will mean a 50 per cent cut to water and sanitation programmes in 15 cities across the country. We will also have to stop hygiene activities for people who recently fled their homes. In September, nearly 400 health facilities, including 189 hospitals, will lose their supply of clean water and essential medicines. That could cut off health care for 9 million people. Also in September, we will run out of money to treat more than a quarter of a million children who are suffering from severe malnutrition. Without treatment, those children will die. It is not difficult to predict the effects of less food, less water and less health care in Yemen. Without more funding, we should all expect large increases in hunger, malnutrition, cholera, COVID-19 and, above all, death. We should expect many more people to die. And just as we are cutting programmes, demands for assistance are set to increase sharply. Last week, a new food security survey was released, covering 133 districts controlled by the Government of Yemen. About 40 per cent of people in those areas are now estimated to be highly food insecure - an increase from 25 per cent at the start of the year. Sixteen districts are now categorized as phase 4, which is one step away from famine conditions. At the beginning of the year, just two districts had been rated as phase 4. In the coming weeks, we will have results from a similar assessment in Ansar Allah-controlled areas, where funding cuts required significant reductions in food aid this year. I therefore once again implore donors to pay their pledges immediately. I am grateful to the United States, Germany, Japan and the European Commission. They are the largest contributors, according to the tracking service my Office runs, of the money we have received so far. I urge those with undisbursed pledges to pay now. There is no time to lose. I also call on Yemen's neighbours in the Gulf to increase their support. The sharp drop in pledges and payments from Gulf countries this year is the main reason the resource gap remains so large. My fourth point concerns Yemen's economy, which is in free fall. When the risk of famine was greatest in late 2018, the exchange rate had fallen to 800 Yemeni rial to the United States dollar. On its current trajectory, economists predict that the value of the rial will drop to 1,000 to the dollar in the coming months. Already in some areas, the rate has been well above 700 rial for weeks. The exchange rate is one of the major determinants of the price of food and other commodities, nearly all of which are imported. In other words, as the rial collapses, fewer people will eat. One solution is for the Government to finance commercial imports, but the Government has run out of foreign exchange. A deposit by Saudi Arabia in the Central Bank of Yemen is nearly depleted, and oil revenue - a major source of Government income - has collapsed. Yemen needs regular foreign- exchange injections to help stabilize the rial, underwrite essential imports and pay salaries. When Saudi Arabia did that in the past, it was very effective. Fuel is another key determinant of basic commodity prices. Fuel is needed to distribute goods around the country, to pump drinking water and to power basic services. In June, only 8,100 metric tons of commercial fuel imports reached Al-Hudaydah - by far the lowest amount ever recorded. As a result, drinking water prices have increased, in some cases more than doubling within a few weeks. Aid agencies are increasingly affected, with some reporting that they can no longer travel to communities to deliver assistance because there is no fuel. As we know, famine is stalking the country again, and the fuel shortages are also behind sharply escalating food prices. On top of those challenges, many Yemenis are losing any remaining income at an alarming rate. COVID-19 has cut into remittances - long the country's invisible life-line - by as much as 70 per cent. A recent survey found that about half of families have lost at least 50 per cent of their income since April. My fifth point is about progress towards peace. The Council just heard from Mr. Griffiths on the political process. With adequate funding, humanitarian agencies can address the most immediate needs in Yemen and prevent a renewed slide towards famine. That would spare millions of people from needless suffering, which would in turn help to create more space for the political process. The choice before the world is the same as last month - help Yemen now or watch the country fall into the abyss.
