Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The theme of today's meeting is directly
related to the growing and ever-diversifying challenges
and threats from terrorism, drug trafficking and cross-
border organized crime. Porous borders are one factor
encouraging the illicit trafficking of weapons and drugs
and the movement of terrorists and their financial
resources. Many types of illicit cross-border trafficking
genuinely and seriously undermine the efforts of the
Council to maintain international peace and security.

Particular attention should be paid to the
sanctions regimes imposed by the Council and the ad
hoc regimes established under its relevant counter-
terrorist resolutions, in particular resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1540 (2004), where for us, the priority
areas are illicit trafficking of drugs, weapons, weapons
of mass destruction and their components and the
movement of terrorists and their financial resources.

It is a secret to no one that there are problems in
terms of compliance with these regimes. The
destructive impact of Afghan drug trafficking, which
has merged with terrorism, has long grown beyond the
borders of that specific region. We view Afghan drug
trafficking as a threat to international peace and
stability. We advocate a comprehensive approach to
countering this threat, including the range of tools
available to the Security Council to curb the financial
flows that fuel drug trafficking and to place drug lords
on the relevant Security Council sanctions lists.

Important measures have been put in place in
terms of implementing Security Council resolution
1817 (2008) in order to counter the smuggling into
Afghanistan of the chemical precursors used to
manufacture drugs. There needs to be greater
involvement on the part of the international security
forces in Afghanistan in efforts to eradicate drug crops
and drug laboratories in that country. The outcomes of
the third Ministerial Conference of the Paris Pact, held
in Vienna in 16 February, provides us the necessary
platform for comprehensive efforts to curb Afghan
drug flows.

Another example is the spread of Libyan
weapons. There is a real threat that those weapons
could fall into the hands of terrorists. In that
connection, Russia initiated resolution 2017 (2011),
which sends the necessary signal and sets out the
relevant framework for efforts to counter that new
threat.

The critical problem of piracy in Somalia also
persists. The sanctions regime against that country,
which for an extended period has had no border-control
regime, has long been in effect. However, Somali
pirates freely receive and have available to them
sophisticated weaponry, boats, Global Positioning
System navigation devices and other equipment
necessary for their criminal activities.

Specifically for such situations, it would be
useful to have an overview of the problems concerning
the control of borders, illicit trafficking and
movements across them. It is important, when
considering cases of illicit cross-border movement and
trafficking, that the Security Council act strictly within
the framework of its mandate to maintain international
peace and security, that it not encroach upon the
purview of other international organizations or bodies,
and that it avoid engaging in revamping the existing
international system of cooperation in the area of
border protection.

The current draft presidential statement, based on
the outcome of today's meeting of the Council,
requests the Secretary-General to prepare a
comprehensive assessment of United Nations activities
in assisting States to counter various types of illicit
cross-border trafficking and the movement of terrorists
and their finances. We believe that it is important that
the report reflect the priority areas I have addressed
and that it take into account the measures that have
already been clearly taken by the Security Council,
which remain in effect.

