Mr. Mahugu (Kenya): Allow me first to thank you,
Mr. President, for arranging this meeting in an open setting.
As has been said by the representative of France, we
believe that this can only enhance transparency and
hopefully increase the Council's effectiveness.
My delegation would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Miyet for his introduction of the report of the
Secretary-General and, indeed, for his update. We would
also like to thank Ambassador Dahlgren of Sweden for the
excellent report on his recent visit to Sierra Leone as the
Chairman of the Sierra Leone Security Council sanctions
Committee, which has nourished our understanding of the
actual situation on the ground.

I myself recall my visit earlier this year to Angola in
my capacity as the Chairman of the Angola Security
Council sanctions Committee. I must say that I found that
Visit to be important and indeed necessary, not only for
myself, but as something that should be done by all
chairmen of Security Council sanctions committees. I am
therefore very happy to note that Ambassador Dahlgren did
visit Sierra Leone, and I hope that in the future other
chairmen of the Council's sanctions committees will be
able to visit their respective areas.

Because of the unending nature of the conflict in
Sierra Leone and the immense costs to the civilian
population, the dual- track approach as envisaged,
combining both military and diplomatic elements, is a most
pragmatic venture that my delegation wholeheartedly
supports. However, for this to succeed we need the full
support not only of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone (UNOMSIL), but also of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS). In this
regard, we appreciate the Gambia's emerging efforts to
broker a peace deal with the rebels.

Sierra Leone's relations with its neighbours clearly
also needs to be nourished. Ambassador Dahlgren also
referred to this point in his briefing. This is why my
delegation encourages more frequent meetings of the
Mano River Union, as he has said. Indeed, in previous
Council meetings, my delegation has suggested that such
summit-level meetings could be augmented by a more
regular permanent senior officials meeting to deal with
petty problems and establish relations that would enhance
confidence-building measures. This sort of arrangement
has worked quite well in our region of East Africa, and
we encourage the parties in Sierra Leone to look at it
closely.

It is because of the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG) that the constitutionally elected Government
was re-installed in Sierra Leone. We must all support
ECOMOG's efforts on the military side through logistical
support and forces. This would strengthen our negotiating
voice in the dual-track approach currently envisioned.

In brief, because of the reasons that I have advanced,
Kenya supports the Secretary-General's recommendation
to extend the mandate of UN OMSIL, upon its expiration
in January of next year, for a further six months, to July
1999.

The United Nations, we believe, has done a very
good job in Sierra Leone under the very able leadership
of the Secretary-General's Special Representative,
Mr. Okelo, and the men and women of UNOMSIL. They
deserve our full support.

