The President (spoke in French): I should like to
begin this meeting by paying tribute, on behalf of the
Council, to His Excellency Mr. Wang Guangya,
Permanent Representative of China, for his service as
President of the Security Council for the month of
April 2006. I am sure that I speak for all members of
the Council in expressing deep appreciation to
Ambassador Wang for the great diplomatic skill with
which he conducted the Council's business last month.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

The situation in Timor-Leste

End of mandate report of the Secretary-General
on the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste
(S/2006/251)

The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Australia, Austria, Brazil, Indonesia,
Malaysia, New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, Thailand
and Timor-Leste in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council's agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Senior Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation of
Timor-Leste.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ramos-
Horta (Timor-Leste) took a seat at the Council
table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.


The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Council agrees to
extend an invitation under rule 39 of its provisional
rules of procedure to Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.

It is so decided.

I invite Mr. Hasegawa to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document S/2006/251, which contains the end of
mandate report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Office in Timor-Leste.

I wish to draw the attention of members to
document S/2006/230, containing the text of a letter
dated 10 April 2006 from the Charge d'affaires ad
interim of the Permanent Mission of Timor-Leste
addressed to the Secretary-General.

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Sukehiro Hasegawa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Timor-
Leste and Head of Mission of the United Nations
Office in Timor-Leste.

I now give him the floor.


