Mr. Cooreman (Belgium) (spoke in French):
Belgium fully aligns itself with the statement made by
the observer of the European Union and would like to
make the following comments in its national capacity.

I would also like to pay tribute to the peacekeepers
who fell in the service of peace, especially the Blue
Helmets from Malawi and Tanzania, who showed
exceptionalcourage lastweekintheDemocraticRepublic
of the Congo and in the Central African Republic.

We thank the Chinese presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate on a highly
topical subject. The African Union and subregional
organizations now play the leading role in peace and
security on the continent. Not only are they more
involved in peacekeeping and peace enforcement
activities, but they are also at the helm of the political
processes that pave the way for sustainable conflict
resolution and are at the forefront of preventive
diplomacy and mediation efforts.

Neither the United Nations nor the African Union
alone can address all the peace and security challenges
facing Africa. The partnership therefore represents not
a choice, but a necessity. I welcome the fact that the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, to which 150 States and
4 international organizations have subscribed, gives
priority attention to the partnership.

For Belgium, operations under African command
contribute to international peace and security. They
therefore warrant multilateral support. The question is
not as much about the principle as about the specific
modalities for funding such operations through the
United Nations budget.

In that context, we commend the African Union
and its member States for the progress made in setting
up and financing the Peace Fund, which will ultimately
have to fund African peace operations to the tune
of 25 per cent of. We are also very pleased with the
ongoing work of the African Union and the United
Nations to develop a joint communique to describe the
progress made and a road map for the next steps.

There can be no question ofimposing more stringent
criteria on missions conducted by the African Union
than those applied to United Nations operations or of
lowering such criteria. In theatres where an African
Union mission works together with a United Nations
mission, the reference and compliance frameworks and
the obligations with regard to respect for international
humanitarian law and human rights and to civilian
populations should be consistent. That is a fortiori the
case for theatres where the African Union conducts
operations alone.

The increasing involvement of African States in
crisis management also means strengthening African
capacities to rapidly deploy forces. Belgium and the
European Union support the African Union and African
troop contributors in the areas of both troop capacity-
building and rapid deployment.

Finally, the Security Council is clearly not the ideal
forum to discuss specific funding modalities. However,
whatever solution is reached, it must be compatible
with the budgetary requirements that we, the Member
States, require of the United Nations.

Lasting solutions can come only from a candid
and sustained dialogue between the Security Council
and the African Union Peace and Security Council.
We must establish a genuine multiparty dialogue that
involves all the parties concerned: the Security Council,
the General Assembly, the Secretariat, regional
organizations - the African Union as well as the
European Union - Member States, troop contributors
and the financial donors. I am convinced that we can
move the consensus on this issue forward. It is in that
spirit that we will approach our term on the Security
Council starting on 1 January 2019.

