Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank the Chinese
presidency for putting the spotlight on strengthening
peacekeeping operations in Africa, and would like
to join previous speakers in commending Secretary-
General Antonio Guterres and the African Union (AU)
Commissioner Smai'l Chergui for their comprehensive
and insightful briefings.

I would like to begin by underscoring that the
African Union is a crucial partner of the United
Nations on the issues of peace and security in Africa.
The African Union-led peace support operations
are absolutely essential to the Security Council's
responsibility to maintain global peace and security
in certain situations, considering the limitations of the
United Nations peacekeeping doctrine with regard to
peace enforcement and counter-terrorism.

Kazakhstan welcomes strengthened cooperation
between the United Nations and the AU, aimed at
supporting Africa's steady pursuit ofpeace, stability and
sustainable development. The Joint United Nations-AU
Framework for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and
Security, as well as the joint framework on sustainable
development, mark a new level of enhanced strategic
partnership between the two organizations, based on
mutual respect and comparative advantages.

To improve the effectiveness of peace operations
in Africa, we need to capitalize on those frameworks
to the fullest, including through joint field visits to
conflict areas, joint briefings and the meetings of
the United Nations-AU Joint Task Force on Peace
and Security. Further technical work is also needed
to develop the modalities for joint analysis, planning
and assessment, as well as reporting to the relevant
intergovernmental bodies.

Both the United Nations and the AU need to
revise their internal administrative processes, policies
and procedures and arrive at strengthening common
synergies. Subregional mechanisms, such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, have
proven to be capable of resolving the most complicated
conflicts in the region. Therefore, closer links between
the United Nations and subregional mechanisms can
help African peacekeeping operations become more
responsive and effective on the ground.

Political solutions, preventive diplomacy and
mediation should be at the heart of any peacekeeping
deployment. African peacekeeping operations should
engage in athorough analysis ofthekey causes ofconflict.
We will succeed only if we can eliminate the drivers of
instability and not just manage the symptoms. We also
need a sound system of information-management and
sharing and to pool best practices and lessons learned.

It is commendable that the African Union, on its
part, has made significant progress in establishing the
necessary accountability, transparency and human
rights compliance frameworks, as requested by the
Security Council. We welcome AU efforts to enhance
the African Standby Force and its rapid deployment
capability, in accordance with the Maputo Strategic
Work Plan, and we call for the finalization of the
memorandum of understanding between the AU and
regional economic communities on the deployment and
employment of the African Standby Force.

My delegation also commends the AU for its efforts
on the operationalization of the management structures
of the Peace Fund, which plays an important role in
ensuring financial transparency and strategic coherence.

We welcome the appointment on 16 November of the
five African members of the Board of Trustees of the
African Union Peace Fund. We encourage the AU to
continue at the same pace with its institutional reform
process, aimed at strengthening the African Peace and
Security Architecture.

The most critical issue may be the financing of
African peacekeeping operations. They will not be
able to deliver effectively without predictable, flexible
and sustainable financing authorized by the United
Nations. We believe that financing should be provided
on a case-by-case basis, in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. By adopting
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017), the Security
Council has expressed its readiness to consider thejoint
financing of those missions through United Nations-
assessed contributions. We therefore support the
initiative of the three African non-permanent members
to adopt a new Council draft resolution on financing
AU peace support operations, which will build on
those resolutions.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that Kazakhstan, as an
observer to the African Union, remains committed to
further strengthening the capacity of the AU and to
helping African countries fulfil their vision of peace,
progress and prosperity through the implementation
of the African Union's Agenda 2063 and the African
Union master road map of practical steps for silencing
the guns in Africa by 2020.

