Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): At the outset,
I would like, at the start of the new year, to wish all
members of the Security Council the best of health and
greatest success in their work. Ialso take this opportunity
to convey our heartfelt and warm congratulations to
your country, Sir, upon its election to the Council and
upon your assumption of the presidency. My delegation
assures you of its support and we wish you the greatest
of success.

I would like to highly commend Mr. Gerard Araud,
Permanent Representative of France and outgoing
President of the Council, for the excellent work achieved
under his leadership, the results of which are more than
clear.

My delegation is delighted to be serving on the
Security Council as a non-permanent member. We take
this opportunity to thank all of those who, by voting for
us, contributed to our successful election. Likewise, we
warmly congratulate all newly elected members, that
is, Nigeria, Chile, Jordan and Lithuania. My delegation

pledges to spare no effort in contributing to the smooth
functioning of the work of the Security Council and its
subsidiary organs.

I would also like to thank and congratulate
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman, Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, for his briefing, which indeed covered
almost everything that I had wanted to say.

Chad is profoundly concerned at the situation in
the Central Africa Republic, in particular at the scale
of the crisis in the country and the and ever-more
dangerous developments we continue to see - all in
spite of the robust mandate entrusted to the African-led
International Support Mission in the Central African
Republic (MISCA) and other forces involved there
through resolution 2127 (2013), adopted on 5 December
2013. While the situation seems to be showing the
early signs of improvement in certain areas, the violent
attacks being committed against the civilian population
in general and foreign nationals in particular have
not decreased at all. On the contrary, the situation
continues to be characterized by widespread insecurity,
massacres, rape and acts ofbrutality that further expose
civilian populations already displaced en masse into
makeshift camps, as well as by the massive wholesale
exodus of foreign nationals to their countries of origin,
including Chadians, Cameroonians, Senegalese,
Malians and many others.

Chad deplores the fact that the situation has
claimed scores of dead and hundreds of missing persons
among its nationals, and we continue to repatriate our
nationals via charter flights and over-land transport.
Like the nationals of other countries, Chadians have
been dispossessed of their possessions and had their
homes ransacked. Such hatred against all communities
of foreign origin due to their belonging to a particular
religion cannot be justified under any pretext and must
be condemned in the strongest possible terms.

Nonetheless, the remarkable efforts being deployed
by MISCA and the French forces to accomplish their
mission, under what are extremely difficult and
complex conditions, must be commended. In that
regard, Chad welcomes the ongoing commitment of
the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States (ECCAS) and
France to achieve greater coordination of the efforts
under way to help the Central African Republic
to emerge definitively from the recurrent cycle of
violence and political crisis. Against that backdrop,
Chad, together with other countries of Central Africa,
is and will remain committed, as it has been since
1994, to supporting joint efforts to re-establish peace
and stability in the Central African Republic. We will
not allow ourselves to be distracted by the insidious
media campaign craftily organized by power-hungry
groups seeking to distort international public opinion
by blurring the lines between Se'leka and Muslims and
Muslims and Chadians, without the slightest proof.

Like the countries of the Central Africa region,
Chad is aware of the consequences of the crisis on
its own security and stability and on the subregional
economic integration process. The number of
extraordinary ECCAS summits held on the subject
of the Central African Republic since the outbreak of
the crisis, the signing of the Libreville Global Peace
Agreement, the implementation of the N'Djamena
road map and the strengthening of the former Mission
for the Consolidation of Peace in the Central African
Republic, which became MISCA on 19 December 2013
with additional contingents, are, among other things,
tangible elements that reflect the determination and
the degree of ECCAS's mobilization in its search for a
solution to the crisis.

In same vein, ECCAS is preparing to hold another
extraordinary summit in N'Djamena on 9 January with
the participation of all international partners to address
the situation in Central African Republic, including
the lack of progress in the security and political fronts
despite the deployment of MISCA and the French
forces. It is obvious that the implementation of the
recommended solutions lies first and foremost with the
Central African political stakeholders. Without their
robust and responsible involvement, it will be difficult
to put an end to the cycle of violence and to move the
political process forward.

In this war for power, where religion is deliberately
exploited for political purposes and conducted by
proxy militias, it is important that the Central African
political class emerge from its lethargy and play its full
role in order to save the country. To do so, MISCA and
the other forces deployed in Central African Republic
should continue their mission of the disarmament and
cantonment of ex-Seleka and anti-Balaka to pacify the
country and allow for the holding of free and transparent
elections in a peaceful environment, in accordance with
the Libreville Agreement and the N'Djamena road map.

In that light, Chad calls for greater mobilization by
the entire international community, in particular the
United Nations, the European Union and the Central
African Republic's bilateral partners, to support
the actions already undertaken on the ground by the
African Union, ECCAS and France. Such a mobilization
must take into account the need for a holistic approach
supported by concurrent actions and based on the
humanitarian situation on the ground, the protection of
civilians, disarmament, the political transition process,
the strengthening of administration and justice, national
reconciliation and the establishment of a truly national
army, which is the only guarantee of peace and stability
in the country.

