The President (spoke in French): With the
Council's permission, I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the President of the Republic of Mali.

The difficulties encountered in Sierra Leone; the
difficulties with deployment in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; the threat of conflict on the
African continent and in other regions of the world; the
increased number of internal crises; and the need to
protect communities, United Nations personnel and the
personnel of aid organizations against violence are
today prompting our Council to adapt and make more
effective its response capacity.

I should like here to welcome the Secretary-
General's initiative, since the report submitted by Mr.
Lakhdar Brahimi is part of the process that will make
the United Nations a truly credible force for peace.

I would like to congratulate the Secretary-General
for the follow-up he has already given to this important
report, whose recommendations have our backing
because they are designed to allow us to better respond
to present and future threats. Within the framework of
the principles of our Organization, let us not fear
change. Let us finally dare to give the United Nations
the means to achieve peace.

In this context, there are several important issues
on which I wish to dwell.

First of all, how can we save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war, when children,
who are the future, are handed over to senseless
conflicts as both victims and executioners?

We need to put an end to the sorry sight of child
soldiers by unequivocally condemning and by taking
energetic measures against all of those who make use
of children, who instil in them a culture of violence and
thus sow the seeds for the perpetuation of violence and
conflicts.

Secondly, efforts in the disarmament field, in
particular as concerns weapons of mass destruction,
must be pursued and stepped up to free our world from
this terrible threat and to put an end to the arms race in
all its aspects.

But for regions such as Africa, it is light weapons
that are our weapons of mass destruction. Efforts to
date have been largely inadequate. My colleagues
know as well as I do that most of the conventional
weapons that are produced are circulating in
developing countries, and especially in Africa. Those
weapons are sometimes provided free of charge;
sometimes at cash prices that quash all competition;
and sometimes on credit against our raw materials: the
share belonging to future generations has been
mortgaged and is being badly managed. We must
therefore work towards effective and progressive
international legal standards to control the circulation
of light weapons. If it is to be a success, the United
Nations Conference on the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons in all its Aspects, to be held next
year in Geneva, must indeed address all aspects of the
issue, including the legal arms trade, and must give
priority to transparency.

The devastating sight of the many victims of
landmines world-wide, including thousands of
children, causes us to urge all to ratify and implement
the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use,
Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Anti-personnel
Mines and on Their Destruction.

Thirdly, I think it important for us to devote
attention to the questions of impunity and of sanctions.

The prevention of bloody conflicts, the
implementation of conventions on human rights and on
international humanitarian law and the protection of
the most vulnerable require the entry into force of the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. We
must put an end to impunity in order to protect
individuals and communities against violence of all
kinds.

Sanctions form part of the means by which the
Organization can take action. They must be adapted to
their specific goals, because there have sometimes been
tragic humanitarian consequences. The recent sanctions
relating to the illicit exploitation of natural resources
demonstrate how much more effective targeted
sanctions can be. In our view, the Secretary-General's
comments on this matter in his report on the
Millennium Assembly (A/54/2000) are apt and deserve
full attention.

Fourthly, cooperation with regional and
subregional organizations should be strengthened to
enable the United Nations, under the supervision of
those organizations, to be more effective at prevention
and at deploying locally based operations. The
international community and the Security Council must
therefore employ a consistent, sustained strategy to
build the capacity of the Organization of African Unity
(OAU) and of a future African union, and of regional
organizations, as well as to cooperate with them.

Finally, how could we fail to endorse all the
measures that have been advocated to strengthen
United Nations peacekeeping operations through, inter
alia, suitable mandates that include protection of the
civilian population, an improved planning capability,
rapid deployment of peace operations, and good
coordination among participants in the field. These
must be supplemented with socio-economic measures
for peace-building.

It is impossible to overstate how right it was for
the Council, last January, to have considered the
question of the AIDS pandemic in Africa, which poses
a genuine threat to security and to fight which all
resources must be mobilized and committed.

It is clear to all that peace and prosperity go hand
in hand, and that we must simultaneously tackle the
underlying causes of conflict, fight poverty and combat
the absence of democracy. Such a comprehensive,
consistent approach would have a broad, lasting impact
on the effective role of the Security Council in the
maintenance of international peace and security,
particularly in Africa, by providing a better life in
greater freedom for all.

For an Africa that is worthy and responsible, and
for a world at peace, we need such a partnership.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready to
vote on the draft resolution (S/2000/845) before it. If I
hear no objection, I shall now put the draft resolution
to the vote.
There being no objection, it is so decided.

A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Argentina, Bangladesh, Canada, China, France,
Jamaica, Malaysia, Mali, Namibia, Netherlands,
Russian Federation, Tunisia, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America

The President (spoke in French): There were 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 1318 (2000).

I have one other brief item of business. I
understand that our Permanent Representatives have
discussed and agreed on the wording of a presidential
statement on the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
May I take it that we approve that statement and are
content that it should be issued by this Summit?

There being no objection, I shall arrange for the
statement to be issued as document S/PRST/2000/28.

I thank all participants for the part they have
played in this meeting; my thanks go to all the heads of
State or Government and Ministers for Foreign Affairs,
to the Secretary-General of the Organization of African
Unity, to the representatives of regional organizations
and to Mr. Javier Perez de Cuellar, who is present in
the Security Council Chamber.

The Security Council has thus concluded its
business for this meeting.

The meeting rose at 3.50 pm.

