Mr. Khan (Indonesia): At the outset, let me extend
my delegation's appreciation to you, Madam President,
for convening this open debate on children and armed
conflict, and for the helpful concept note (S/2014/ 144, annex). I also wish to thank the Secretary-General,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Children and Armed Conflict, and the Executive
Director of UNICEF for their valuable briefings.

Our appreciation also goes to Alhaj i Babah Sawaneh
for being willing to share his heartfelt experience as
a former child combatant. Thirteen years ago in this
very Chamber (see S/PV.4422), Alhaji Babah Sawaneh
narrated how, at the tender age of 14, he was trained
by rebels to shoot, burn down houses and kill innocent
people. Since then, there has been notable international
progress on the protection and promotion of children's
rights in conflicts. Yet too many children continue to
tragically become fodder in the various war zones and
hostility-affected regions.

Indonesia welcomes the adoption today of
resolution 2143 (2014) , which it is hoped will garner
greater concrete support for the efforts to safeguard
children in armed conflicts. Indonesia appreciates the
work of the Special Representative, along with other
relevant United Nations entities, on protecting children.
We also take note of the collaboration between her
Office and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, particularly
regarding the mainstreaming of children's rights issues
into important mechanisms, such as the Human Rights
Council's universal periodic review and the treaty
bodies. In addition, Indonesia would like to make the
following observations.

First, we must all contribute to further strengthening
the global normative framework within and outside the
United Nations system on the protection of children in
conflict. It must always be underscored that there will
be neither any tolerance for recruiting child soldiers
nor any lax measures to safeguard children and their
rights in conflicts. While that should be clear in United
Nations peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
it is crucial that there also be dialogue and cooperation
with national authorities on those issues. Effective
child protection will be possible when concerned
Governments and local authorities are closely engaged
with and involved in protection efforts. We therefore
encourage the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General to step up her efforts in working closely with
the relevant national Governments to enhance mutual
trust and confidence.

Secondly, while the United Nations is uniquely
placed to advance child protection in conflicts
normatively and operationally, it should seek greater
partnerships with the wide array of relevant regional
organizations and civil society groups to enhance
outcomes, especially because a number of ongoing
conflicts have a regional dimension. We are pleased that
the Special Representative places priority on partnering
with regional and subregional organizations, which

will bolster the United Nations agenda on children
and armed conflict.

Thirdly, the various United Nations child protection
actors, including the Blue Helmets, must be adequately
resourced and supported in carrying out protection of
children in the field. While United Nations personnel
should be properly equipped and trained in child
protection, they should also work closely with the
concerned national actors to increase their sensitivity
and capacity in that imperative. In that regard, we
would also highlight the potential enabling of the
needed capabilities for child protection through the
ongoing United Nations Civilian Capacities Initiative.

Standing resolutely, we must all ensure that
international human rights and humanitarian laws
for the protection of children are not perceived as a
challenge. At home, Indonesia is grateful that our
children have the opportunity to live without fear and
to grow and develop physically, mentally and socially.
To that end, we have enforced measures to ensure
the protection and promotion of the rights of children
through various national laws, targeted strategies and
infrastructure.

Indonesia underlines the need to have greater
international support for child victims, whether for
former under-age combatants or those affected by
violence or displacement. We emphasize greater
measures for meeting children's physical, educational,
health and psychological needs, which may persist for a
long time. We stress the role of family and community
in creating a welcoming and enabling environment for
former child soldiers, along with other effective long-
term measures that help them to become normal and
productive members of society.

Also, as a State party to the Optional Protocol
to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the
involvement of children in armed conflict, Indonesia is
committed, including through its national peacekeeping
centre, to improving the training and capacity of its
peacekeepers on this subject.

In closing, I would submit that the most important
step in protecting children's rights is preventing conflict
itself. It is essential to build capacities that can assist
Governments in resolving challenges non-violently. A
culture of peace based on the principles of tolerance,
rights, responsibilities, reconciliation and coexistence
needs to be promoted intensively. Indonesia, in its
contributions at the various regional and multilateral
organizations, including the different United Nations
forums, will continue to give high priority to the
safeguarding of children in conflicts.

