Mrs. Azucena (Philippines): I am honoured to speak on behalf of the 10 States members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). We congratulate Viet Nam - represented today by His Excellency the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Pham Binh Minh - for assuming the presidency of the Security Council. We welcome the presence of ASEAN member States Indonesia and Viet Nam as non-permanent members of the Council, as we look forward to the further strengthening of the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership and cooperation. The relationship between ASEAN and the United Nations finds its roots in their respective Charters. On one hand, article 2 of the ASEAN Charter commits ASEAN and its member States to upholding the United Nations Charter and international law. On the other hand, Article 52 of the United Nations Charter cites the role of regional arrangements or agencies in the maintenance of international peace and security. Cooperation to promote regional and international peace and security isa key feature of the ASEAN-United Nations comprehensive partnership and cooperation. ASEAN believes' that regionalism and multilateralism are important principles and frameworks of cooperation, and that their strength and value lie in their inclusivity, rules-based nature and emphasis on mutual benefit and respect. We have a shared commitment to maintaining and promoting peace, security and stability in the region, as well as to the peaceful resolution of disputes, including full respect for legal and diplomatic processes, without resorting to the threat or use of force, in accordance with the universally recognized principles of international law, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. We promote sustainable security in the region by reinforcing strategic trust and mutual confidence within ASEAN and in the wider Asia-Pacific region, helped by reaffirming the principles of the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, as well as its application to the wider region, and on the basis of upholding the United Nations Charter and international law. We acknowledge the continued contribution of the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting (ADMM) and the ADMM-Plus in maintaining regional peace and stability. We welcome the defence sectoral body's theme last year on sustainable security, with the aim of strengthening, consolidating and optimizing defence cooperation and supporting cross-pillar activities. We are pleased to note further progress in the area of humanitarian assistance and disaster relief, maritime security, peacekeeping operations, counter- terrorism, military medicine, humanitarian mine action and cybersecurity. Peacekeeping remains the flagship programme of the United Nations enterprise. ASEAN-United Nations collaboration in peacekeeping and _ post-conflict peacebuilding, with activities conducted through ASEAN member States' national focal points and the ASEAN Peacekeeping Centres Network, continues to be strengthened. As of July 2019, ASEAN member States had contributed approximately 5,500 military and police personnel, as well as technical expertise, to United Nations peacekeeping missions. We have intensified efforts to advance the women and peace and security agenda, including through the provision of a growing number of women peacekeepers and the establishment of the ASEAN Women for Peace Registry, to which the Secretary-General reiterated the United Nations commitment to providing technical support. ASEAN cooperation has intensified efforts on matters related to international terrorism and non-traditional threats, including transnational crime. Representatives of ASEAN member States and the ASEAN secretariat have participated in United Nations- sponsored regional workshops and conferences on issues such as counter-terrorism and foreign terrorist fighters, cybercrime, environmental crime, illicit drugs and human trafficking. ASEAN looks forward to further bolstering its partnership with the United Nations in our shared aspiration to maintain and enhance peace, security and stability and further strengthen peace-oriented values in the region and around the world. In my national capacity, I wish to highlight the following points. First, as a proud founding Member of the United Nations, the Philippines is firmly committed to international law, as it is an indispensable foundation in our efforts to build a more peaceful, prosperous and just world, with the States Members of the United Nations enjoying territorial integrity and political independence. In promoting respect for international law, all disputes must be settled peacefully, in accordance with Article 2 and Chapter VI of the United Nations Charter. The 1982 Manila Declaration on the Peaceful Settlement of International Disputes is the authoritative articulation of our collective duty, under the United Nations Charter, to peacefully resolve disputes in the international arena. Secondly, terrorism, with its links to drug trafficking and organized crime, is a most serious threat to international peace and security. The Philippines supports efforts mandated by the United Nations Charter on effective collective measures for the prevention and removal of threats to peace. We support the legal instruments we have developed throughout the years, along with Security Council resolutions and their effective implementation, to fight and end terrorism. Thirdly, we uphold the primacy of sovereignty and, as enshrined in the United Nations Charter, the principle of the sovereign equality of all its Members. The United Nations stands on the foundation of the aggregated sovereignty of its Members. It harnesses sovereignty not for some against others, but for the common purposes of peace and productive cooperation. It is also our view that today's conflicts equally require trust and respect for sovereignty, not a plain assertion of the multilateral over sovereign States. Working against sovereignty undermines the international order, as we have seen when States are made to fail by multilateral action. I conclude by reaffirming the commitment of the Philippines to upholding the letter and spirit of the United Nations Charter as we address with fortitude the persistent threats to world peace.
