Mr. Kobler: I am pleased to introduce to the
Council the third report of the Secretary-General
pursuant to resolution 2001 (2011) (S/2012/535) on the
activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI). I will also brief Council members on
the most recent developments in Iraq.

One year ago, my predecessor told Council
members that he was cautiously optimistic about
Iraq's future. Today, as the Council considers the
renewal of the UNAMI mandate, Iraq has much to
be proud of regarding what it has achieved. With the
final withdrawal of United States troops at the end of
last year, Iraq regained full control over its sovereign
territory.

It has made committed efforts to enforce law and
order across the country. Reclaiming its place at the
diplomatic table, it successfully hosted the twenty-third
Summit of the League of Arab States in March and
talks between Iran and the permanent members of
the Security Council plus Germany in May. Yet, my
predecessor had tempered his cautious optimism with
the caveat that determined leadership would be required
within Iraq for the country to continue to progress.

As I sit before the Council today, Iraq is in the
midst of a seven-month-long stalemate between the
political blocs, a situation that continues to hamper
progress in areas essential to Iraq's development,
including a sustainable solution to the disputed internal
boundaries; the unfinished constitutional agenda; the
adoption of essential outstanding legislation; and the
preparation of next year's provincial Council elections.

When the Council adopted resolution 1770 (2007),
it gave UNAMI a mandate to advise, support and assist
the Government and the people of Iraq. The question
today is whether crucial obstacles can be overcome in
order for the Iraqi State and society to begin to realize
their full potential. In my assessment, the role of
UNAMI will be more important than ever in supporting
Iraq on its journey towards stability and development.

Since my last briefing to the Council (see S/PV.6747), I have strengthened my engagement with
political leaders from all sides in Baghdad and in the
Kurdistan region, met with representatives of many of
Iraq's communities, and listened to the advice of Iraq's
spiritual leaders, such as Grand Ayatollah Sistani in
Najaf. I have also sought the views of the Governments
of Iran, Kuwait and Turkey on the situation in the
region.

The core of the UNAMI mandate is to support and
to assist the people of Iraq, for it is the people of Iraq
who want the political stalemate to end. It is they who
want to have a life in security and prosperity and a
better future for their children and who long for the day
when the benefits from the natural wealth of the country
will translate into the reliable delivery of electricity and
other public services and economic development.

Almost seven years ago, the Iraqi people laid the
foundations for democracy in their country by adopting
their Constitution. Today, however, key institutions
have yet to be established and fundamental legislation
remains outstanding, including the establishment
of the Federation Council; the strengthening of the
judicial system; the legislation on revenue-sharing
and hydrocarbons; and the protection of minorities, to
mention but a few.

My colleagues and I have made the promotion of
progress in those areas a priority. In particular, the
legal and policy frameworks for sharing revenue need
to be put in place. That would constitute a significant
strengthening of the federal system, improve the
environment for investment, and provide for the agreed
distribution of national wealth. Revenue-sharing is
vital to helping improve Arab-Kurdish coexistence,
to ensuring that Iraq remains a single federal State,
and, above all, to advancing a solution of the disputed
internal boundaries.

Making progress in unblocking Iraq's unfinished
legislative agenda, however, requires an agreement
among Iraq's political leaders that will end the political
stalemate. Such an agreement must be reached through
transparent and inclusive dialogue, in respect of the
Constitution and in a spirit of compromise.

There is no democracy without elections. There
are no credible elections without a strong and truly
independent election commission. As we speak, my
political deputy, Mr. Gyorgy Busztin, is engaged
in facilitation efforts to bring about the formation
of a new Independent High Electoral Commission
with a membership that is representative of the main
components of Iraq, including women and minorities.

The urgent selection of Commissioners is essential
to ensuring that the Provincial Council elections, due
to take place in March 2013, can be conducted on time.
I am concerned that the ongoing political stalemate
is hindering the process, however. In recent days, I
have discussed with political leaders, including Prime
Minister Nuri al-Maliki, the need for a swift conclusion
of the selection process and the adequate representation
of women and minorities in the Commission. Today, I
would like to reiterate my appeal to all political blocs
to expedite the selection of professional commissioners.
Here, UNAMI stands ready to actively assist.

The number ofcivilian casualties caused by terrorist
attacks is increasing across Iraq. Since the beginning
of this year, an average of 12 violent incidents per day
have claimed a total of more than 1,300 victims, many
of whom were innocent children and women who were
simply in the wrong place at the wrong time. Each
victim is one too many.

The Iraqi authorities must continue to make every
effort to identify the perpetrators of such acts of violence
and to bring them to justice. The attacks are intended
to ignite further violence. Despite the suffering, Iraqis
from all walks of life and religious backgrounds must
turn their back on past divisions and unite for a peaceful
future.

Human rights are a cornerstone of Iraq's democratic
future and are at the core of the United Nations mandate
in Iraq. To that end, UNAMI continues to support
the activities of the Ministry of Human Rights in
ensuring that Iraq meets its international human rights
obligations.

As I informed Council members in April, the
Council of Representatives endorsed the appointment
of the Commissioners of Iraq's first Independent
High Commission for Human Rights. I am pleased to
further report that the Commissioners have now met
and started their work. UNAMI and the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) are supporting the
Commission in that process.

The findings of the 2011 United Nations report on
the human rights situation in Iraq, published in May,
underlined the fragility of the human rights situation
in Iraq. The report's conclusions largely coincided with
the Ministry ofHuman Rights' own findings. While it is
recognized that the Government of Iraq has made some
progress in implementing measures to protect and to
promote human rights, the impact on the overall human
rights situation remains limited. The United Nations is
assisting the Iraqi authorities in strengthening the rule
of law and in boosting protection for human rights in
Iraq in order to bring an end to abuses such as arbitrary
arrests and detentions.

The economic, social and cultural rights of
Iraqis are also matters of real concern. Poverty, high
unemployment, economic stagnation, environmental
degradation and a lack of basic services continue to
affect large sections of the population. It is vital that
Iraqis, in particular vulnerable groups, be provided
with better access to basic services, social welfare
and community development programmes and
opportunities for education. Nothing less is required in
order to provide for the success of future generations.
The rights of all Iraqis, including minorities, must be
protected, as stipulated in the Iraqi Constitution.

Iraq retains the death penalty for a large
number of crimes. I therefore reiterate the call by
the Secretary-General and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights on the Government
of Iraq to establish a moratorium on all executions
with a View to their abolition. I welcome the fact that
the authorities in the Kurdistan region continue to
implement a moratorium on carrying out executions,
which has been in place since 2007.

Let me now turn to some of the recent regional
and international developments pertaining to Iraq. As
members know, Prime Minister Al-Maliki's visit to
Kuwait in March was followed by the historic visit of the
Amir of Kuwait to Baghdad to attend the Arab Summit.
Those two visits have markedly improved bilateral
relations between Kuwait and Iraq and facilitated the
resumption of the meetings of the Joint Iraq-Kuwait
Ministerial Committee.

Iraq has also taken decisive steps to finalize
the Iraq-Kuwait boundary maintenance project, in
accordance with resolution 833 (1993). At the request
of both parties, the United Nations is preparing for the
maintenance work to start by 31 October, provided that
key prerequisites, such as the removal of obstacles on
the border, are met. Bringing all Chapter VII obligations
pertaining to Kuwait to a satisfactory close will boost
prospects for bilateral trade, and investment, promote
regional cooperation and lead to the restoration of Iraq's
rightful standing within the international community.

In this regard, I would also like to take this
opportunity to welcome the adoption on 28 June by
the Council of Representatives of a law ratifying the
Additional Protocol to the Comprehensive Safeguards
Agreement of the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and I encourage the Government of Iraq to take the
remaining steps to ensure its entry into force as soon
as possible.

The intensity and frequency of sand and dust storms,
mainly generated from inside Iraq, have increased in
recent years. They have a significant impact on public
health in Iraq and in the wider region, especially for the
most vulnerable, and they affect transport and trade.
During my visit to Kuwait in June, and following an
offer by the Amir of Kuwait to invest a portion of Iraq's
outstanding war compensation funds back into Iraq, I
proposed an environmental fund to combat sand and
dust storms. If Iraq and Kuwait agree, the fund could
be used to undertake activities to reduce that health
hazard, which is impeding daily life in the region.
Such activities might include improving water resource
management, anti-desertification, reforestation and
agricultural projects.

Needless to say, the ongoing violence in Syria is
a source of deep concern, given the potential for the
spread of instability and violence, humanitarian fallout
and political repercussions. The United Nations system
in Iraq is putting in place contingency plans for a
possible humanitarian emergency. In this connection, I
recently visited a refugee camp in the Kurdistan region
for those displaced by the conflict in Syria. So far,
with 7,000 refugees, their numbers are manageable.
On 10 July, the United Nations and the League of
Arab States Joint Special Envoy for Syria, Mr. Kofi
Annan, visited Iraq and met with Prime Minister Nuri
al-Maliki. The Government of Iraq was very clear on
the importance ofa political transition that is Syrian-led
and Syrian-owned, and that ensures that the legitimate
and democratic aspirations of the Syrian people are
fully realized.

The United Nations in Iraq also continues to
support the development of effective, accountable
and transparent State institutions. My new Deputy,
and Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator for
Iraq, Ms. Jacqueline Badcock, took up her duties on
13 May. She has already shown her determination and
leadership in coordinating the United Nations country
team to deliver as one. I have asked her to ensure that
the country team strengthens its presence and activities
across the country. That is taking shape in Basra.
There, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes
can assist in bringing the quality of life in that oil-rich
province to the levels found in other oil-rich countries
in the region.

Let me briefly highlight two of the priority areas
with important political, security and development
implications, where the United Nations system in Iraq
is working as one.

Iraq is one of the most youthful countries in the
world, with 50 per cent of the population under the
age of 18. At the same time, the unemployment rate
for youth is more than double the domestic average, at
23 per cent. The United Nations system is supporting
programmes aimed at increasing youth participation
in the social, political and economic spheres. Building
on the International Year of Youth 2011, the United
Nations is supporting civil society groups to strengthen
their role in ensuring democratic space and freedoms.
The third UNDP National Human Development Report
focuses on youth and will be published later this year.

As with youth, women are important actors in
Iraq's development, yet the illiteracy rate among Iraqi
women is more than double that of Iraqi men. In my
meetings with Iraqi governmental interlocutors, as
well as women's civil society organizations, I advocate
for the adoption and implementation of the proposed
national strategy on the advancement of women. The
United Nations family is working to support women
in taking up their role in political and economic life.
The United Nations is also continuing to work to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and to encourage the
Government to fulfil its commitments in that regard.

Finally, I still remain very concerned by the lack
of progress in resolving the issue of Camp Ashraf.
In the past months, 2,000 residents of Camp Ashraf
have relocated to Camp Hurriya. Approximately 1,200
remain in Camp Ashraf. The several deadlines set by
the Government of Iraq have been extended. I thank the
Government ofIraq for its flexibility in this regard, and
I appeal to the Iraqi authorities to continue the process
to resolve the relocation peacefully. Our commitment
is strictly humanitarian; it is to facilitate a voluntary,
temporary relocation of residents to Camp Hurriya as
a first step of resettlement to countries outside Iraq.
However, the success ofa facilitator depends at least on
good will. There can no facilitation without constructive
and practical dialogue.

We are faced with three main challenges. First,
recent weeks have witnessed difficulties in maintaining
dialogue between UNAMI and the residents and
between the residents and the Government of Iraq,
reinforcing a perception that residents lack the genuine
will to participate in the process facilitated by UNAMI.
Secondly, responsibility also falls on the many
international supporters. It is of great importance that
they contribute to positively influence the residents'
positions. Thirdly, to date, almost no Member State has
stepped forward to offer resettlement to eligible former
Ashraf residents.

There must be a way out of Camp Hurriya in the
foreseeable future. Without the prospect of resettlement,
the ongoing process runs the risk of collapsing. The
temporary transit location of Camp Hurriya has the
capacity to accommodate the remaining 1,200 residents
and meet acceptable humanitarian standards. Both
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees have devoted substantial
energy and resources to resolving the issue. More than
100 staff members are dedicated to the project in the
meantime.

I appeal to the Government of Iraq to be generous,
particularly in terms of humanitarian needs like
water and electricity, and to avoid violence under any
circumstances. I also appeal to Camp residents to abide
by Iraqi laws and avoid provocation and violence.
Time for finding a sustainable solution is running out.
The Government's patience is wearing thin. I would
therefore like to echo the Secretary-General and
urge Camp Ashraf residents to cooperate with Iraqi
authorities and to relocate from Camp Ashraf to Camp
Hurriya. It is also imperative that third countries step
forward to accept eligible residents for resettlement as
soon as possible, without which there can be no durable
solution.

In my introduction, I posed the question of whether
the people of Iraq still need UNAMI. I am convinced
that UNAMI is needed more than ever to help Iraq
complete its transition to a stable and prosperous
democracy. UNAMI has the legitimacy and the standing
to represent the international community in Iraq. Iraqis
from all communities look to UNAMI to protect their
aspirations and to ensure that their needs are met. With
the Security Council's support, UNAMI will continue
its efforts to address the many outstanding issues
crucial to securing Iraq's future. The substantial cut of
20 per cent of UNAMI's budget in 2013 requires that
we do more with less. In that context, the Mission may
need to reconsider some areas of operation.

I should like to sincerely thank the members of the
Council for their continued support, the Government of
Iraq and the wider membership of the United Nations,
as well as the staff of UNAMI, for their unrelenting
commitment and dedication to implementing our
mandate.

