Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): My statement will be made up of four small
parts.

The first is that propaganda, disinformation and
psychological warfare are not new concepts. A new
phenomenon, exacerbated by what we are seeing in
the Syrian conflict, is the spread of fake news. In such
fabrications, they stoop to using images of children. We
do not want the Secretariat of the United Nations to be
used as an instrument in such a cynical game.

I do not want to remind the Western troika that
summoned today's meeting, which has spoken so
grandiloquently of the role that they played in the
emergence of the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) as a result of the American and British invasion
of Iraq, of the role that those three countries played in
exacerbating the Syrian crisis, which has led to such
dreadful consequences and the resurgence of terrorist
organizations in Syria and Iraq. What I find particularly
strange was the statement by the representative of
the United States, who delivered her statement as if
she were Mother Teresa. She should remember what
country she is representing and her own country's
track record. Only then can she start opining from the
position of moral supremacy. Let us ask: Who is guilty
for what? Who is to blame? I think that ultimately God
will tell us.

The second part of my statement concerns
information. As of yesterday evening, Syrian
authorities had assumed full control of over 98 per cent
of Aleppo. The militant rebels hold only three square
kilometres. In the past 24 hours, the Syrian army has
freed another 11 neighbourhoods in eastern Aleppo. In
the past 24 hours, the regions of Aleppo that are still
under rebel control have decreased. With the help of the
Russian Centre for Reconciliation of Opposing Sides
in the Syrian Arab Republic, 7,796 civilians have been
evacuated, including 3,946 children. Some 375 rebels
have laid down their arms and crossed into the western
opart of the city. Since the start of the operation,
approximately 110,000 civilians - including 44,367
children - have been evacuated from the city, and
more than 7,000 have returned to their homes in the
liberated areas of the western part of Aleppo.

Three humanitarian actions have taken place in
the past 24 hours, during which civilians in temporary
shelters in eastern Aleppo have received humanitarian
supplies. In the neighbourhoods of Al-Aziza and
Sheikh Maqsood, around one ton of supplies has been
delivered. In Al-Malihah, around 1.5 tons of supplies
have gotten through. For civilians leaving areas of
Aleppo under the control of illegal armed groups, hot
food and emergency supplies are being provided.

In the past 24 hours, a total of 16 hectares have
been demined and 48 buildings - including five
schools, a residential complex and a home for the
elderly - as well as a park and 2.5 kilometres of roads,
have been cleansed of improvised explosive devices. In
the past 24 hours, Russian sappers have deactivated and
disassembled 1,200 explosive devices in the liberated
parts of eastern Aleppo. Results of a survey of the
liberated areas of eastern Aleppo conducted by Russian
sappers of the International Mine Action Centre have
not yet revealed any hospital or school that the militants
used for its intended purpose. There are still numerous
armed mines in public buildings and schools that were
used by the rebels as storage centres for explosives or
headquarters for sharia courts or meeting places for
militants or factories for making homemade rockets.

I will move on to the third part of my statement,
using the latest information. Currently, the Syrian army
is concluding the liberation of Aleppo from radical
militant groups, including terrorists of the Al-Nusra
Front, who earlier refused to leave the city through the
secure routes. Moreover, not only did they continue
with their hostilities against Government forces, stating
that it was better to die than surrender, but they also
regulary shelled civilians neighbourhoods in Aleppo,
killing innocent women, children and elderly people.
More than that, they hampered any chance of civilians
leaving areas of militant control. They opened fire on
civilians who were trying to break out towards the
western part of the city. That fact has been confirmed
by numerous witness testimonies, including from
personnel of international humanitarian agencies.

With respect to mass arrests and disappearances
and bloody repraisals against civilian activists, we
have no information attesting to that. An hour ago, we
contacted our Embassy in Demascus, which is contact
with the Syrian authorities and the Commander of the
Russian Army in Syria. They categorically denied
that information. Naturally, the militants leaving the
encircled city were checked for possible involvement
in the commission of crimes, including attacks on a
Russian field hospital. We believe that in this situation,
the measures taken have been justified, because we
are dealing with terrorist thugs from Al-Nusra, Nour
al-Din al-Zenki thugs and other such gangs.

However, I want to stress in particular that the
vast majority of former members of the illegal armed
groups that have handed themselves over to Syrian
authorities as a result of amnesty have returned to their
families, after concluding with the proper procedures.
The most important aspect of the conflict, the counter-
terrorist operation in Aleppo, will conclude in the
next few hours. All militants, together with members
of their families and the injured, are currently going
through agreed corridors towards destinations that
they have voluntarily chosen, including towards Idlib.
At checkpoints, officers from the Russian Centre for
Reconciliation of Opposing Sides are working.

As to arbitrary arrests or other violations of the
agreement reached with the illegal armed groups, the
Russian military has not reported any such violations.
Moreover, such information can be confirmed by
representatives of International Committee of the Red
Cross currently in Aleppo, as well as by all United
Nations humanitarian agencies based in Aleppo, headed
by the Resident Coordinator.

Finally, we are responding to all communiques sent
to us, including from the United States delegation, with
regard to alleged reports of certain abuses or violations
of international humanitarian law. I will read out the
text of a response of our military representative in
Geneva to a message he received from Jan Egeland,
who is, as the Council knows, Steffan de Mistura's
Senior Special Adviser on Humanitarian Affairs. The
response reads as follows:

"Having received a signal that in eastern Aleppo
cases of ill treatment by Government forces
against civilians, the Russian Reconciliation
Centre has begun an immediate investigation into
such accusations".

Yesterday and today, Russian officers visited all
liberated regions. They spoke with commanders and
civilians. Not a single report ofill treatment or violations
of international humanitarian law against civilians of
eastern Aleppo was discovered. The endless incidents
listed just now are not credible. At the same time, facts
have come to light concerning crimes committed by
terrorists. In the Al-Rashidin neighbourhood were found
the bodies of people who had been executed trying to
leave the city. In the area of Al-Ansari Mashad, booby-
trapped schools and hospitals were discovered. In the
Insari Sark neighbourhood, the documents of a sharia
court were discovered, containing death sentences
delivered against civilians. All opposition headquarters
and armaments have been located in schools, mosques
and hospitals. Thousands of witness testimonies have
been collected, describing the torture, summary
execution and brutalization of civilians by insurgents.
We hope that our interlocutors will have the courage
and objectivity to report on that.

We hope that the Secretariat has the courage and
objectivity to state and report all of this and to not try
to one-sidedly blame the Syrian Government and, as
has been said here, those who support them, including
Russia. Those who say that are protecting the terrorists.
For a long time, we have said that it was unacceptable
when Secretariat officials have spoken about terrorists
as being no more than a detail of the conflicts in Syria
and Iraq. They are not just a detail. They are a primary
fact, which is so interpreted in Security Council
resolutions.

As for the Security Council not fulfilling its role, I
beg to disagree. The Council adopted the fundamental
resolution 2254 (2015) in December last year. It is not
our fault that certain States continue to seek satisfaction
on the battlefield while maintaining the illusion of the
possible change of regimes in Damascus by force. Let
us return to proper work and properly implementing
Security Council resolutions that might actually lead to
a settlement of the crisis in Syria.

