I would like to join others in thanking Ms. Hayden for her comprehensive briefing and ask her to transmit my wholehearted congratulations to Ms. Lyons on her appointment as the new Special Representative of the Secretary-General. We wish her every success in her new role and I affirm France's unwavering support for the United Nations efforts in Afghanistan. I will start by stating the obvious and underlining that the current circumstances should push us all to be more united than ever in continuing our support to the people of Afghanistan, a country that has been plagued by war, terrorism, poverty and now a pandemic. The first crucial form of support is to ensure continued and sufficient humanitarian assistance to deal with the many challenges that lay ahead, in particular the risk of the spread of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. France welcomes the efforts of the United Nations agencies and their partners to respond to the humanitarian needs of the population and to the COVID-19 crisis. Those efforts need to be supported and enhanced. It is also key to ensure safe and unimpeded humanitarian access to all those in need. In that regard, I also would like to recall the obligation for all parties to respect international humanitarian law, including the protection of civilians. The recent terrorist attack on 25 March is an appalling crime, which our Council rightly and firmly condemned (see SC/14147). Efforts must be sustained to reduce violence. Attacks against civilians must stop, and the Secretary-General's call for a ceasefire should be heeded and implemented in Afghanistan. Following the completion of the electoral process in Afghanistan, France calls for the swift appointment of an inclusive and united Government. That is especially critical in view of the start of intra-Afghan talks. France would like to reiterate its call for inclusive representation, from all sides, in the negotiations. We welcome the announcement of an inclusive Afghan delegation for the peace talks, which includes five women among the 21 members. It is essential that women participate directly and meaningfully in the peace talks at all levels of decision-making. Inclusivity is also critical to ensure that the human rights of every person are safeguarded in the negotiation of this peace process. The signing of two agreements in February paves the way to peace. Despite the major disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, their implementation must continue, along with the fight against terrorist activities as well as drug and human trafficking. We will closely monitor the progress made in that regard in the light with our security interests. Before concluding, I would like to underline our strong hope that progress will continue to be made towards lasting peace, the preservation of the unity and integrity of the country, better governance and the effective protection of human rights. Finally, I would like to express our full support for the elements to the press proposed by Germany.
