Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to express our
gratitude to you, Madame President, for calling this
meeting on the situation in my country and the events
unfolding there. I would also like to commend the
Secretary-General for his concern about the situation in
my country.

Pol Pot, head of the Khmer Rouge in Cambodia,
was asked why he executed one third of his people. He
said he did it because of the people. Before invading
the Soviet Union, Hitler recalled Rommel from Libya
and told him, "General, I intend to invade the Soviet
Union". Rommel told him, "Operation Barbarossa will
cost us 2 million lives". Hitler responded, "What does
it matter if 2 million Germans die in service to the
glory of the Fuhrer?"

What is taking place in the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya is indeed very dangerous. On 15 February,
a group of peaceful civilians protested, calling for the
release of a lawyer named Tarbel who was representing
the families of 2,000 prisoners who were killed in the
Abu Salim prison in 1996. This group faced gunfire
aimed at their heads and chests, as if the soldiers who
opened fire did not know that human beings have
heads, hearts and legs, or that there are other parts than
can be shot at, that there are such things as tear gas
bombs or roadblocks that can contain demonstrations.

Libyans are asking for democracy; they are
asking for progress; they are asking for freedom; and
they are asking for their rights. They demonstrated
peacefully. They did not throw a single stone. They
were killed. What did Brother Muammar Al-Qadhafi
say? He said that these people were using
hallucinogens. These tens of thousands of people
would need mountains of such pills to lose their minds
in such a way. One million turned out in Benghazi
yesterday. A pile of pills the size of the Akhdar
Mountains would not be enough for that many people.

Muammar Al-Qadhafi and his sons are telling
Libyans: "Either I rule you or I kill you". That much is
clear this evening after dozens of our brothers were
killed in Tajura and in eastern Tripoli. He gave a
speech to a crowd of children who were brought in
from asylums and soldiers dressed in civilian clothes.
He told them "I will burn Libya; I will distribute arms
to the tribes. Libya will run red with blood". Is this for
glory, or is it for the people? Muammar Al-Qadhafi
cannot give a single weapon to any person in Libya,
because they will not be used for him, they will be
used against him.

I regret being in this position. The first time I
heard Muammar Al-Qadhafi, he was addressing a
secondary school, in the south, in 1959. He was talking
about how he wanted freedom for the Congo. In 1960,
I listened to him denounce the French nuclear tests in
Algeria. In 1961, I listened to him speak out against the
separation of Syria and Egypt. Today, I listened to him
telling his people "Either I rule over you or I destroy
you."

Fear not, Libya is united. Libya will remain
united. Libya will be a progressive State. But I say to
my brother Al-Qadhafi, leave the Libyans alone.
However many of these steadfast people you kill -
these people that offered up half of their own numbers
11-24388
to fight Mussolini and Graziani, and this when they
were barefoot, hungry and poor - they will not
surrender. Libyans will not surrender. Omar Mukhtar
said it best: "We will not surrender. Either we achieve
victory or we die." We will not surrender. Victory, or
death.

When I was a member of the Security Council,
representing my country, I talked openly about the
murders we saw in Gaza. Muammar Al-Qadhafi said
they were followers of Bin Laden. I ask my brother, "Is
a six-month-old child who was killed a follower of Bin
Laden?" Libya was established by a resolution of the
United Nations. Please, United Nations, save Libya.
No to bloodshed. No to the killing of innocents. We
want a swift, decisive and courageous resolution.

