Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful for the
briefing provided by the Secretary-General's Special
Envoy for Yemen, Mr. Martin Griffiths. We take this
opportunity to convey to him our full support in his
duties and in his tireless efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Yemen.

We took note of the outcome of the consultations
held in Geneva under the auspices of the United
Nations, despite the fact that all the interested parties
were not present. Nonetheless, we recognize the full
validity and legitimacy of the process of consultations
and dialogue as the only way to advance the political
negotiation process towards a peaceful solution to
the situation in Yemen. In that regard, we call on the
relevant parties and actors to constructively participate
in and contribute to the process of dialogue and avoid
confrontational and violent rhetoric.

As the Special Envoy noted, there is undoubtedly a
real need to work on confidence-building measures to
bring the parties closer together, and dialogue must be
stepped up on key issues, such as the opening of routes
and roads to enhance the deployment of humanitarian
and medical assistance, the permanent reopening of
the Sana'a airport and, above all, the de-escalation of
the conflict zones, which includes stability and full
operations at the port of Al-Hudaydah.

Also, it is important to reiterate to the parties that
any attack or military campaign that targets civilians
or public spaces, housing or medical and educational
health centres, as well as the launching of missiles and
the deployment of antipersonnel mines, is contrary to
international law and international humanitarian law.
We therefore we call on them to observe the fundamental
principles and rules of distinction, proportionality and
precaution in the military campaigns that they carry out,
while avoiding causing unnecessary suffering to the
civilian population, especially to women and children.

We reiterate again that there is no military or
otherwise confrontational solution to the conflict
in Yemen. For that reason, all the stakeholders and
parties involved should cease violence and commit
themselves to complying with the contents of the
Council's presidential statements of 15 March 2018
(S/PRST/2018/5) and 15 June 2017 (S/PRST/2017/7)
and fully implement the provisions of resolution
2216 (2015), while abandoning all preconditions for
starting dialogue, stopping hostilities immediately
and committing to establish a process of negotiation
that allows for agreement on a political solution that
satisfies the demands and aspirations of the Yemeni
people against that backdrop of respecting their
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
In that regard, we recall the words of the Secretary-
General on 13 April here in the Chamber:

"There is only one pathway to ending the Yemeni
conflict and to addressing the humanitarian crisis:
a negotiated political settlement through inclusive
intra-Yemeni dialogue." (S/PV823], p. 2)

Finally, in order to achieve that objective, my
delegation reiterates its utmost support for the mediation
and dialogue efforts that the Special Envoy has initiated
and continues to develop with the parties.

