Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): I would like to thank
you, Sir, for convening this important meeting, and to
commend once again the outstanding contribution of
Senegal to United Nations peacekeeping endeavours. I
wish also to express my gratitude to Under-Secretary-
General Ladsous for his valuable briefing. We
look forward to receiving the relevant report of the
Secretary-General.

My delegation is especially grateful to the United
Nations Police Commissioners who briefed us today.
I myself was privileged to see young police officers
in the field, especially in protection of civilians sites,
while on the Security Council mission to South Sudan,
and their work is highly appreciated indeed.

Ukraine actively supports United Nations policing
in its efforts to enhance the efficiency of field
operations, including by contributing its best police
officers to missions. As an active police-contributing
country, we note that despite the challenges faced by
United Nations uniformed men and women, policing is
a highly promising endeavour of our Organization.

While activities in volatile missions like the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan and the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali hit today's headlines - and rightly
so - I cannot but acknowledge the achievements in
other peacekeeping and special political missions
where United Nations police is deployed, such as the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus.

We welcome the fact the United Nations policing
personnel has improved significantly in size and scope
to respond to changing conflict dynamics and to ensure
the efficient implementation of mandates, with due
regard to the safety and security of United Nations
personnel. The challenges faced by United Nations
police components on the ground have also evolved
significantly and need thorough consideration by the
Council. In that context, I would like to highlight several
points, and will try to do so in the spirit suggested by
the United Kingdom delegation.

First, Ukraine welcomes the progress made in the
development of the Strategic Guidance Framework for
International Police Peacekeeping. We also commend
the first United Nations Chiefs of Police Summit,
organized by the Police Division last June. This event
provided us with a solid foundation for the further
strengthening of international cooperation in United
Nations policing.
Secondly, the complexity of tasks and growing
needs in building institutional police capacity in
post-conflict environments require Member States
to nominate their most qualified and skilled police
officers to missions. In that respect, Ukraine holds that
that predeployment and in-mission training of police
personnel for United Nations peace operations should
be enhanced. We also believe that ensuring deployment
readiness and increased performance requires the
collective and coordinated actions of the Secretariat
and Member States. The Police Peacekeeping Training
Center in Ukraine, with its predeployment course under
United Nations standards, is our contribution to this
joint venture.

Thirdly, we believe that peacekeeping operations
should be provided with resilient mandates, sufficient
to ensure security and public order, including by
halting illegal cross-border inflows of weapons and
mercenaries. Peace missions should have the means
and resources necessary for the effective monitoring
and verification of ceasefires, the withdrawal of heavy
weapons and disarmament.

Fourthly, I would like to highlight the importance
for police-contributing countries to register and
manage all formed police unit commitments through
the Peacekeeping Capability Readiness System. It is
crucial to ensure United Nations capacity to rapidly
deploy police forces to new or existing theatres, as well
as to maintain their mobility on the ground. Timely
troop generation and deployment are a prerequisite for
mission success.

Fifthly, without a common understanding of United
Nations standards and realities on the ground, successful
United Nations policing is not possible. Recalling the
presidential statement S/PRST/2015/26 of December
2015, on the findings of the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446),
would like to emphasize the need to enhance triangular
cooperation between police-contributing countries,
the Secretariat and the Council. In particular, more
frequent police-related briefings by the Secretariat
could improve information-sharing, including before
mandating police elements of missions.

Finally, assistance to host States in capacity-
building for the protection of civilians and counter-
terrorism is a vital task ofUnited Nations peacekeeping
operations. To that end, police components, as integral
parts of peacekeeping operations, should be provided
with sophisticated technologies and clear mandates.
Let me conclude by thanking the heads of police
components and their personnel for their dedicated
service to the United Nations.

