Mr. Kabba (Sierra Leone): I am honoured to
address the Security Council at this debate on the
reform of United Nations peacekeeping. At the outset,
let me congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of September and for hosting this timely
debate. I commend the Secretary-General for his vision
for the United Nations, including the reform of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. Let me also commend
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for
Peace Operations, for his comprehensive briefing on
the reform of United Nations peacekeeping operations.

Sierra Leone acknowledges with appreciation the
Secretary-General's reform agenda on sustaining peace
in all its facets. We support the Secretary-General's
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and would like to
recall that Sierra Leone was among the first countries
that endorsed the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations.

Given that peacekeeping remains one of the
most effective tools available to the United Nations,
its success is, however, dependent on a range of
stakeholders. The commitment of all stakeholders to
prioritizing the prevention of conflict and sustaining
peace will enhance the effectiveness and coherence
of our efforts to promote peace and security at the
national, regional and global levels. A similar approach
is also required for peacekeeping operations with
a view to enhancing their performance and the full
realization of set objectives within the parameters of
realistic expectations.

The evolving nature of today's peace and security
challenges demands more than ever before our
collective commitment to working cooperatively for
the achievement of a more peaceful and secure world.
In that regard, the contribution of peacekeeping to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, as well as the
need to promote sustainable development, cannot be
overemphasized. However, if peacekeeping is to be more
effective and efficient, we must invest more in addressing
the drivers of conflict and the use of peacemaking and
preventive diplomacy. That will enhance the coherence
and effectiveness ofpeacekeeping operations and better
situate them to effectively deliver on their mandates,
within clear exit strategies.

We note, however, that, Security Council
members and the larger United Nations membership
have differing views on several issues related to
peacekeeping. That was demonstrated by the fact
that Member States were unable to agree on the draft
annual report (A/AC.121/2019/L.3) of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations at its latest
session in February and March as a result of substantive
differences, particularly with regard to funding
modalities of African Union peace support operations.

It is our hope that this debate will provide an
opportunity to take stock one year after the Declaration
of Shared Commitments. In addition, Council
members should identify the areas in which more work
needs to be done and devise a plan to deliver on the
commitments both at the Council and bilaterally. On
this first anniversary of our Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, I would like to call on this organ, the wider
membership of the United Nations and all stakeholders
to build and strengthen partnerships in order to address
the challenges faced by the United Nations in its
peacekeeping efforts.

