Mr. Salgueiro (Portugal): For the sake of
efficiency and in order to save time, I will shorten my
oral statement today. The full text has been distributed.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The candidate countries Turkey,
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, the countries of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidates Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania, as
well as Ukraine, the Republic of Moldova, Georgia and
Armenia align themselves with this declaration.

With the support of the international community,
Afghanistan has achieved significant progress in recent
years. This was also confirmed on the occasion of the
recent high-level meeting held at the United Nations on
23 September. But serious challenges remain
threatening to undermine the achievements to date.

We share the concern of the Secretary-General
about the many issues that present challenges to the
short- and long-term security and stability of
Afghanistan that have not yet been resolved. In his
earlier reports to the Council, the Secretary-General
expressed concern at the increasing trends in violence
and challenges to State authority.
We recognize the central role played by the
United Nations in promoting peace and stability in
Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the international
community and thus contributing to Afghanistan not
being alone as it faces its current manifold challenges.
In that context, we welcome the adoption of Security
Council resolution 1776 (2007) on 19 September,
which renewed the mandate of the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF), and resolution 1746
(2007) on 23 March 2007, which extended the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
mandate. We would like to take this opportunity to
commend UNAMA under the excellent leadership of
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Tom Koenigs.

The International Security Assistance Force led
by NATO since August 2003 has been crucial in
improving security, initially in Kabul and later through
its programme of phased expansion in the north, west,
south and east of the country. To that effect we
recognize the importance of increasing the effective
functionality, professionalism and accountability of the
Afghan security sector to provide long-term solutions
to security in Afghanistan.

The European Union expresses its concern with
the intensified Taliban-led insurgency. Taliban and
insurgent groups continue to prevent full security in a
number of areas, while rates of insurgent and terrorism
violence are higher than in 2006 and criminal and drug
gangs continue to grow. We are deeply concerned with
the expansion of opium poppy cultivation by 17 per
cent and potential opium production by 34 per cent.
The unprecedented increase of opium production in
2007 poses a grave threat to reconstruction and nation-
building in Afghanistan.

In that context, it is crucial for Afghanistan to
have a viable police force. We, the European Union,
have been accelerating efforts to that end through
launching the European Union Police Mission
(EUPOL) this past June. The European police mission
is working towards an Afghan police force that
respects human rights and operates within the
framework of the rule of law. Moreover, the mission is
addressing issues of police reform at the central,
regional and provincial levels in close coordination
with its partners.

At the same time, we must not overlook the fact
that some important steps have been taken. At the

regional level, the European Union positively notes the
more collaborative atmosphere that has begun to
prevail in Afghan-Pakistani relations, with the
recognition that terrorism was a shared challenge.
Therefore, we congratulate the peace jirga that took
place in Kabul between Presidents Karzai and
Musharraf in August 2007, and the joint declaration
that resulted from that event. Peace, security and
stability in Afghanistan cannot be achieved without the
positive support of the countries in the region.

Afghan commitment on good governance is
needed. Only by appointing qualified Government
officials with a good human rights record, providing
enough provincial government capacity and
implementing the anti-corruption road map can an
effective and legitimate administration can be realized.
The adoption of such measures becomes all the more
urgent as we approach the 2009 elections.

It is with deep regret that the European Union has
learned of the recent execution of 15 people. The
European Union opposes the death penalty in all cases.
We urge the Government of Afghanistan to reinstate
the moratorium on the death penalty with a view to
abolishing it.

Finally, we stress the importance of urgent
attention by both the Afghan Government and the
National Assembly to ensuring adoption of the
electoral law by the end of 2007, which is vital to
prepare the presidential elections that will take place in
2009.

Let me conclude this statement by stressing that
the European Union remains committed to the long-
term reconstruction of Afghanistan. We continue to
support the Afghanistan Compact, which we consider
the principal framework for the future reconstruction
and stabilization of the Country until 2010. Therefore,
we pledge to continue to work with the Afghan
Government, the United Nations and other
international partners to build a prosperous, secure and
sustainable Afghanistan.

