Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): Let me start by thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Martin Kobler, for his comprehensive briefing
on the latest developments in Libya and the activities
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. We
commend his efforts in the search for a political solution
to the Libyan crisis. We also thank Ambassador Skoog
for his report on the activities of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011). We appreciate his leadership.

The deteriorating security situation and the
continuing political stalemate in Libya remain a source
of great concern. With the prevailing lawlessness and
the existence of parallel and divided institutions, the
possibility of Libya sliding back into conflict presents
a serious risk, as the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2017/283) has warned. We believe that the Libyan
Political Agreement is still the only framework for
ensuring a lasting political solution to the Libyan crisis.
The need for renewed efforts to facilitate political
dialogue and address the key controversial issues
that continue to impede the implementation of the
Agreement has already been recognized, but it is now
time for taking concrete actions in that regard.

It is undoubtedly the Libyans who should resolve
their own problems. There is no alternative to Libyan
ownership of the process of resolution. However, careful
coordination of regional and international efforts in
support of the Libyan peace process in full recognition
of the country's sovereignty and territorial integrity
is vital. In that connection, we acknowledge the key
role played by the neighbouring countries of Libya.
It is in that spirit that we welcome their intensified
efforts to stabilize the situation in the country. We also
support the decision of the African Union High-level
Committee on Libya to include neighbouring countries
as members, recognizing their indispensable role in
addressing the crisis.

In order to ensure the effectiveness of the efforts in
support of Libya, it is imperative that there be enhanced
coordination and coherence among all of the relevant
regional and international stakeholders. In that context,

we welcome the joint communique issued by the Libya
quartet's meeting, held on 18 March in Cairo, which
stressed the importance of a political solution. There
can be no military solution to the conflict in Libya.

Finally, we remain concerned about the overall
humanitarian situation in Libya, as well as the suffering
and plight of refugees and migrants. Though the fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant has
brought tangible progress, the continued presence ofthat
group and its sleeper cells still poses a serious threat.
All of that underscores the urgent need to reinvigorate
the political dialogue in order to restore peace and
stability in Libya. There is a need for unity of purpose
within the international community in supporting and
encouraging all Libyan actors to constructively and
seriously engage in searching for a lasting solution to
the Libyan crisis.

