Mr. Lamamra: On behalf of the African Union,
let me start by expressing our gratitude to the Security

Council for according us this opportunity to address it
at such a critical juncture in the Somalia peace process.
The Council's decision to schedule this meeting on
Somalia, at the request of the African Union (AU), is a
testament to the importance that members of the
Council attach to the situation in that country, as well
as to their commitment to build the kind of partnership
that the challenges in Somalia and elsewhere in Africa
so urgently require.

AU Commission Chairperson Jean Ping sincerely
regrets that prior commitments have prevented him
from attending this meeting. He extends his
compliments to the Council and its members, confident
that today's deliberations will pave the way for further
progress in the relentless search for lasting peace and
reconciliation in Somalia.

More than a year ago, I had the opportunity to
address (see S/PV.6407) this organ on the issue of
Somalia to convey the request made then by the AU
Peace and Security Council and to appeal for the
enhancement of the United Nations support package to
the African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM).
Subsequently, the Security Council adopted resolution
1964 (2010), which authorized the Secretary-General
to continue to provide support for an enhanced troop
strength of 12,000. That the Security Council decision
fell short of what the AU had requested is in no doubt.
Yet, it represented a step forward, and we endeavored
to make the best out of it in support of the aspirations
of the Somali people to lasting peace, security and
stability.

Today, I am pleased to report that significant
progress has been made on the ground by the forces of
AMISOM. and those of the Transitional Federal
Government (TFG). For the first time in 20 years,
almost the whole of Mogadishu is under the control of
the TFG. In addition, military operations in other parts
of the country by TFG forces, with the support of
Kenya and Ethiopia, have further weakened
Al-Shabaab extremists and other anti-peace elements.

The Somali population has been quick to embrace
the relative peace brought about by the efforts of
AMISOM. and TFG forces. Since August 2011, the
capital, Mogadishu, has experienced something of a
revival. Roads are being repaired, homes rebuilt and
markets reopened. Real estate prices - for instance,
along Via Moscow - have doubled. And people are
now staying out in the streets late into the night,
despite the omnipresent threat of terrorist attacks.
Traffic at the Aden Abdulleh International Airport has
trebled, while the line of ships waiting to dock at the
sea port grows longer by the day. Mogadishu has
played host to several high-profile visitors, including
the African Union Commission Chairperson, Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon, the President of the General
Assembly, President Ismael Omar Guelleh of Djibouti
and Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

Those achievements were made by an under-
resourced and under-equipped AMISOM. They also
came at a considerable cost to the Mission. Scores of
young Burundians and Ugandans, fighting side-by-side
with their Somali comrades, have paid the ultimate
price in the line of duty. The month of October 2011
was particularly difficult, as AMISOM. and TFG forces
stepped-up their efforts to secure the capital after the
forced withdrawal of Al-Shabaab.

We at the African Union are determined to ensure
that the sacrifices they have made, on behalf of all of
us, are not in vain. We are therefore grateful to the
people and the Government of Burundi and of Uganda.
Their actions are a true reflection of African solidarity
and our collective commitment to stand by the people
of Somalia in their hour of need.

In spite of the severe challenges posed by a
devastating humanitarian crisis, the gains made on the
ground have created an unprecedented window of
opportunity to further peace and reconciliation and to
help the Somali people open a new chapter in their
troubled history. This is all the more true as progress is
also being made on the political front, particularly
since the middle of last year. The implementation of
the Kampala Accord of June 2011 and the political
road map of September 2011 is generally on course.

Undoubtedly, some challenges remain to be
overcome. One could, in this respect, point to the
prevailing situation in the Transitional Federal
Parliament, which has been in a state of paralysis and,
on one occasion, was the scene of a brawl as a result of
the illegal removal of the Speaker of the Parliament,
Sharif Hassan Sheikh Aden. Yet such difficulties are to
be expected given the complexity and protracted nature
of the conflict in Somalia. In a way, the situation is as
much a reflection of deficiencies in leadership on the
part of the Somali stakeholders as it is an indication of
a failure on the part of the international community to
provide support that is truly commensurate with the
challenges at hand.

It is against that background that the African
Union and the Intergovernmental Authority on

Development (IGAD), recognizing the urgent need to
help the Somali people sustain this renewed
momentum in the peace process, decided to pursue the
critical approach of enhancing the capacity of both
AMISOM. and TFG forces.

I am glad to report that the strategic concept for
future AMISOM. operations, whose development
involved broad consultations with the Somali
authorities, the troop-contributing countries (TCCs),
United Nations and other partners in Addis Ababa,
Nairobi and Mogadishu, as well as a series of planning
sessions, was endorsed by the African Union Peace and
Security Council at its 306th meeting, held in Addis
Ababa on 5 January.

The Secretariat deserves our highest
commendation for fully supporting this process,
including the deployment of a team of competent
United Nations planners who worked very closely with
the Commission to finalize the strategic concept. That
document is therefore the product of a joint effort.
Essentially, the strategic concept provides for the
following: an increase in the level of United Nations-
supported AMISOM. uniformed personnel from 12,000
to 17,731, including 5,700 from the new troop-
contributing countries, a Djiboutian contingent and the
rehatted Kenyan troops, as well as an AMISOM. police
component; the deployment by Burundi and Uganda of
additional troops to reach the current United Nations-
authorized strength of 12,000; the extension of
AMISOM's area of responsibility, including the
insertion of AMISOM. troops in the areas liberated with
the support of Ethiopia; the provision of the required
force enablers and multipliers, as well as logistical
support to other components of AMISOM; and, last but
not least, enhancement of the TFG security and allied
forces, so as to enable and empower them to play an
increased role in the implementation of the strategic
concept.

I wish to reiterate the call made by the Peace and
Security Council of the AU for the Security Council to
expeditiously consider and authorize the support
required for the implementation of the strategic
concept for future AMISOM. operations. The strategic
concept relies very heavily on the provision of force
enablers and multipliers, logistical support, funding for
reimbursement of contingent-owned equipment, self-
sustenance of troops and other critical requirements.
We remain appreciative of the support being provided
on the ground to AMISOM. by the United Nations, and
we certainly look forward to the pursuit of such a joint
endeavour.

The AU Commission, on its part, is accelerating
preparations and consultations on the follow-on
planning requirements through continued engagement
with our four troop-contributing countries - Burundi,
Djibouti, Kenya and Uganda - and with IGAD
countries, countries of the region and other partners.
This will include the elaboration and early finalization
of a revised AMISOM. concept of operations so as to
adequately address all relevant pending issues, such as
command and control, liaison and coordination, and
troops-to-task per sector.

Obviously, the military efforts of AMISOM. and
the TFG forces are designed to achieve the political
objectives that are articulated in the Mogadishu road
map. With incoming Kenyan forces now an integral
part of AMISOM, and with the support provided by
Ethiopia, several new areas throughout the country are
being liberated from terrorist insurgents. In that
context, it is important to ensure that there is no
political vacuum in the liberated regions. That
highlights the need for increased political outreach and
reconciliation on the part of the TFG, as well as
recovery support. Therefore, coherence between
military operations and political strategy remains
imperative and is adequately articulated in the strategic
concept.

Consequently, the African Union Commission
will continue to support the concerted efforts of the
Special Representative of the Chairperson, Ambassador
Boubacar Diarra; the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Ambassador Augustine Mahiga; and
the IGAD Facilitator, Kipruto Kirwa, to assist the
Somali leaders and other stakeholders in focusing on
the implementation of the Kampala Accord and the
political road map in the light of the progress achieved
so far, in particular at the Garowe conference on
constitution-making.

Somalia is at a crossroads. We should not relent
in urging the Somali stakeholders to take advantage of
the current momentum, so as to once and for all bring
to an end the violence and suffering visited upon their
people by two decades of conflict and destruction. We
should insist on the need for them to fully comply with
the commitments contained in the Kampala Accord and
the Mogadishu road map. We should continue to stress
that they have the primary responsibility for achieving
lasting peace and reconciliation in their country.

At the same time, we should not lose sight of the
fact that the Somalis cannot succeed without adequate
support from the international community. As stressed
by the Chair of the AU Commission in his 15 October
2010 report on Somalia to the Peace and Security
Council, we cannot hide from the fact that, so far, the
international community has yet to fully assume its
responsibility in Somalia. Its action in Somalia has
been belated, hardly keeping pace with developments
on the ground, partial - forcefully addressing some
aspects of the crisis, for instance the scourge of piracy,
while not giving sufficient attention to the action
required on the mainland - and inadequate. The
resources mobilized so far are incommensurate with
the challenges. The international community has not
shown the sense of anticipation and proactivity
required or seized opportunities, when they presented
themselves, to further peace and reconciliation in
Somalia.

Today, learning from our past experiences and
shortcomings, we have the opportunity to turn the
situation in Somalia around for the greater good of its
long-suffering people and in support of regional
stability and international security. As the present
deliberations proceed, I have no doubt that we are all
fully aware of what is at stake. Failure to act now will
be extremely costly.

While reiterating our gratitude to the Security
Council for the steps that it has already taken in
support of AMISOM, we cannot but call on it to do
more to enable us all to cover the remaining ground in
our long journey towards lasting peace, reconciliation
and security in Somalia.

In closing, I want to again express the African
Union's appreciation to South Africa, as President of
the Council, for its sustained efforts to further the
partnership between the AU and the United Nations; to
IGAD for its leadership and resolve; to the AMISOM
TCCs, including the new contingents from Djibouti
and Kenya, for their commitment; and to the Secretary-
General and the Council for the continued attention
being paid to the situation in Somalia.

