Mr. Inchauste Jordan (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We express our gratitude
for the report of the Secretary-General (S/2017/357)
presented by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI), Mr. Jan Kubis,
and convey our strongest support for the implementation
of the mandated activities.

Furthermore, we appreciate the important
work being carried out by UNAMI in fulfilling its
mandate and the dialogue and coordination that it has
implemented to encourage the strengthening of the
peace process in Iraq.

We recognize and encourage the courageous and
determined struggle that the Iraqi security forces
are carrying out against Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL), while prioritizing the protection of
civilians and civilian infrastructure. We underscore
that, as the terrorist group is driven out and populations
are liberated from its control, the deployment of United
Nations humanitarian assistance and its reaching those
who need it most can be ensured.

We note with concern that to date, according
to the report of 15 May issued by the World Health
Organization, since the beginning of counter-terrorism
operations in Mosul in October 2016, more than 650,000
persons have been internally displaced and more than
12,000 have been wounded as a result of the military
campaign in that region. Furthermore, according to
the Secretary-General's report, during the period from
February to April alone, 908 civilians, including men,
women and children, have died, thereby raising the total
number of the conflict's casualties to more than 80,000.

We are extremely concerned about the weapons
capability that ISIL has developed and the terror tactics
that it has been deploying - carrying out drone attacks
against civilians, using improvised explosive devices
and using innocent civilians as human shields. In
that regard, we reiterate our strongest condemnation
of all acts of terrorism as criminal and unjustifiable,
wherever, whenever and by whomever they are
committed. Similarly, we condemn the cowardly use of
children and women as human shields in the strongest
terms, and reaffirm the need for all States to combat that
practice through all means available in accordance with
the Charter of the United Nations and other obligations
under international law.

While constantly respecting the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Iraq, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia recognizes the efforts
and will of the Iraqi people to achieve a historic
political and social agreement that will finally lead to
the establishment and consolidation of peace. In that
regard, we look forward to the holding of elections,
and we hope that the electoral calendar and the legal
mechanisms necessary to implement that calendar
will emerge through the consensus of all parties and
stakeholders for the benefit of the population in general.

Furthermore, we entrust the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq to support and accompany
that process in the best way forward. In the same vein,
we welcome the support expressed by the League of
Arab States at its Summit meeting held in Jordan on
29 March, at which it stated that Iraq's stability and
territorial integrity are fundamental foundations for the
security of the entire Arab region.

We also appreciate the recent efforts of the
Iraqi Government to identify Kuwaiti citizens who
might have been buried on Iraqi soil and to identify
and return property taken during the conflict. We
highlight the constant and active cooperation that
Kuwait and Iraq have developed so as to fulfil their
international commitments.

Finally, we call on the parties involved to find a
way to enable the Iraqi people to achieve reconciliation
and definitive peace through a process led by and for
the benefit of the Iraqi people.

