President Bongo Ondimba (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to commend you, Sir, and
through you your country, Turkey, for taking the
initiative to organize this summit meeting, which gives
us an opportunity today to assess the role of the
Security Council in the maintenance of international
peace and security.
With developments in the international context,
new threats to peace and security in our world have
emerged. These include, inter alia, climate change,
arms proliferation, international terrorism, piracy, drug
trafficking and its corollary, transnational organized
crime. The complex nature of these new threats and the
now obvious interdependence between security issues
and those of development make the role of the Council
increasingly difficult and the mandates of its
peacekeeping missions less and less effective. If it is to
confront these new challenges, the Council must
reconsider its methods of operation.

From this perspective, I am pleased to propose
some ideas that I believe could help the Council to
make its action more effective. I urge the Council to
emphasize prevention. As members will agree, it is
better to prevent crises and conflicts than to have to
resolve them. To that end, I exhort the Secretary-
General to pursue his mediation efforts and to do
everything possible to improve the Organization's early
warning mechanism.

On 8 March, at the International Peace Institute
here in New York, I emphasized the importance that
Gabon attaches to the role of preventive diplomacy.
That idea prevailed, for example, when we
implemented mechanisms in our subregion to prevent
and manage crises and conflicts such as the early
warning mechanism for Central Africa, headquartered
in my country, and the Council for Peace and Security
in Central Africa. Within the framework of its
preventive action in Central Africa, the Council would
do well to strengthen the capacities of all these
mechanisms. I wish here to welcome the imminent
opening in Libreville of the United Nations Office for
Central Africa, the mandate of which will encompass
this mission.

Given the complexities of the new crises the
Council faces today, the Council must reconsider its
approach to peacekeeping. My country therefore
supports the Secretary-General's New Horizon
initiative, aimed at making peacekeeping operations
more robust. When peacekeeping is inoperative, the
Security Council must find a way to impose peace.
Such an approach would have been useful in particular
in Somalia.

Beyond their operational content, peacekeeping
missions must have a global and multidisciplinary
nature. We thus welcome the inclusion of new
components in these operations, such as offices for
child soldiers, victims of sexual abuse and the
protection of civilian populations. A smooth transition
towards peacebuilding requires the Council to take into
account both the basic conditions for sustainable peace
and the expectations of populations. That is why it is
important to establish peacekeeping operations with
clear and achievable mandates. These mandates must
be endowed with crisis exit strategies based on
benchmarks to enable performance evaluations and the
fulfilment of identified objectives.

Ensuring international peace and security is an
immense task that requires increased cooperation
between the Council and regional organizations,
especially because the latter are more familiar with
realities in the theatres of operation. I therefore
welcome the existence of an official consultation
mechanism between the Security Council and the
African Union (AU) Peace and Security Council on
questions of common interest. I am also pleased to see
that these two organizations are working together to
find solutions for peace in Darfur and in Somalia.

Africa being the main theatre for peacekeeping
missions, consolidating cooperation between the
Security Council and the AU Peace and Security
Council is a strategic goal. Such cooperation will
strengthen the action of the Peace and Security
Council, and this Council will benefit from having a
partner whose knowledge and mastery of the
challenges on the ground will be an indispensable
asset.

Peacekeeping must be pursued through
peacebuilding in order to prevent the resurgence of
crises and conflicts. It is thus important that
peacebuilding missions in post-conflict countries
increasingly include programmes to help re-establish
political, juridical, security and socio-economic
institutions.

I believe that these comprise the foundation for
vigorous action by the Council that is more adapted to
realities in the field and the expectations of populations
facing the multiple scourges that threaten peace and
security in the world.

