Mr. Inderfurth (United States of America): The
United States is pleased to support extension of the
mandate of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Liberia (UNOMIL) for another three months. This follows
the agreement of 21 December among the Liberian parties
on a cease-fire and a political process for ending their
five-year civil war. We commend President Jerry
Rawlings of Ghana, Chairman of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), for his

 

success in facilitating the peace agreement. We also
commend Trevor Gordon-Somers, who was then the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary General, the
Organization of African Unity, the ECOWAS Committee of
Nine, and Nigeria, the major contributor to ECOMOG, for
their supportive roles in this achievement. It is now up to
the Liberian people themselves to demonstrate their
commitment to peace by doing all in their power to
implement fully the provisions of the peace agreement.

In this regard, we are concerned by the inability of the
Liberian parties to agree on the composition of the new
Council of State at the recent meetings in Accra, and urge
the parties to overcome the obstacles encountered in their
deliberations on this matter.

UNOMIL, in conjunction with ECOMOG, has a
critical role to play. It is already engaged in monitoring the
28 December cease-fire and, providing the cease-fire holds,
will soon begin monitoring the disarmament process,
supervising demobilization of combatants and reintegrating
them into peaceful society, and assisting ECOMOG in
overseeing overall implementation of the peace agreement.
If implementation of the peace agreement proceeds and the
cease-fire is maintained, UNOMIL should be returned to
the level authorized by resolution 866 (1993).

The United States strongly supports humanitarian
efforts to alleviate the suffering of the hundreds of
thousands of persons displaced by the conflict. We urge all
members of the international community to help further the
peace process in Liberia and to support international and
regional efforts to aid implementation of the Accra
Agreement. The United States hopes that other States
Members of the United Nations will contribute generously
to the United Nations Trust Fund for Liberia, as the United
States has already done, because the Fund is a tangible
expression of support for the Liberian people's desire for
peace. We hope that peace will return to Liberia in 1995.

