Mr. Holmes: I shall be brief, given the hour. I
have listened very carefully to the debate and to all the
comments that have been made, and I welcome, above
all, the commitment to this agenda of the protection of
civilians; the recognition, I think, by all speakers of the
need to do more to turn our words into deeds now and
in future; and the general recognition that we need to
be even more proactive than we have been in the past,
not least in the field of conflict prevention.

I should like also to take this opportunity to thank
all those speakers who have paid tribute and
recognition - here I am speaking on behalf of the
humanitarian community as a whole - to
humanitarian workers in the field, and the recognition
of the sacrifices that they have to make, including, on
too many occasions, the ultimate sacrifice.

Let me reassure those who have raised the point
that, of course, I fully recognize the distinction
between the deliberate targeting of civilians and other
actions which result in civilian deaths. There is, of
course, a heavy obligation on the part of those who are
using force in areas where civilian populations are
present to do everything possible to avoid those
civilian deaths. Let me add that I also take full note of
the statement made just now by the representative of
Colombia.

Let me thank several Member States for the
support they gave to the ideas that I put forward in a
preliminary way with regard to taking a more
systematic look in the future at the effect of the
inclusion of protection concerns in peacekeeping
mandates and what effect those have had on the
situation on the ground and, similarly, to looking
systematically and regularly at cases of denial of
access for humanitarian workers, which, as many
speakers have commented, is a fundamental point if we
are going to do our job of attempting to protect
civilians. I will look at how we can take these ideas
further.

I have also taken note of, and we will follow up
on, other suggestions that were made during the
debate, including some for the next report of the
Secretary-General, in October.

I note in particular: the suggestion by the
representative of Canada, speaking on behalf of
Australia and New Zealand as well, regarding a better
evidence base to enable us to measure progress towards
protection objectives; the idea of looking at how far we

are succeeding in implementing resolution 1674 (2006)
on the protection of civilians; the idea of an annex to
the Secretary-General's report precisely on issues of
access, which I have already mentioned; and the
suggestion that the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations should cooperate even more
closely than we do already on the question of
peacekeeping mandates to ensure that protection
concerns are fully included - and let me assure the
Council that that cooperation is already extremely
good.

The representative of Japan suggested that there
could be an updating of the aide-memoire adopted by
the Council on the protection of civilians. I think that is
a good suggestion which we might try to take up,
perhaps during 2008. There was also a suggestion, I
think by the representative of the Republic of Korea,
that there should be a specific mechanism to look at
how we deal with the protection of civilians in each
particular conflict - to look at the specificities of each
case. I agree that that is a suggestion worth taking up.

Several speakers referred to the importance of the
role of regional organizations in the protection of
civilians. I agree that that role is important - and,
indeed, increasingly important. I pay tribute to the
efforts of the African Union and the Economic
Community of West African States to recognize the
importance of the protection of civilians in their
political reconciliation efforts in various conflicts in
Africa. I think the cooperation between the United
Nations and the African Union in this area is
increasingly important for the future; it was recognized
as such in the recent agreement. As one or two
speakers mentioned, we held a high-level conference in
Dakar this year, on capacity-building precisely for
these kinds of objectives. We would certainly be
willing to repeat that in other regions.

Several delegations referred to the current
humanitarian issues in Gaza. I fully recognize the
seriousness of the humanitarian situation in Gaza. We,
together with our representatives on the ground, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East, the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and others, are making every effort to ensure
that the crossings can be opened as soon as possible.
Without full opening of the crossings, in particular the
Karni crossing, we face the possibility of a
humanitarian crisis in Gaza in a few weeks' time
because of lack of food and lack of medical supplies.
Some supplies are getting through at the moment, but
they are certainly not sufficient to deal with the
problem. We are fully focused on that, and I can assure
the Council that we will do our best to make sure that
we can resolve those issues quickly.

Several representatives mentioned the
responsibility to protect and the agreement on that at
the 2005 World Summit. Delegations mentioned it in
different ways, which perhaps illustrates the
complexity of this debate and the complexity of the
discussion we face on how to implement the
responsibility to protect. This is a debate which we
clearly need to continue, and it will be continued this
year, as already promised. I think my only comment
would be that, in debating this issue, we should not
focus too exclusively on the possible actions of last
resort in the responsibility to protect. There are many
stages before that in helping countries to exercise their
responsibility to protect their own civilians.
07-39152

Finally, let me just repeat that I think it is clear
from the debate that this is an issue of great concern to
many Member States, and justifiably so. I take away
the message that we need to go on looking for new
ways to take effective action to protect civilians in
armed conflict. As several members pointed out, this is
an important criterion for judgement of the efficacy of
the Security Council itself. Of course, it was very
useful to have a reminder from the representative of
Rwanda of what it is we want to make sure to avoid in
the future.

Let me conclude by saying that I recognize my
own responsibility in this area and that I will do my
best to fulfil it.

