Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his comprehensive briefing on his latest report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (S/20l7/922, annex). Egypt stresses its
full support for the mandate of the High Representative
and his efforts to assist Bosnian authorities to overcome
the challenges.

Egypt welcomes all efforts to maintain stability
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and its unity, with all its
ethnic and cultural components. We are cognizant
of the important role played by the European Union
(EU)-led stabilization force in achieving that objective.
Accordingly, we welcome the unanimous adoption
of resolution 2384 (2017) today. That sends a strong
message from the international community to the
Bosnian people that we are committed to maintaining
stability and security in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
that we are committed to providing the necessary
support to country to anchor its sovereignty, unity and
territorial Integrity.

Two decades after its signing, the General
Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains the cornerstone for institutional
stability and sustainable peace. We express our deep
concern about the great challenges to the Peace
Agreement referred to in the report during the reporting
period, especially resorting to inflammatory and
divisive rhetoric. We call upon all political leaders to
give precedence to the political interests of the Bosnian
people over any other considerations. We call upon
them to rise above narrow political and ethnic interests
that undermine any progress and stability. We call upon
them to engage in serious political consultations to
discuss the proposed amendments to the election law in
Bosnia, which would prevent a potential political crisis.

Those events coincide with what the report referred
to as limited progress towards the implementation
of the 5+2 plan to close the Office of the High
Representative, especially regarding the registration
of defence property in addition to the rejection by the
Serbian entity to increase the budget allocated to State
institutions, which adversely affects the sustainability
of financial policies. Egypt stresses its full support to
the Office of the High Representative with respect to
what was provided for in the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the relevant Security Council resolutions. We call
upon the High Representative to intensify his efforts to
implement the plan in full.

In conclusion, Egypt stresses the importance of
respecting the unity, stability and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the respect of its national
Constitution and of all decisions and verdicts of the
judiciary by all parties to solidify stability. Egypt
welcomes the recent positive developments, especially
the improved relations with neighbouring countries and
the improvement of some of the economic indicators.
We call upon the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to strengthen social cohesion and political consensus
to move forward with peace efforts and reforms. In
addition, we call upon the international community to
continue its efforts to support Bosnia and Herzegovina,
which would have a positive effect not only on the
stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina but on the stability
of the entire region of the Balkans.

