Mr. Djani (Indonesia): At the outset, let me
present Indonesia's views on the agenda item under
consideration. After that, we will pose questions to
both Force Commanders. I would like to thank Under-
Secretary-General Lacroix and the Force Commanders
for their comprehensive briefings, which focused on
cooperation with host States and on the operational
challenges to the current mission mandates in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP). Let me also extend our
condolences to the family of Major General Francis Vib
Sanziri and to all peacekeepers around the globe.

Consent is indeed one of the core principles of
United Nations peacekeeping. Peacekeeping missions
cannot deploy without the agreement and cooperation
of the Government of the host State. There are in
fact concrete actions that we could take as part of the
Action for Peacekeeping agenda and its Declaration of
Shared Commitments to strengthen host-State consent
and cooperation.
The first action is strengthening consultation among
peacekeeping stakeholders on mandates and their
implementation. We need to collectively implement the
existing intergovernmental commitments on triangular
cooperation between troop- and police-contributing
countries, the Security Council and the Secretariat.
We also need to consider options for further direct
engagement between host Governments and the Security
Council. That should include cooperation in the pursuit
of Security Council mandates, including facilitating
access, and recognize national responsibilities related
to the safety and security of peacekeepers.

The second action concerns the contribution of
peacekeeping operations to the protection of civilians.
Our contingents in UNAMID have experienced
first-hand that quick-impact projects, community
engagement, mediation and facilitation, with close
cooperation with the host Government, are vital in
improving protection-of-civilian mandates.

The third action is better training and capacity-
building for mission leaders to navigate issues related
to host-State consent and cooperation. It takes a regular
effort by mission leaders, with the assistance of Member
States and regional organizations, to maintain the
consent and cooperation of the host-State Government
counterparts through all the changes. Managing host-
State consent and cooperation is, I believe, the most
important and difficult part ofa mission leader's job.

The fourth action is ensuring that missions have the
right tools to manage host-State consent and cooperation.
In that respect, possible guidelines are required to
navigate the cooperation with host-State Governments.
The guidelines can outline different consent scenarios
facing peacekeepers, response options and criteria for
identifying a serious deterioration of consent. Such
tools will be important when needed to elevate issues
to the Security Council before the situation becomes
a crisis.

Let me once again thank and pay tribute to the
Force Commanders for their exemplary commitment.
Indonesia, as one of the largest troop/police-contributors
to peacekeeping operations, will always support their
work and efforts, be it within UNAMID, UNFICYP or
other peacekeeping missions around the globe.

I would like to end my remarks by posing some
question to both Force Commanders. I would like to ask
them, from their observations, the following. What are
the concrete impacts of the so-called Christmas-tree
mandates on the relationship between the peacekeeping
missions and the host countries?

I would like to ask the Force Commander of
UNAMID two additional questions. What are the
challenges being faced to achieve a responsible
drawdown and exit strategy? And what should the
Security Council do to ensure that the formulation of
the next mandate is clearly articulated and corresponds
to the operational challenges?

I would like to ask the Force Commander of
UNFICYP the following question. What should be
improved in terms of the current mandate to ensure that
UNFICYP can support the achievement of a political
solution and improve cooperation with the host country?

