Mr. Miyet (Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations): I should like to comment first on the points
raised by Ambassador Dahlgren. I, too, want to thank him
for the quality of his report and for his dedication.

The question of joint border monitoring is one that we
have certainly examined. As he said, these are essentially
questions of security, and I would suggest that there is a
role for the Sierra Leonean authorities and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Monitoring
Group (ECOMOG) to play. For the time being, taking into
account the difficulties and the means at the disposal of
ECOMOG, it is clear that they do not have the capacity to
deploy their troops along the borders. They are so actively
engaged on other very difficult fronts that it would be
difficult for them. It is clear that we cannot send even an
assessment team if there is no security provided, and we
are not in a position to do that at this point.

It must be clear that there are priorities at this point.
The Secretary-General stated in a report in June 1998 that
monitoring would improve the situation in the region. But
I think that because of the difficulties on the ground, the
security situation and ECOMOG's lack of means, the
difficulty of trying to deploy people in the jungle - and
it is a jungle - would create big difficulties.

(spoke in French)

A second issue was raised by the representative of
the United States with regard to measures taken to
guarantee the safety of the observers. I should first like to
say that this is daily concern for us; for the special
representatives on the ground, the force commanders who
are there observing and the heads of the military
observers, it is a constant concern. New instructions were
given two days ago to ensure that every step is taken to
deal with the renewed rebel activity near Freetown. Of
course, we are continuously reviewing the security
situation at each of the sites where observers are
deployed. As I said earlier, for security reasons not all the
observers have been deployed yet - just 40 out of 70.
Furthermore, it was decided two days ago that only air
transport would be used, and when ECOMOG assures us
that the safety of our personnel can be assured at the
destinations.

In Sierra Leone, as with other missions in which we
are involved where the risks are considerable, we are
endeavouring, working closely with our representatives on
the ground, to deal with developments.

