The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Malaysia.

Ijoin my colleagues in expressing our appreciation
to Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Alexander Hug for their
comprehensive briefings.

Malaysia is greatly alarmed by the recent escalation
in fighting in eastern Ukraine. We have heard from the
briefers on the gravity of the recent situation, which
is the worst since the signing of the Minsk agreement
in February 2015. We join other Council members in
strongly urging all parties to fully comply with the
provisions of the Minsk agreement, as stipulated in
resolution 2202 (2015). We also call for the parties to
cooperate fully with the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) Special Monitoring
Mission in order to enable them to carry out their
mandate as laid out in the Minsk agreement.

Malaysia welcomes the progress made thus far in
the implementation of the Minsk agreement. Until very
recently, the ceasefire has generally been respected,
despite incidents of low-intensity and sporadic fighting.
We note that both sides withdrew heavy weapons in the
early months after the signing of the Minsk agreement.
We welcome and commend the establishment of four
working groups in the context of the Trilateral Contact
Group, focusing on political, security, economic and
humanitarian issues.

On a related note, I would like to highlight that the
overall improvement in the security situation between
March and April 2015 due to the ceasefire has allowed
for the return of an international team, including
Malaysian personnel, to complete the recovery mission
for Malaysia Airlines flight MH-17. We regret the fact
that it took the Malaysian recovery team almost a year
following the downing of the aircraft to be able to enter
the crash site due to the ongoing fighting in eastern
Ukraine. As our team recently managed to collect more
remains and belongings of the victims of flight MH-17,
we were provided with a grim reminder of the tragic
humanitarian costs of the conflict in Ukraine.

As we have heard from the briefers, whatever
progress made in implementing the Minsk agreement is
still far from irreversible. Despite claims by both sides
that heavy weapons have been withdrawn, we remain
concerned that movements or presence of weapons in
violation ofthe Minsk agreement have been observed by
the Monitoring Mission. Inspections by the Mission of
heavy-weapon holding areas also found some weapons
missing or unaccounted for.

With the most recent clashes in Marinka, the Minsk
agreement is in real danger of unravelling. The civilian
population, in particular children, would undoubtedly
bear the brunt of an escalation in the situation. It is
heart-wrenching that as of 15 May 2015, over 160,000
children have been internally displaced in eastern
Ukraine, 68 killed and almost 200 injured. Children
continue to live with their families in bomb shelters
and to be internally displaced and deprived of basic
necessities such as water and health care.

We would remind all parties of their obligations
under international law and international humanitarian
law, particularly with regard to the protection of
civilians. We also urge all parties to allow for safe and

unrestricted humanitarian access to those in need.

The parties to the conflict must take a step
back from the spiralling violence in Ukraine and
recommit themselves to the full implementation of the
Minsk agreement. We reiterate our commitment to a
peaceful resolution of the conflict in Ukraine based
on the principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
including respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Ukraine. We appeal to the conflicting
parties not to lose the opportunity for peace once again.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

