The Secretary-General: First of all,
Mr. President, let me thank you and your delegation for
organizing this debate on an important topic. I think we
can all look forward to a very constructive discussion.

The protection of children caught up in armed
conflict has been among my main priorities as
Secretary-General. During the past 10 years, we have
tried to place the issue firmly on the international
agenda. Since 1998, when the first Special
Representative for Children and Armed Conflict began
his work and the Council held its first open debate on
the subject, this issue has gained greater visibility. The
Council's annual debates have benefited from the
participation of non-governmental organizations -
and, at times, children themselves - and have
demonstrated that there is a gathering will to act
against those who recruit and continue to use child
soldiers.

The past decade has also seen important gains in
the elaboration of international legal standards for the
protection of children. The Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC) classifies the
recruitment of children into fighting forces as a war
crime and a crime against humanity. The International
Labour Organization's Convention No. 182 defines
child soldiering as one of the worst forms of child
labour. The African Charter on the Rights and Welfare
of the African Child outlaws child soldiering. And the
Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child on the Involvement of Children in Armed
Conflict established 18 as the minimum age for
children's participation in hostilities.

The Security Council itself has been part of this
progress. Its resolutions have highlighted six grave
violations, drawn from international humanitarian law,
that concern children affected by armed conflict:
killing and maiming, abduction, child soldiers, sexual
violence, attacks on schools and hospitals and the
06-63086
denial of humanitarian access. Today, the international
community is shifting its focus from the elaboration of
standards to the provision of real protection. In the past
year alone, we have seen encouraging signals that
impunity for crimes against children will no longer be
tolerated. The ICC is prosecuting Thomas Lubanga
Dyilo for conscripting and enlisting children under the
age of 15 years and using them to participate actively
in hostilities. For the first time, a former head of State,
Charles Taylor, is being brought to account, for
violations committed against children during the
conflict in Liberia.

It is incumbent upon all of us to sustain that
political and practical momentum, and to keep a close
eye on situations of concern. To that end, last year, the
Security Council called for the establishment of a
monitoring and reporting mechanism. The mechanism
is now at work in seven countries and is providing
timely and reliable information to a Task Force chaired
by my Special Representative. That information forms
the basis of my bimonthly reports to the Council's
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict and
has resulted in targeted measures against offending
parties. Those measures have led warring parties to
come forward and to agree to concrete action plans to
respect the rights of children. By now the Council will
have received the report on the independent assessment
of the monitoring and reporting mechanism. I urge the
Council to consider the recommendations that have
been made to strengthen the monitoring process.

The United Nations system will continue to do its
part in this effort. UNICEF has made protection an
essential ingredient of its work and is taking the lead in
the field. Department of Peacekeeping Operations child
protection advisers have been attached to several
peacekeeping operations, reporting to the respective
Special Representatives. The Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights are also playing active roles in the
monitoring and reporting mechanism. My Special
Representative has just finalized a two-year strategic
framework to assist her in better fulfilling her special
role as an independent moral voice.

Not so long ago, the problem faced by children in
situations of armed conflict was, in important respects,
an invisible issue. Little was known, and even less was
said. The initiatives I have just described represent
06-63086

significant progress. Yet, we have only begun to
scratch the surface. I hope that the Council will
consolidate the gains that have been made and will
move forward to cover all situations of concern and all
grave violations. The tangible gains of the past few
years show that, when there is political will in the
Council, we can make life better for the millions of
children trapped in situations of armed conflict.

