Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): Allow
me to welcome and thank the Secretary-General for
presenting his ninth report on the protection of civilians
in armed conflict (S/2012/376) and for his important
briefing today. I would also like to thank Ms. Valerie
Amos, Mr. Ivan Simonovic' and Mr. Philip Spoerri for
their detailed analyses of the matter.

The report draws attention to the need to comply
with the regulations of international humanitarian
law in order to reduce the impact of armed conflicts
on civilians. This matter is particularly relevant to the
Colombian State because we have had to defend our
democratic institutions from attacks by illegal armed
groups, whose warfare strategies openly violate those
laws. We share the Secretary-General's concern with
regard to the situation faced by civilian populations
in situations of armed conflict in several parts of the
world, as well as the recurrent violation of the obligation
of all parties to conflict to respect and protect civilians,
in accordance with international law.

We agree that all parties to conflict should promote
respect for international law, that we should strengthen
protection for the United Nations peacekeeping and
other relevant missions, and that we should improve
access to humanitarian aid and enhance accountability
for violations of the law. We believe that, as noted
by the Secretary-General, these issues not only pose
significant challenges for actions to protect civilians,
but that they also open important fields of action for the
Organization and its bodies. Similarly, we understand
that the report is intended as a complement to the
Council's mandates in that area.

Moreover, the report refers to the importance of
enhancing legal compliance by non-State armed groups
and suggests that such compliance is dependent on the
existence of direct contact between the United Nations
and non-State armed groups. In that regard, I note that
Colombia has reservations regarding the second part of
that proposal. In order to further develop that typology,
the report identifies a formula that may work or have
worked in particular situations, and elevates it to the
status of a generally applicable solution. We do not
believe that one-size-fits-all solutions can work. Every
situation is different and must be approached by taking
into consideration its special circumstances.

In the particular case of measures directed at
non-State armed actors, in our case the suggestions
contained in the report conflict with the policies
adopted by the Colombian Government on the question
of possible peace negotiations. We believe that the
concern to enhance compliance by non-State armed
actors with international humanitarian law and other
relevant norms is valid, but we also believe that it is
amply covered by the first core challenge, namely,
enhancing compliance by parties to conflict with
international humanitarian law and, in particular, the
cardinal principles of distinction, proportionality and
taking precautions in attacks.

The report implies that in all non-international
armed conflicts, there should be ongoing and direct
engagement between non-State armed groups and the
relevant United Nations bodies in order to try to improve
compliance with international humanitarian and human
rights law. Furthermore, the report advocates greater
and more systematic engagement with such groups
in situations of armed conflict, and points out such
engagement must be initiated as soon as possible,
conducted at a high level by all parties concerned, and
sustained throughout the conflict. It concludes that,
while engagement will not always result in improved
protection, its absence will almost certainly mean more
civilian casualties in current conflicts.

Colombia cannot agree with that approach. While
we accept that some of those recommendations may be
successfully applied in certain situations around the
world, that is not the case for every situation. For that
reason, we must carefully analyse the recommendation
that Member States abstain from adopting policies
or other measures that impede the engagement of
humanitarian organizations with certain non-State
armed groups and, in particular, that impede activities
to promote respect for international humanitarian law.

Based on our recent and, I may add, painful
experience in Colombia, the Government of President
Juan Manuel Santos Calderon has adopted the policy
that any dialogue between the United Nations and the
illegal armed groups that have been internationally
designated as terrorist organizations can only be held
with the Government's prior and explicit consent. That
message comes from the Government of Colombia in
cooperation with the United Nations.

Certainly, the Colombian Government wishes that
those illegal armed groups and their leaders would take
concrete action to abide by international humanitarian
law norms and principles, but it is also firmly convinced
that such compliance will not be achieved solely
through direct engagement between those groups and
United Nations representatives. We Colombians have
already gone down that path, with results that can only
be described as unfortunate.

On the other hand, the Government has been
equally firm in declaring that it is willing to initiate
peace negotiations with the armed groups at any time,
provided that they cease attacks against civilians,
abandon actions such as kidnapping and sexual violence,
and refrain from recruiting and using children, actions
which clearly constitute breaches of international
humanitarian law and which the Government and all
Colombians radically reject. Colombia would like to
thank States Members of the United Nations and the
Organization itself for showing understanding and
respect for that policy, which will continue to be in place
until the illegal armed groups operating in our country
modify their behaviour and comply with international
norms.

I would like to clarify that Colombia fully
understands that compliance with international
humanitarian law by non-State armed groups is
essential in order to effectively protect civilians, and we
advocate for this. Nevertheless, the existence or absence
of engagement on the part of the United Nations with
these groups is not a decisive factor in the application
of the rules governing armed conflicts.

Focusing on the possibility of engagements of
certain actors with illegal armed groups simply diverts
attention from the truly fundamental issue - the lack of
political will to comply with international humanitarian
law. An effective guarantee of the rights of civilians
during hostilities does not require engagement with
non-State groups, but rather the decision on the part
of those parties, either to abandon altogether the use
of violence and pursue their goals through democratic
debate, or, if they decide to persist in their armed
struggle, to comply with international humanitarian
law.

It is worth noting that the Government of Colombia
has always appreciated and welcomed the commendable
work carried out by the International Committee
of the Red Cross as a facilitator in the liberation of
individuals kidnapped by illegal armed groups. During
the past 18 years, the Government of Colombia, acting
in close cooperation with the International Committee
of the Red Cross and in many cases with the support of
friendly Governments and civil society organizations,
has made it possible for more than 1,500 people to
regain their freedom.

My Government also understands and shares the
concern about the issue of humanitarian access and
agrees with the proposal that the alternatives stated
in the Secretary-General's report aimed at reaching
people in need of humanitarian assistance - such as the
temporary cessation of hostilities, humanitarian pauses,
humanitarian corridors, de-confliction arrangements
and days of tranquillity - must be tailored to suit the
particular circumstances of each conflict.

Colombia would therefore welcome an open-ended
and objective debate on the constraints on humanitarian
access. A serious analysis in that regard could not fail
to show that international humanitarian law imposes
the adaptation of military efforts to humanitarian
imperatives, but it does not rule out that such efforts may
have to contemplate some form of control for practical
security reasons on the transit of people and goods.
That includes the creation of reasonable conditions
allowing civilians effective exercise of their rights and
implies the existence of the safe environment needed to
facilitate access to humanitarian assistance.
Colombia supports the idea, expressed in the
Council's presidential statement of 22 November 2010
(S/PRST/2010/25), which calls for the protection of
civilians against violence, that the promotion of peace
processes and the establishment of sustainable peace
and development, as well as respect for human rights
and the rule of law, are of the utmost importance for the
protection of civilians.

Finally, allow me to say that Colombia, as a
200-year old democracy, has solid institutions with
a very complete and up-to-date legal framework. We
have spared no effort to improve and complement this
framework, as it is shown by our adoption of ambitious
initiatives to achieve peace and reconciliation. This is
the case for the transitional justice system embodied in
Colombia's Justice and Peace Act of2005, which enabled
the demobilization and reintegration into society of over
30,000 combatants; the innovative mechanism for the
restitution of and the granting of reparations to victims
set out in the 2011 Act on Victims; and a constitutional
amendment approved just a few days ago through which
a new legal framework for peace is to be established.

The Government of Colombia has adopted clear
policies aimed at maintaining public order and
achieving peace and security, which are compatible
with our international obligations and are in line
with the objective of protecting civilians. I apologize,
Mr. President, for speaking longer than usual.

