Ms. Del Ponte (spoke in French): Eight years
ago, when I was first appointed Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we lived in a different world in which
international justice and the International Tribunal had
a long road ahead of them. Who at that time would
have believed that one day, we would see the arrest of
a former head of State? Since then, international justice
and the International Tribunal have made considerable
progress. Indeed, during my two mandates as
Prosecutor, we have succeeded in arresting 91 persons.

In mid-September, my mandate as Prosecutor will
come to an end. This is therefore the last time that I
will address the Security Council in my capacity as
Prosecutor of the International Tribunal. Here, I wish
to express my sincere gratitude and thanks for the
support that the Council has provided to the Tribunal,
to international justice and to me personally during the
past few years.

(spoke in English)

Members will have received my written
assessment of the completion strategy. Thus, I will now
highlight a few points set out in the report and address
recent developments that have occurred since the
issuance of the written report.

We have come a long way towards achieving the
goal set for the International Tribunal, namely, the
prosecution of the most senior leaders responsible for
the most serious crimes committed on the territory of
the former Yugoslavia after 1991. During these years, I
have undertaken investigations of crimes committed in
conflicts in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo
and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
During my terms, as I indicated earlier, 91 accused
have been transferred to The Hague, while as of this
date four remain at large. Fifty-nine persons have been
convicted in the first instance, including as recently as
last week. A number of those cases are still on appeal.
Moreover, the Appeals Chamber has confirmed the
convictions of 37 persons. Currently, we are
conducting six first-instance trials, with 25 accused,
and are awaiting judgements for three other accused.
Only 11 accused are still at the pre-trial stage. In
addition, there are five appeals pending, involving 11
accused.

While trials and appeals are progressing and
nearing completion, there is a sense that a significant
degree of justice will have been brought to the victims
of the conflicts that raged throughout the region.
However, many victims will feel that that was not
enough, and they will be right. There are numerous
mid- and lower-level perpetrators who could not be
tried in The Hague because of the International
Tribunal's completion strategy. I have been working
intensively with authorities in Belgrade, Sarajevo,
Zagreb and Skopje to transfer knowledge and evidence
that we possess pertaining to hundreds of other
suspects.

Although we have seen some progress in
domestic prosecutions, I advise the international
community to remain vigilant. The temptation of the
respective Governments to interfere in these processes
is still very present. Thorough monitoring of all
domestic war crimes proceedings remains imperative.
The Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) has proved to be the institution best
suited to carrying out this important function. I
therefore call upon the Council to provide its full
backing to that regional organization. Since the
question of whether the OSCE should continue to
monitor trials in Croatia is being debated, I wish to
reaffirm the importance of the monitoring process
carried out by the OSCE and recommend that it pursue
that activity in Zagreb.

The fact that four persons remain at large -
including, in particular, Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic i is a permanent stain on our work. We
believe that those fugitives are currently in Serbia or
within its reach. I should inform members, however,
that my Office has no information regarding the current
whereabouts of Radovan Karadzic's. It is troubling that
Radovan Karadzic has disappeared from the radar
screens of the relevant services, and it seems that no
one is actively searching for him. I am, however,
convinced that relevant States in the region have the
means to locate and arrest him.

In the past few weeks, we have observed general
progress in Serbia's level of cooperation with the
International Tribunal, in particular with the Office of
the Prosecutor. I was in Belgrade, upon the invitation
of President Boris Tadie, to discuss and assess Serbia's
cooperation with the International Tribunal. During my
stay, I met with senior political leaders and
Government officials, including the President, the
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister. I also
had meetings at the operational level to discuss in
detail plans to locate and arrest fugitives.

During the visit, authorities at various levels
expressed a clear commitment to provide all the
assistance necessary to locate and arrest the remaining
fugitives. New structures have been put in place, aimed
at centralizing all activities to apprehend fugitives.
Thus, for instance, shortly after the new Government
was formed, a National Security Council was
established; it is chaired by the President and will be
the central organ dealing with fugitive issues. The
National Security Council has already convened and, at
its first meeting, has reaffirmed that its priority is to
cooperate with the International Tribunal by arresting
fugitives.

Moreover, on 31 May, thanks to the cooperation
between Serbia and Republika Srpska, Zdravko Tolimir
was arrested and transferred to The Hague. Following
that arrest, just over this past weekend, Serbia worked
directly with us to locate Vlastimir Djordjevic, in
Montenegro. Montenegrin authorities subsequently
arrested him and transferred him to The Hague, where
he is now in the custody of the Tribunal.

Those arrests demonstrate Serbia's commitment
to cooperate fully with my Office. I should also point
out that, in the past few weeks, Serbia has responded to
most of the pending requests for assistance, and my
Office is at this moment studying the material we have
received. The backlog of outstanding and partially
responded to requests since March this year has been
reduced from more than 250 to less than 50. That
illustrates the recent positive developments in Serbia's
level of cooperation with my Office. Over the coming
weeks, my Office will closely scrutinize Serbia's level
of assistance, as I still demand its full cooperation,
which includes the provision of full access to
documents and the arrest and transfer of the
fugitives- in particular Ratko Mladic - to The
Hague.

I would like once more to emphasize, as I have
done in my previous reports to the Council, that the
continuing impunity enjoyed by Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic gravely undermines all efforts to
bring justice to the victims. That impunity also
seriously affects the credibility of the International
Tribunal, which was mandated to prosecute those most
responsible for the most serious violations committed
in the former Yugoslavia. As the Council is considering
pending regional issues - in particular the future
status of Kosovo - I hope that any such decision and
the timing thereof will not undermine ongoing efforts
to arrest and locate fugitives.

In December 2005, during my appearance before
the Council (see S/PV.5328), I explained the reasons
why Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic were still at
large. At times, I could sense that our work was
hampered because the political convenience of the
moment was interfering with the administration of
justice and with the fulfilment of the International
Tribunal's mandate. The International Tribunal has had
to rely on political bodies, States or even military
alliances to obtain access to key evidence.
Unfortunately, cooperation was not always
forthcoming, and we were not always successful in
securing that crucial evidence.

States and organizations present on the ground
have at times been hesitant openly to assist the
International Tribunal. While in certain cases accused
were arrested and surrendered immediately, in other
cases fears of alleged political and security instability
permitted those indictees to remain free. Indeed, the
international community missed clear opportunities in
the period 1995 to 1998 to arrest Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic. Today, as the clock is ticking, we
need this international assistance more than ever. As
experience has shown, the Council, the European
Union, other regional organizations and States can
provide strong incentives for States of the former
Yugoslavia finally fully to cooperate with the
International Tribunal. The Completion Strategy in
itself is a strong encouragement for some to do nothing
and wait until the International Tribunal closes its
doors. I trust that the necessary action will be
undertaken to prevent that tactic from succeeding.

As to other States in the region, Croatia's level of
cooperation has been generally satisfactory. Recently,
my Office has, together with the Croatian authorities,
been able to solve certain problems encountered during
the preparation of the trial against Ante Gotovina and
his co-accused. I am hopeful that the commitment of
the Croatian Government to resolve effectively any
issues emerging in this cooperation during the pre-trial
and trial phases will be unequivocally affirmed in
future.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's level of cooperation
with my Office has progressed over the past months
and is now also at a generally satisfactory level. There
are clear indications that progress has been made and
that coordination between the State and entity levels in
targeting the fugitives' support network is improving. I
also welcome the important role played by Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and in particular the Republika Srpska, in
facilitating the arrest and transfer of Zdravko Tolimir
to The Hague recently.

Finally, I am appreciative of the role played by
Montenegrin authorities in the arrest and transfer of
Vlastimir Djordjevic. In both the Tolimir and
Djordjevic cases, the arrests are the concrete result of
increased cooperation at the regional level between the
various State authorities.

Despite the difficulties, I believe that we have
nonetheless achieved an important degree of justice, as
the number of convicted high-level individuals shows.
Only 11 cases remain at the pre-trial stage, and those
are expected to commence sometime within the next
year. Four persons remain at large.

The International Tribunal is often criticized
because it is apparently too slow or inefficient.
However, over the past four years, there has been a
great quantitative and qualitative leap forward in our
judicial work. The management of pre-trial processes
has greatly improved. Some of the International
Tribunal's judges are taking a more active stance,
which I certainly welcome. More written evidence is
being admitted and more adjudicated facts are being
accepted. The prosecution, being the engine of any
trial, is making continuous efforts to make proceedings
as effective and efficient as possible while preserving
the rights of the victims and the defence.

I have taken the liberty of focussing on some of
the issues that, in my view, deserve to be addressed so
as to enhance the credibility and efficiency of
international judicial processes. Please do not
misunderstand me. The International Tribunal has
made impressive achievements. All the judges,
prosecutors, registrars and staff members who have
been working for the International Tribunal since 1993
deserve credit for its successes. There are only a few
more years to go. To build upon what has been
achieved thus far, it is essential that continuity be
ensured at the helm of the Office of the Prosecutor. My
successor should be immediately operational so as
further to foster the efficiency of the trial work and to
make it possible to continue to track remaining
fugitives. Of course, I hope that, given the recent
arrests made and Serbia's commitment, we will soon
see the end of the issue of fugitives.

I now turn to the members of the Council,
because it is to the Security Council that the
international community, the public and the victims
will turn to take the necessary measures to redress
injustice. They will turn to the Council to call for the
arrest of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic. I trust
that the Council will take the action that is required
and give us the support needed to successfully carry
out our mandate.

(spoke in French)

Mr. President, I should like to take this
opportunity to express my heartfelt gratitude for your
country's commitment to international justice. I should
like also to commend the pioneering role that Belgium
has been playing in this area. I was particularly
appreciative of your country's active role in supporting
the International Tribunal throughout its existence and
the courageous stands taken regarding it. Allow me
also, Mr. President, to thank your Minister for Foreign
Affairs for his support and his confidence in the work
that we are doing.

I should like to conclude by calling on the
Council to continue the struggle against impunity by
using its power to ensure the proper functioning of
international criminal justice. I call on the Council to
continue to support the International Tribunal and my
successor, so that they can successfully complete the
mission that the Council has entrusted to them.

Finally, in my personal capacity, I should like to
express my sincere gratitude for the Council's support
and for the confidence that it has shown in me during
my mandate as Prosecutor.

