Mr. Mladenov: Jerusalem is one of the most
complex, and perhaps captivating, cities in the world.
Of all the final-status issues in the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict as identified in the Oslo Accords - refugees,
settlements, security arrangements, borders, relations
and cooperation with other neighbours and other
issues of common interest - Jerusalem is the most
emotionally charged and difficult subject.

For the Jewish people, it is, and will always be, the
centre of their faith and life. For centuries, they have
looked to it as a symbol of hope for the future. It is
also the centre of life for Palestinians and, since the
occupation of East Jerusalem in 1967, many have lived
in fear of losing their livelihoods and their connection
to the city. For both Israelis and Palestinians, Jerusalem
is, and will always remain, an integral part of their
national identity. For billions of people around the
world, it also serves as a symbol and a cornerstone of
their Christian, Jewish or Muslim faiths. That is why it
remains one of the most sensitive places in the world.

For decades, there has been broad agreement among
Member States about the particular status of Jerusalem,
including through resolutions 252 (1968), 476 (1980) and
478 (1980), as well as General Assembly resolution 181
(II). The United Nations has repeatedly declared that
any unilateral decision that seeks to alter the character
and status of Jerusalem could seriously undermine
the current peace efforts and may have repercussions
across the region. As stated by the Secretary-General,
the United Nations position is clear: Jerusalem is a
final-status issue, for which a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution must be achieved through negotiations
between the parties and on the basis of the relevant
United Nations resolutions and mutual agreements.

On 6 December, United States President Donald
Trump announced that the United States recognized
Jerusalem as the capital of the State of Israel. In that
recognition, he said that final-status issues, including
the boundaries of Israeli sovereignty, remained for the
parties to determine. He made clear his commitment
to advancing peace between Israelis and Palestinians
and called for the status quo at the holy places to be
respected. The announcement also signalled the start of
preparations to move the United States Embassy from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, while renewing the six-month
waiver by which the Embassy remains in Tel Aviv.

Without doubt, that decision has been widely
welcomed in Israel. It has also caused much anger
among Palestinians and anxiety across the Middle East
and beyond. Palestinian President Abbas condemned the
move and stressed that the United States had withdrawn
from its role as a mediator in the peace process. He
warned of the potential consequences for security
and stability in the region and underlined the need to
immediately work towards national reconciliation.
Hamas described the proclamation as an attack against
the Palestinian people and called on the Palestine
Liberation Organization to withdraw its recognition
of Israel. In Israel, Prime Minister Netanyahu thanked
President Trump for the decision. He reaffirmed his
commitment to maintaining the status quo at the holy
sites, while President Rivlin said that Jerusalem was
not an obstacle to peace.

I am particularly concerned about the potential risk
of a violent escalation. In anticipation of the United
States decision, Palestinian factions called for three
days of rage to take place from 6 to 8 December. Some
called for 8 December to be the start ofa new uprising,
or intifada.
Since the decision, we have seen widespread
demonstrations and violent clashes between Palestinian
protesters and Israeli security forces throughout the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and
Gaza. According to the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, at least one Palestinian was
killed and more that 140 have been injured. There have
also been protests in Arab cities and villages within
Israel, as well in cities around the region and beyond,
from Lebanon and Jordan to Malaysia and Bangladesh.

On 7 December, six rockets were reportedly
fired from Gaza towards Israel. All but one landed
short of Israel, without causing damage or injury. The
Israel Defense Forces responded by shelling a Hamas
military installation in the Gaza Strip and by bombing
another from the air, causing damage but no injuries.
We continue to follow developments on the ground
very closely.

We all understand and respect the symbolic,
religious and emotional charge that Jerusalem holds for
people across the region and beyond. Nevertheless, I
urge all political, religious and community leaders to
refrain from provocative action and rhetoric that could
lead to escalation. I call on all of them to exercise
restraint and to engage in dialogue.

It is now more important than ever that we preserve
the prospects for peace. It will be ordinary Israelis and
Palestinians - their families and their children - who
will ultimately have to live with the human costs and
the suffering caused by further violence. They will
look to their leaders to find the strength and the will to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace that addresses
all final-status issues, that ends the occupation of
Palestinian territory that started in 1967 and that brings
security and stability to both Israelis and Palestinians.

The United Nations remains strongly committed to
supporting all efforts to achieve a negotiated two-State
solution. That is the only way to achieve the legitimate
national aspirations of both Israelis and Palestinians.
That point has been clearly reaffirmed by Secretary-
General Guterres. I again stress his view that there is
no plan B for the two-State solution. Palestinian and
Israeli leaders, as well as the international community,
have an important responsibility to advance peace
efforts to that end. Only through constructive dialogue
can we hope to achieve peace. I call on all parties to

remain engaged.

Today we stand at another critical moment in the
long-running history ofthe conflict. We are yet to see if
the prospects for peace can be preserved and advanced.
It is up to us all in the international community, as much
as it is up to Israeli and Palestinian leaders, to urgently
advance ajust and lasting resolution ofthe conflict. The
Secretary-General clearly stated that realizing a two-
State solution with Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and Palestine is the only way that such a Vision can be
achieved. I have warned many times in the past - and
I will do so again today - that ifthe Israeli-Palestinian
conflict is not resolved in line with relevant United
Nations resolutions and in a manner that meets the
legitimate national aspirations of both peoples, it risks
being engulfed into the vortex of religious radicalism
that has taken over the Middle East. There is a serious
risk today that we may see a chain of unilateral actions
that can only push us further away from achieving a
shared goal of peace. In the coming days, it will be
critical that leaders demonstrate their wisdom and make
every effort to reduce the rhetoric, prevent incitement
and rein in radical elements.

In its 2016 report (S/2016/595, annex) the Middle
East Quartet called for steps to reverse negative trends
that undermine the two-State solution, so as to build
the conditions necessary for successful final-status
negotiations. Today that call remains as valid as ever.
I urge the international community to fulfil its historic
responsibility to support the parties in achieving
peace and a comprehensive agreement. The Secretary-
General and the United Nations are committed to
supporting Palestinian and Israeli leaders in returning
to meaningful negotiations in order to achieve a
lasting and just peace for both peoples. We remain
deeply committed to working with the parties and
with our international and regional partners to realize
that objective.

