Mr. Eler (Turkey): At the outset, I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very
timely debate.

It has been seven years since the adoption of the
landmark resolution 1738 (2006), which identifies
the issue of the protection of journalists in armed
conflict as a matter of international peace and security.
Unfortunately, recent statistics indicate that journalists
and media workers in armed conflict continue to be
killed, tortured, detained, targeted, wounded, harassed
and kidnapped.

The stories, personal experiences and images
brought to us by journalists from the frontlines serve
to remind us all of the human consequences of conflict.
They help us remember that protecting international
peace and security is a crucially important task that
affects the lives, livelihoods and future of millions
of civilians suffering in war. Journalists help expose
illegal and inhuman practices in conflicts and bring
suffering and abuse to light. They help the international
community by providing crucial facts in their effort to
prevent conflict and influence world opinion.

The important and honourable work of journalists
and media workers is often undertaken in the most
dangerous circumstances. Their vital functions increase
their vulnerability, and they are sometimes deliberately
targeted for their reporting.

The most recent example is the Syrian crisis.
Turkey, as a neighboring country, has become a hub
hosting journalists on their way to cover the conflict in
Syria, and does its best to help media workers conduct
their professional duties and facilitate their passage to
and from Syria. Turkey also does its utmost to grant
access to journalists wishing to report on Syrian
camps in Turkey, helping them acquire the necessary
permission and providing them with informative
briefings. Since 2011, 406 delegations of foreign
journalists have been received in the public areas of
the camps, where they have been allowed to film and
conduct interviews. In addition, Turkey has extended
a helping hand to domestic and foreign journalists who
have been kidnapped or wounded, most recently in
Syria and Libya.

I would like to note that legal and administrative
gaps persist in addressing the issue of the protection
of journalists at the national and international levels,
along with problems related to implementation and
enforcement.

Turkey expresses its appreciation for all efforts
undertaken by the United Nations and its agencies
in this area and commends the Security Council for
keeping the issue on its agenda. I would also like to take
this opportunity to stress that a sustainable solution
to the protection of civilians and journalists can be
achieved only through conflict prevention. It is the
duty and responsibility of the international community
to act collectively and decisively to that end.

