The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ghana.

My delegation would like to thank the Secretary-
General for the comprehensive report (S/2007/608) he
has submitted pursuant to resolution 1770 (2007). We
would also like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lynn
Pascoe for his introduction and update on the report.
We also wish to thank Ambassador Zalmay Khalilzad
for his briefing on the Multinational Force in Iraq
(MNF-I).

By resolution 1770 (2007), the Council expanded
the role of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (UNAMI) in the political and reconciliation
processes, while the Multinational Force maintained its
lead role in maintaining peace and security in the
country. The situation in Iraq remains challenging and
the degree of success in UNAMI's work will largely
depend on the willingness of Iraqis themselves to bury
their differences for the sake of peace. In that regard,
Ghana is encouraged by the series of legislative
initiatives that the Iraqi leadership announced on
26 August 2007, aimed at breaking the impasse in the
political process. We are also encouraged by the effort
by the Constitutional Review Committee to submit its
final report to the Council of Representatives by the
end of this year.

Ghana welcomes the steps taken by the
Secretary-General, including his meeting on
22 September 2007 with the participants of the
expanded neighbours' meetings - a meeting aimed at
mobilizing regional support and cooperation, which are
essential in facilitating the full and effective
implementation of the mandate of UNAMI - and the
progress of the International Compact with Iraq. In that
regard, we welcome the establishment of the Compact
secretariat, as well as the administrative and technical
support being provided on an interim basis by the
United Nations, the World Bank and other development
partners. My delegation further wishes to underscore
the importance of the six-month workplan being
developed to streamline the activities and
implementation of the International Compact for Iraq.

It is my delegation's expectation that the next
expanded meeting of Iraq's neighbours, which is to be
held in Istanbul, Turkey, will contribute to the
satisfactory resolution of issues relating to energy,
refugees and security - among other issues with far-
reaching regional and global repercussions.

In the light of recent ethnic tensions along Iraq's
borders, Ghana appeals to all sides to exercise
restraint, and calls on Iraq's neighbours to continue to
play constructive roles in the quest for durable peace in
the region.

In conclusion, Ghana remains concerned about
the political, security, economic, humanitarian and
human rights situation in Iraq. It wishes to commend
UNAMI's work in promoting an all-inclusive political
dialogue - including its support for the constitutional
and electoral processes in Iraq - in order to create an
enabling environment for addressing the challenges
confronting the people of Iraq. Ultimately peace,
reconciliation and unity in Iraq can only be achieved
and sustained by Iraqis themselves.

Finally, it is our hope that the collective
endeavours of UNAMI, the Multinational Force and
neighbouring States will lead to the outcome the people
of Iraq and the international community desire, namely,
stability, unity and reconciliation in Iraq, in the interest
of world peace and security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Iraq.

