Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): Today we are adding an intermediate element
to an important stage in the very detailed work that has
been done in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations since
last year's meeting at Annapolis. The process has not
been easy, and many factors have significantly
complicated it. But the fact that the parties have begun
in earnest to address the major issues for them is in fact
08-65213
a real step forward. We must secure and continue that
momentum towards peace. It is also essential to ensure
continuity and to continue the negotiations while
building on what has been achieved. The Quartet of
Middle East mediators participating at yesterday's
meeting all expressed those same views, as did
representatives of the League of Arab States during
contact, in New York.

We have a serious task before us today, namely,
to strengthen the continuity and irreversibility of the
political process through a resolution of the Security
Council and give that approach the strength of
international law. The adoption of the draft resolution
before us will, of course, not guarantee that the
situation will evolve only in the right direction. Much
will depend on whether it is possible for Israelis and
Palestinians themselves to develop and foster the
necessary preconditions to move ahead successfully.

Of particular importance are the draft resolution's
provisions calling for the full implementation by both
parties of their obligations under the Road Map. In that
regard we have in mind, of course, primarily the
security situation, not allowing any terrorist acts,
ending settlement activity and lifting the blockade and
restrictions on movement.

The draft resolution also underscores the crucial
need to allow the Arab Peace Initiative to work
effectively. It is especially important in the present
circumstances to restore the territorial and political
unity of Palestinian national administration as quickly
as possible. That is essential for strengthening the
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue and for ensuring the
viability of future final arrangements in the framework
of that dialogue.

The Israeli and Palestinian parties face a very
complex problem. It requires political will and
certainly courage. Members of the Quartet, meeting at
Sharm el-Sheikh with President Mahmoud Abbas and
Israeli Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, became convinced
that the negotiators have shown those qualities. We
expect that those who will continue the negotiations in
the future will also demonstrate those important
qualities.

Of course, progress is impossible without the
active support on the part of the international
community. Today's meeting demonstrates that such
support will in fact continue to be extended to the
parties as they aspire to peace. Russia will make its

contribution to the collective efforts to ensure peaceful
and sustainable development in the region. Only by
working together and by respecting the internationally
recognized legal basis can we achieve a just, lasting
and comprehensive peaceful resolution.

Along with our partners, we will take every step
necessary to ensure that the international meeting on
the Middle East that has been scheduled for 2009 in
Moscow marks as an important step forward. We shall
also work to ensure that it serves to accelerate the
process to reach an agreement, which is the goal of the
draft resolution before the Security Council today.

