Mr. Cardi (Italy): I would like to thank the High
Representative for his briefing and reiterate our support
for his work.

Italy aligns itself with the statement to be made
later on behalf of the European Union.

At the outset, allow me to emphasize that the
future of Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the European
Union. The country has made significant steps forward
during the past year, thereby demonstrating its ability
to find unity of intent and capacity to embark upon
difficult but necessary structural reforms. The reform
agenda, which was developed with the assistance
of the European Union and international financial
institutions, has outlined the key areas of action to
trigger development and consolidate the stability of
the country. Nevertheless, the recent failure to adapt
key legislative reforms required by the International
Monetary Fund risks jeopardizing the results achieved.

We call on all institutions and political forces to
stay committed to the reform process and maintain
momentum towards the fulfilment of political and
economic goals. Such reforms are needed, first and
foremost by, the people. The political leadership will
be held accountable based on the results that it delivers
to its citizens.

I underscore that the reform agenda has paved
the way for the country to present a formal request of
accession to the European Union. We look forward to
the finalization of the questionnaire of the European
Commission and encourage the authorities to keep
this goal in focus and achieve it through efficient
coordination of all institutional levels.

This is indeed a crucial time for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. For that reason, we urge all institutions
and political forces to refrain from raising issues that
could divert attention from the reform agenda and the
European track. Recent political tensions must be set
aside. Any dispute should be addressed through frank
and inclusive dialogue and by abiding fully with the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in full respect
for and cooperation with the institutions established
therein, starting with the Constitutional Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We expect that the discussion on the Election Law
will be addressed as much as possible in a consensual
way, without endangering the institutional architecture,
and with the aim of establishing a functional legal
framework for the elections in autumn 2018. At the
same time, it is important to consider how the need for
institutional reform represents an important step that
Bosnia will be called on to fully accomplish in the future
in the perspective of the European integration path.

Ethnic divisions are still entrenched in Bosnian
society. We call on all the authorities to tackle them
and to focus on the many needs of the Bosnian people.
The citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, especially the
youngest, do not need divisive rhetoric. They deserve
concrete opportunities to build the future in their own
country. They want to be recognized as enjoying the
same rights and freedoms as all European citizens.
From outside, we will continue to provide support along
with the European Union.

Secondly, I would like to add that the regional
dimension is of the utmost importance. Integration and
cooperation among Western Balkan countries is key
to their stabilization and development and conducive
to their European path. It will strengthen mutual
confidence, improve connectivity and freedom of
movement, develop the private sector and encourage
youth mobility. That is true especially for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. As Chair of the Western Balkan process
in 2017, Italy is engaged in a fruitful dialogue with all
Western Balkan countries to identify with them their
priorities to boost regional integration. Bosnia and
Herzegovina is actively contributing, as it has already
proved by hosting a regional summit last March in
preparation of the annual Western Balkan summit that
Italy will host in Trieste on 12 July. We are committed
to making this entire process meaningful and beneficial
to these countries. In a few days, on 24 May, we will
host another preparatory ministerial meeting in Rome.

In conclusion, our support to Bosnia and
Herzegovina is driven by respect for its sovereignty and
territorial integrity, as enshrined in the Dayton Peace
Agreement; our full support to the European Union-led
peacekeeping force Althea, authorized by the Council;
and our staunch commitment to accompanying the
path Bosnia and Herzegovina has chosen towards the
European Union. In that regard, we urge the country
to redouble its efforts to take forward the 5+2 agenda
established by the Peace Implementation Council for
the closure of the Office of High Representative and to
steadily advance in approaching the European Union.

As the country's stability continues to strengthen
and further progress is achieved on reforms and
on the European Union path, we look forward to
continuing, in the appropriate forum, the discussion
with the international community on the possible
reconfiguration of the international presence.

