Mr. Bila: My name is Mohammed Bila. I am
a remote sensing expert in the Lake Chad Basin
Commission, in N'Djamena. I have been working in
the Komadugu-Yobe basin in Nigeria since 1990 as a
hydrologist at the Federal Ministry of Water Resources
in Abuja. I have been in the service of the Lake Chad
Basin Commission since April 2002.

My briefing today is going to focus on climate
variability and its impact on the vulnerability of the
Lake Chad basin, and on what the United Nations can
do to reduce the general vulnerability of the region.
To help in understanding the situation, I will share
my experience from a community that survives on
cultivating the lake floor and then on four communities
that used to depend on the shoreline of the Lake
Chad but are now 10 kilometres away from the lake
and depend on sharing the river Komadugu-Yobe for
their livelihood.

The years 1983 and 1984 proved to be the driest
in Borno in recent history. The minor tributaries of
Lake Chad - the rivers Yobe, Yedseram and the El
Beid - were dry and the level of Lake Chad fell three
metres below the critical level for the pumping station
at Kirinowa. Consequently, the South Chad Irrigation
Project (SCIP) could not irrigate any land from 1984
to 1986. The lake floor became a refuge and offered
an opportunity to farm workers from the South Chad
Irrigation Project to cultivate beans and maize. In 1985,
there were 25,000 people living in 49 villages along the
western portion of Lake Chad in Nigeria. In 2010, the
population in the central part of the north basin was
estimated to be 56,421, living in 387 villages on the lake
floor. Lake-floor cultivation of crops using the residual
soil moisture, which began around 1985 or 1986, is one
of the methods of adaptation to drought and deprivation
for the communities around Lake Chad.

One of the villages located near the border tripoint
marker between the Niger, Nigeria and Chad is Kaukiri.
In 2010, there was an estimated population of 1,425
of largely lake-floor farmers of beans and maize in
the village. The local produce market brings together
farmers, livestock herders and traders from all three
countries. In July 2010, when I was on a mission, the
traditional chief reported that for the previous three
years, the usual recession moisture farming could not
take place because the Komadugu-Yobe river did not
bring water to the farmlands around Kaukiri. There
was no evidence that those three years of failure in
agriculture and loss of livelihood for all island villages
around Kaukiri were noticed or supported by local
authorities or local community-based organizations.
As of today, no authority can detect if a similar
disaster is occurring because there is only one water-
level measurement station in the whole 25,000 square
kilometres of Lake Chad's old shoreline, located in
Bol, Chad. In general, the environmental monitoring
network in the Lake Chad basin is inadequate, sparse
and poorly funded and operated.

Malam Fatori and Kaniram, in Nigeria, and Bosso
and Mamouri, in the Niger, are riparian settlements of the
Komadugu-Yobe river, which forms the border between
the Niger and Nigeria. Prior to the Sahel droughts,
all four settlements were located on the Lake Chad
shoreline, but the shrinking of Lake Chad has reduced
the communities to competing for the seasonal flow of
the Komadugu-Yobe river for dry-season agriculture.
The competition for the river has led to claims and
counterclaims of river diversion by the communities
on both sides of the border, and the loss of livelihoods
may have led to the build-up of social tension among
young people prior to the outbreak of the insurgency
in 2012. While the Niger-Nigerian mixed commission
has established a mechanism for consultations on the
development of new water abstraction at the national
level to prevent a further build-up of social tension,
similar cross-border cooperation in local water
governance could help with conflict management and
the reduction of social tension among young people.

Those examples are two of the possibly many
incidences that occur across the Lake Chad basin region
that are not noticed on the national level because our
national water-governance mechanism is not structured
to capture such information or respond to it. Equally, at
the regional and global levels, climate variability and

its impact on the loss oflivelihood were not noticed due
to deficiencies at the lower levels of water governance.

An obvious solution to the poor water management
that has led to the loss of livelihoods and the rising
tensions is to restructure the water governance
mechanism to operate in a participatory manner at the
local level, with input from resource user groups. User-
group capacities should include resource monitoring
and reporting as a concurrent activity associated with
resource exploitation.
At the regional level, the solution must acknowledge
the link between local environmental degradation
and the recurrent Sahel drought. The environmental
challenges facing the Lake Chad basin are connected
to the challenges of climate change faced by the Sahel
region of Africa. The Sahel is increasingly facing
extreme variability of climate resulting in frequent
droughts, short-duration, high-intensity rainfall,
desertification, water scarcity, land degradation and
ultimately, food insecurity. Consequently, addressing
the climatic root causes of local challenges through
risk assessment and management will require a similar
solution at the Sahel regional level.

Future threats linked to climate risks will continue
to exist in the Lake Chad basin and other regions of
the world currently facing fragility related to climate
risks. The Security Council is unique in its position not
only to stop current conflicts, but also to prevent future
conflict through climate diplomacy, based on early
warning and risk assessment reports by other United
Nations agencies in the field.

Over the past two weeks, the Lake Chad Basin
Commission has participated in an integrated joint
mission with the United Nations, non-governmental
organizations, researchers and development partners
coordinated by the United Nations Development
Programme to the Lac region of the Republic of Chad.
During the mission, we were informed that in the Lac
region, there are 120 polders that could be developed
for year-round agriculture. We saw how women's
community-based organizations are using the polders
for vegetable gardens, and we heard the young people's
request for dams to be built as a management mechanism
to exploit more of those polders. Such community-
based organizations could be created around each
polder or resource user group and provided with the
requisite training and equipment to monitor and report
the water level to supplement the lack of information at
the national and regional levels.

National and local-level information and assessment
could be aggregated annually by the United Nations
country teams and then integrated in the reporting of
the regular briefings delivered by the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa
(UNOCA). Global-level early warning could be issued
by the Security Council as the need arises to serve as
a basis for measures integrating climate adaptation,
cooperation in water governance, conflict prevention
and management, enhancing livelihood resilience and
global security. I have three recommendations for the
Security Council.

First, a participatory system of local water
governance should be introduced into the Lake Chad
basin as a priority. Secondly, climate-security risk
assessment and reporting from the conflict affected
zones of the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin should be
included in the regular briefings given by UNOWAS
and UNOCA to the Security Council. Thirdly, in
view of the projection of continuing global warming
within conflict-affected regions, climate-security risk
assessment and reporting from the local, national and
regional levels should be aggregated and presented
to the Security Council to serve as early warning for
conflict-prevention advice to United Nations Members
and for integrating climate adaptation, cooperation in
water governance, conflict prevention and management,
enhancing livelihood resilience and the global security
of the planet.

