Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank you, Mr. President, and
the entire Chilean team for the work you carried out
in January. You have begun this year very well, with a
heavy programme combining a useful field mission in
Haiti and a dense and productive agenda in New York.
Moreover, we were honoured by the presence of the
President of Chile, Ms. Bachelet Jeria, in the Council.

January 2015 will remain forever in the collective
memory of the French people. The terrorist attack
against the newspaper Charlie Hebdo, the crimes that
followed it against the representatives of the security
forces, and then the anti-semitic attack at the Hyper
Casher market were deeply shocking for France and
the rest of the world. On behalf of my country, I would
like to once again thank the United Nations for its
exemplary support through the statement (SC/ 11727)
issued by the Security Council on 7 January, through
the minute of silence observed by the Council and
through the commitment of the Secretary-General, who
came to express his support to us in the French Mission
in New York, as well as the representatives of so many
of Council members' countries for their expressions of
solidarity.

The attacks underscore the extent to which, in
an interdependent world, the security of all of us is a
common good. More than ever, peace and stability in
the Middle East cannot be disassociated from those of
Europe. More than ever, France is committed to the
future of the Middle East. In that connection, the current
political crisis in Yemen has created a power vacuum in
which Al-Qaida in the Arabian Peninsula is prospering.
In that context, we reaffirm our support for the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
aimed at promoting the establishment of a Government
of national unity and the continuation of the process of
political transition. Those conditions are necessary to
continue combatting terrorism in that country.

Early 2015 has also been marked by the rapid
deterioration of the situation in Ukraine and the
renewal of combat by separatists supported by Russia,
in violation of the ceasefire and the Minsk agreements,
which they committed to uphold last September. The
attacks carried out by separatists these past few days,
and in particular the offensive launched in Mariupol,
seemed to indicate that they were deliberately targeting
civilians. As the Secretary-General recalled to the press
last Saturday, they could constitute serious violations
of international humanitarian law. It is urgent to
de-escalate the situation and to put the political process
back on track. That will require a more constructive
attitude on the part of Russia, which needs to stop
supporting the separatists, in particular by supplying
them with weapons.

There can be no military solution to the conflict.
The Minsk agreements of September 2014 remain the
only basis for a lasting solution to the conflict. France
continues to mobilize and will continue its efforts
in close contact with its German partners and the
Ukrainian and Russian authorities in the framework of
the Normandy format meetings.

I shall now turn to the African crisis. The influence
of Boko Haram is spreading in Nigeria, as we saw in
January, and beyond to neighbouring countries. The
atrocities being committed are growing worse. The
humanitarian consequences are horrible and pose a
threat to the peace and stability of the region. In May
2014, the Paris summit warned about this phenomenon
and led to the mobilization and strengthening of
regional cooperation, as has been recalled by the
follow-up meetings, in particular the Niamey meeting
held on 20 January.

The next step is to make the Multinational Joint
Task Force operational without delay by developing a
concept of operations, a concept of logistics support,
rules of engagement and all other necessary documents,
as was agreed in Niamey. The decisions follow and
comply with the call launched by the Security Council
in an important presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/4)
adopted on the eve of the Niamey meeting. France,
like its partners, stands ready to consider a binding
resolution of the Security Council authorizing the
regional force on that basis.

In Mali, the escalation of fighting between
armed groups in recent weeks is very worrisome.
In implementing its mandate, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) had to use force on 20 January
against a rebel group - the Mouvement national pour
la liberation de l'Azawad - which was firing on the
city of Tabankort and on the MINUSMA camp. As
underscored by the majority of Council members
during consultations on 6 January, the deteriorating
security situation requires joint pressure on the part of
the international community on all parties to cease the
fighting, respect the ceasefire and resume the Algiers
negotiations without delay with a view to achieving
lasting and inclusive peace. Before the peace talks
resume in Algiers, we will propose a presidential
statement of the Council to demand, in the clearest
possible way, that the Malian parties return in good
faith and without delay to the path of peace.
January was an important month for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo; 2 January 4 the date of the
ultimatum established for the Forces democratiques
de libe'ration du Rwanda - marked the failure of
the disarmament process of that armed group. The
Council reacted immediately by holding an emergency
meeting to examine the situation and adopted a strong
presidential statement (S/PRST/2015/ 1) on the need to
take immediate action against that group. As we come
to the end of the month, we expect the authorities of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, now more than
ever, to assume their responsibilities and undertake
operations against the armed group.

The Council also met to discuss the findings of
the strategic review of the United Nations presence in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Fourteen years
on since the United Nations Organization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo deployed in
the country, we must step up efforts to ensure that
the mandate of the Mission, in particular in terms of
protecting civilians, is more actively and effectively
implemented. According to the recommendations of
the Department of Peacekeeping Operations, we need
a force that is more modern, mobile and responsive, but
also more determined, if we are to make a difference
on the ground and persuade the population of the added
value of our efforts.

The Council spoke forcefully on 22 January
regarding the riots in Kinshasa. We warmly welcome
the outcome of the crisis. However, we must remain
alert. We call once again for the legal framework and
timetable for the elections to be developed by consensus.

Finally, the first half of 2015 will be an important
period for the Central African Republic in its return
to stability and peace. We welcome the continuing
deployment of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), which should continue at a
steady pace. We also welcome the robust posture
that MINUSCA has already adopted and which it is
particularly important to strengthen in this period.

Major milestones are on the horizon as we
approach the Bangui Forum and the legislative and
presidential elections. They must allow us by August
2015 to inclusively complete the transition period
led by President Catherine Samba-Panza, with the
support of international partners and the tripartite
mediation led by President Denis Sassou Nguesso.
The Security Council must remain engaged to ensure
that these essential steps for the stabilization of the
Central African Republic succeed, that the timetable
is respected and that the efforts of all parties focus on
these same goals.

Achieving stabilization also means combating
impunity and respecting human rights. The report just
issued by the international investigation commission
makes an important contribution in that regard.

I conclude by thanking once again the Chilean
presidency and wishing the best of luck to China as it
takes over in February.

