The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

I, too, wish to thank the Deputy Secretary-General,
Mr. Jan Eliasson, and the Assistant Secretary-General,
Mr. Andrew Gilmour.

Any gross and systematic violation of human
rights is a threat to international peace and security.
Regrettably, this type of situation has been occurring
too often in too many places in the world, and the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea is no exception.
That is why Spain continues to support the ongoing
examination of this matter by the Security Council. I
will not dwell on the details, but naturally I am surprised
that a Government that is capable of modernizing its
arsenal at any cost should allow its people to suffer
continuous famines. I am even more surprised that
the State itself, which is responsible for the security
and protection of its citizens, is the principal cause of
their desperation.

The citizens of North Korea want to flee their
country. They seek liberty, dignity and respect and are
willing to risk their own lives to that end. They are even
prepared to risk summary execution. Some 80 per cent
of those who manage to get out are women, and they are
very often captured by human trafficking networks that
force them into prostitution or to marry abroad.

It is important to recall that progress has been made,
such as the issuance of reports on the implementation
of As we have seen in the report of the Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
But much more needs to be done.

The Security Council has not remained indifferent
to the suffering of the people of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. In resolution 2321 (2016), which was
adopted just a few weeks ago and is the latest to impose
sanctions against the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea, is a good example ofthat. But we must pursue our
work and remain aware that condemning human rights
violations is undoubtedly necessary but not sufficient.
Pressure must also be accompanied by dialogue. In that
spirit, I wish to highlight four elements that the Spanish
Mission considered to be key.

First, the Committee pursuant to resolution
1718 (2006), which has played a significant role as a
pressuring mechanism, has also been able to adopt
a banking channel to fund United Nations agencies
operating in that country.

Secondly, we must provide necessary support to
United Nations agencies working in the country. In that
regard, I highlight the work that the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights, which was opened
last year in Seoul, must undertake and is undertaking.

Thirdly, we must offer the necessary support to
civil society.

Fourthly, there is a need to send a very clear
message against impunity, but that cannot happen if
there is only one participant in the dialogue. The first
step must therefore be to enable to the long-blocked
visit of the Special Rapporteur and other human rights
mechanisms to the country.

Moreover, we must insist that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea shed light on the hundreds
of abductions, most of them of Japanese citizens, whose
whereabouts have not yet been identified. We can
achieve peace and stability in the region only when the
Pyongyang regime shoulders its responsibility for that
violation of the sovereignty of neighbouring States.

The situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea is extremely complex and requires
a multidimensional approach. It is our hope that this
meeting will serve to ensure that the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea responds to the cocnerns
that have been expressed today and finally ends its
internal human rights violations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

On behalf of Deputy Secretary-General Jan
Eliasson, I wish to offer his thanks to Council
members for their work and his apologies for having
had to leave the Chamber. The Deputy Secretary-
General is performing his duties as Acting Secretary-
General today.

I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.

