The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Australia, Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba,
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Egypt,
Iceland, Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya,
Malaysia, Norway, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, the
Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Turkey to
participate in this meeting.

I should like to inform the Council that I have
received a letter dated 23 January 2012 from the
Permanent Observer of Palestine to the United Nations,
which is contained in document S/2012/56 and which
reads as follows:

"I have the honour to request that, in
accordance with its previous practice, the
Security Council invite the Permanent Observer
of Palestine to the United Nations to participate
in the meeting of the Security Council which is to
be held on Tuesday, 24 January 2012, regarding
the situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question."

I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to
participate in the meeting in accordance with the rules
of procedure and previous practice in this regard.

It is so decided.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco,
Assistant Secretary-General for Political Affairs, to
participate in this meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.

Under rule 39 of the Council's provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of
2
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, to
participate in this meeting.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I now give the floor to Mr. Fernandez-Taranco.

