We thank the Niger for convening today's important meeting and the briefers for their briefings. Today, we are putting a human face on our discussions on climate and security. We are encouraged by the progress of the international community's awareness on the issue and by the efforts of the majority of the members of the Security Council to keep the it on the agenda and explore different dimensions of what the Secretary- General has called the greatest threat to humankind. The Dominican Republic recognizes that the Security Council is faced with the challenge of considering an unconventional threat to international peace and security. However, in the light of the continued deterioration of the environment, it is obvious that new, natural enemies have become more frequent, disproportionate and fierce, positioning themselves as permanent violent affronts to millions of people. Of the 20 countries at the top of the list of regions most vulnerable to climate change, 60 per cent are currently in fragile and violent situations. In many cases, climate shocks can lead to development reversals and systemic breakdowns in essential services and undermine the ability of humanitarian actors to reach those in need or to anticipate such needs effectively. We stand with the millions of people and families that dedicate every day of their lives to farming, herding or fishing and have to live with the anxiety of seeing their incomes eroded and their livelihoods threatened by conflict, floods, droughts and other extreme weather events, leading them to displacement or other negative ways of coping. Far too often, conflicts themselves harm the environment and the essential civilian infrastructure on which people rely to survive. These are violations of international humanitarian law, and we must take every possible step to make parties to conflicts refrain from those actions. In addition, in times of conflict, adaptation efforts aimed at overcoming the immediate effects of climate change become less of a priority than is the striving to ensure the very security of people. Having recognized climate change and environmental degradation as major security-risk factors, the fact that those climate risks, when combined with armed conflict, make matters worse, not only for countries and regions affected, but also for the United Nations in its efforts to respond and effectively support them, makes it a priority for the Security Council to join efforts with other relevant United Nations organs to effectively address all dimensions of the climate crisis ina holistic, mutually reinforcing way. It is also critical to address these consequences while taking into account the existence of other issues, such as those related to gender, youth, children and the elderly, and especially internally displaced persons and refugees. We are currently experiencing a global health crisis. Accordingly, beyond the achievements made in the assessment of risk factors, the coronavirus disease pandemic has created new and unexpected circumstances to be considered when evaluating possible mechanisms that will allow us to prevent conflicts in the face of non-conventional threats. The Dominican Republic reiterates its commitment to making further progress on this topic so that together we can achieve a comprehensive human-centred vision and plan of action for resolving the problem. We emphasize the critical need to join forces in solidarity in order for the Security Council to address the adverse effects of climate change on international peace and security in its work. In this way, the response to armed conflicts will be considered from various angles - humanitarian, security and resilience-building - allowing for actions that address the complexity of the current circumstances and meet the challenges to achieving international peace and security.
