Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over
the Security Council. We welcome the new non-
permanent members of the Council, and express our
appreciation for the cooperation of those Council
members whose terms of office recently expired.

Last year, the sanctions Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) carried out a great
deal of work on ensuring the effective implementation
of restrictive measures introduced by the Security
Council against the Taliban and Al Qaeda. In this
context, particular mention should be made of the two
trips that, pursuant to paragraph 1 of resolution 1455
(2003), the Chairman of the Committee undertook to a
number of countries. The process of consultations held
by the Chairman was a first step towards establishing a
dialogue with individual Member States on various
aspects of the complex sanctions regime. That has
allowed us not just to monitor the situation on the
ground as it pertains to the implementation of the
Security Council's decisions, but also to examine the
specific difficulties that have arisen in the preservation
of the requirements involved. We are convinced that
such a practice of cooperation between the Committee
and Member States has shown itself to be tried and
true, and should therefore continue.

The Security Council will soon have to adopt a
new resolution to refine the parameters for the
sanctions regime. The work on the relevant decisions is
already under way. With regard reaching agreement on
a draft resolution, we believe that it will be important
for the Council to take into account the experience of
the sanctions Committee and the Monitoring Group,
which demonstrates that the effective restriction
measures need further clarification with regard to their
scope.

A more careful approach needs to be taken to the
consolidated list of individuals and organizations to
which sanctions are applied, and appropriate measures
should be taken not just by the sanctions Committee by
also by Member States themselves. We should not
forget that that list is one of the most effective
instruments that the Security Council has for
combating the threat to international peace and security
posed by terrorism.

Unfortunately, we must point out that the low
level of accountability of Member States under
paragraph 6 of resolution 1455 (2003) has had a
negative impact on the Council's ability to undertake a
comprehensive analysis of the observance by States of
the sanctions measures adopted by the Council.

In the final analysis, this makes it more difficult
to identify problems in the functioning of the current
sanctions regime, thereby reducing its effectiveness. As
we undertake further work in this field, we believe that
there should be a greater use of targeted and selective
approaches in determining those countries whose
efforts in carrying out sanctions require careful study.
At the same time, we would like such an approach to
be impartial and objective.

