Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset to express to you, Sir,
our thanks for immediately convening this meeting at
the request of the Syrian Arab Republic, Lebanon and
the Group of Arab States.

As this is the first open meeting of the month, we
congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency
and wish you every success in your stewardship.

We also thank Ambassador Sir Emyr Jones Parry,
Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom, and
the members of his delegation for their leadership of
the Council last month.

Allow me to begin by reading out the text of the
letter addressed by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Syrian Arab Republic to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations and the President of the Security
Council. The letter has not yet been officially
translated. Following my reading of the letter, I shall
make my official statement on the item on the agenda.

"I wish to advise you that the Israeli air
force, on the morning of Sunday, 5 October,
violated the Lebanese and Syrian airspaces and
committed an act of aggression by launching
guided missiles inside the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic. The target was a civilian site in
the village of Him Saheb, north-west of the
capital, Damascus. That act of aggression caused
physical damage.

"The Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic informs the Council of this flagrant
violation of Lebanese and Syrian air space and of
this aggression against the territory of the Syrian
Arab Republic in open defiance of the United
Nations Charter and the norms of international
law, and constituting a serious new escalation; it
requests an immediate meeting of the Security
Council to consider this Israeli aggression against
Syrian territory and to consider the measures that
the Council must take to deter the Government of
Israel from pursuing its provocative policy of
aggression against Syria.

"By its persistent aggression against the
Palestinians and by deliberately provoking the
broadening of the scope of that aggression to
include Syria and Lebanon, the present
Government of Israel is underscoring that it is a
Government of war, not a Government of peace.

"Syria is not incapable of establishing a
balance of resistance and deterrence that would
force Israel to reconsider its calculations. Syria
has exercised maximum self-restraint, because it
realizes that on many fronts Israel is provoking
pretexts to export its current domestic crisis to the
rest of the region, which would thus be exposed
to further escalation and volatility.

"Syria, which is at present a member of the
Security Council, believes that the Council is the
most appropriate forum to address, condemn and
halt this dangerous development, with a View to
preventing a repetition of such acts; this
development poses a threat to international peace
and security and exposes the already deteriorating
situation in the region to dire consequences that
could spiral out of control."

That letter was signed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Syrian Arab Republic.

I shall now make my statement on the item on the
Council's agenda. Permit me, Mr. President, to thank
you for convening this emergency meeting of the
Security Council, in response to the request of the
Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, to discuss
the flagrant Israeli military aggression within the
territory of the Syrian Arab Republic, targeting a
civilian site in the village of Ein Saheb north-west of
Damascus and causing physical damage.

Let me also express our satisfaction at the
statement issued by Secretary-General Kofi Annan,
strongly deploring this act of aggression and
expressing concern at the potential escalation of an
already tense and difficult situation in the region.

This unwarranted aggression - in flagrant
violation of the Charter of the United Nations, of
international law and of the 1974 Disengagement
Agreement between Syria and Israel - is a clear
manifestation of an Israeli policy based on aggression
and lack of respect for agreements. This Israeli
aggression targeting a Syrian village is a true and
precise embodiment of Israeli terrorism, while Israel
falsely claims to be fighting terrorism and standing
against it. Moreover, this terrorist act of aggression
provides further proof that the massacres committed by
Israel on the pretext of fighting so-called terrorism
reflect a big lie and an irrational, foolish claim, all used
in an attempt to justify the policy of colonialism and
settlement-building in violation of all the principles of
peace and security on which the United Nations was
founded, and running counter to the peace process that
began at Madrid in 1991.

The act of aggression that Israel committed
against Syria this morning is part of a strategic policy
adopted by the Israeli Government in order to escalate
tension in the Middle East, at a time when the
international community is pursuing efforts towards a
comprehensive, just peace in the Middle East that
would ensure peace and stability for all the peoples of
the region.

It has become abundantly clear to the entire world
that it is beyond belief that Syria - which has
respected and complied with the mission of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force since 1974, as
all the sponsors of the peace process and other world
leaders can attest - or the powerless Palestinians -
who lack weapons and who are languishing under
Israeli occupation and harsh oppression - could take
any action posing a threat to anyone, especially as it is
common knowledge that the Palestinian people lack an
army and a military arsenal anything like those
possessed by Israel.

For us, the question that comes immediately to
mind is how Israel can persuade the entire world that it
is a victim at a time when it forcibly occupies the
territory of others, lays siege to them, demolishes their
homes, uproots their crops and murders their children
rather than joining them at the negotiating table to
ensure the implementation of the legitimate rights of
all sides, in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations and the norms of international law.

This flagrant Israeli aggression is no isolated
incident. In fact, it was preceded by another Israeli
violation, committed - without justification or
provocation - on 2 January 2003 in the demilitarized
zone, which resulted in the death of a Syrian soldier.
The UNDOF report on this incident, following an
extensive investigation, found that there was no
justification for the crime and that Syria had exercised
maximum restraint, which averted an escalation of the
situation at that point.

It is strange that Israel should continue to violate
international agreements and to flout the Charter of the
United Nations, to the point where Arabs and many
other people around the world have come to believe
that Israel sees itself as above international law and as
acting beyond the jurisdiction of the resolutions
adopted by the Security Council.

It is very strange indeed that the Israeli
Government, after several decades of occupation,
bloodshed and the flouting of international law, does
not recognize that the path to peace lies in Israel's
implementation of relevant Security Council
resolutions on the Arab-Israeli conflict. All those
resolutions remain unimplemented and unrespected by
Israel.

Nonetheless, it is important to place on record
that Israel's past performance with regard to its respect
for international law and the resolutions of the United
Nations is not in the least honourable. Israel has defied
the United Nations and its resolutions from 1948 to
today. General Assembly resolution 181 (II) on the
Palestinian State has been dead letter since its
adoption. Resolution 194 (III) on the return of
Palestinian refugees has not been implemented except
insofar as Israel has challenged and denied it.
Resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), which seek to
achieve a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East, are contested, misinterpreted and distorted by
Israel.

On this basis, it is only logical that all Member
States, with the exception of Israel - which has
become a symbol of defiance of the United Nations and
its resolutions - should debate international legality
and the implementation of Security Council
resolutions. The current Government of Israel, through
its continued aggression against the Palestinians and its
broadening of the scope of that aggression to include
Syria and Lebanon, confirms de facto that it is a
Government of war and not a Government of peace.

I wish to stress and reiterate here in the Security
Council the contents of the letter addressed by the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Syria to this Council, in
which he emphasized that Syria is not incapable of
establishing a balance of resistance and deterrence that
would force Israel to revise its calculations. Syria has
exercised maximum self-restraint because it recognizes
that Israel is creating opportune pretexts with a view to
exporting its current domestic crisis to the entire
region, thus exposing it to further escalation and
volatility.

Syria has come to the very heart of the house of
legality, right here in the Security Council - which
represents the hopes and aspirations of millions of
Syrians and Arabs and the concerns of many millions
more throughout the world who uphold the principles
of international law - in order to condemn this act of
aggression, which has no justification whatsoever, and
to demonstrate once again to the entire world and from
this forum our adherence to the United Nations system
and its resolutions. In this regard, Syria has officially
submitted the text of a draft resolution that responds to
the challenges before us, in accordance with the
principles of the United Nations Charter. I would stress
that the draft resolution on the table reflects the
positions usually adopted by the Security Council in
the face of similar acts of aggression and threats.

We are fully confident that all members of the
Council will respond forthwith and stand up to this
Israeli challenge in the context of their ongoing efforts
to address any threat to international peace and
security. Will the Council meet this new challenge? We
are very hopeful that it will.
