Mr. Zouev: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Abyei and the ongoing efforts to support
the implementation of the agreement between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement on temporary arrangements for
the administration and security of the Abyei Area of
20 June 2011. I shall also provide an update on the
status of the Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism, as requested in resolution 2352 (2017).

Conflict in the Abyei Area continues to follow
four patterns. First, the traditional source of conflict
between the Ngok Dinka and Misseriya continues to
be the issue of access to grazing land and water. The
conflict prevention and mitigation strategy adopted by
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
(UNISFA) has been effective in reducing large-scale
violence. The mission's success in managing those
issues has encouraged the return of the Ngok Dinka,
with an estimated 15,000 returnees being assisted by
the humanitarian community.

Secondly, criminality in and around the Amiet
common market, which has become an important
economic hub, has been shown to have the potential
to exacerbate intercommunal tensions as the two
communities mingle in the market and the surrounding
areas. The spike in July and August in intercommunal
violence related to the market has dropped sharply
in the wake of UNISFA'S proactive engagement in
de-escalating tensions between the Ngok Dinka
and Misseriya communities. Unfortunately, a few
violent incidents have occurred since the publication
of the Secretary-General's report (S/2017/870 and S/2017/870). On 13 October two Ngok Dinka died and
three more were wounded at the Amiet common market
after unknown armed assailants opened fire. UNISFA
responded promptly with a pursuit and initial medical
treatment. Thirdly, violence continues to be associated
with petty crime, largely as a result of the adverse
economic situation in the Abyei Area, where there is
a lack of livelihood opportunities and a large presence
of arms. And lastly, the presence of armed groups has
the potential to influence and polarize communities,
thereby inflaming intercommunal tensions.

While UNISFA operations have continued to
enhance peace and stability within the Abyei Area,
intercommunal tensions persist in the absence of
progress in the implementation of the agreement
of 20 June 2011. Disagreement on the joint interim
institutions continues to hinder their establishment. The
Abyei Joint Oversight Committee did not convene in
the last week of July as was agreed on at its meeting in
May. The African Union called for a follow-up meeting
of the Committee in Addis Ababa on 16 August, but
it was postponed the day before the scheduled date at
the request of South Sudan, which cited the need to
await the outcome of an expected meeting between the
Presidents of South Sudan and the Sudan. The Presidents
have been expected to meet since July, and that meeting
is crucial, but a date has yet to be announced, although
we hope it will be shortly, if not today. The efforts of
the African Union continue, which has called for an
extraordinary meeting of the Oversight Committee on
9 November.

The agreement of 30 July 2011 established the
border monitoring and verification mission, and the
Cooperation agreement of 27 September 2012 on
security arrangements operationalized the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism. Nearly
six years later, the Mechanism remains at an initial
operating capability. Despite the lack of progress, both
countries and the African Union view the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism as essential
and, in an important show of common purpose, jointly
asked Council members to retain UNISFA's support to
the Mechanism in their letter of 23 September.

In that context, I would like to share with the
Council the progress made on the benchmarks for
the full operating capability of the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism , namely, the
regular meetings of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism , the resumption of border demarcation
discussions, the resolution of the dispute over the
Safe Demilitarized Border Zone and full freedom
of movement for Joint Border Verification and
Monitoring Mechanism operations. With regard to the
Joint Political and Security Mechanism, both parties
have stated that concrete action could only follow the
anticipated meeting of the Presidents. The meeting
of the Joint Security Committee in early June did not
take place, with mutual accusations of support for each
other's rebel movements. The Committee was created
to address exactly those kinds of disputes, which makes
its current suspension particularly discouraging.

I also regret to report that border demarcation
discussions have not resumed, nor have the documents
for the non-binding opinion on disputed and claimed
areas been handed over. However, in a positive step
to advance the implementation of decisions taken at
the latest meeting of the Joint Political and Security
Mechanism, held in May, the parties participated in an
initialjoint aerial reconnaissance mission in September,
facilitated by UNISFA, to identify temporary
observation sites within the Safe Demilitarized Border
Zone, in the vicinity of the agreed border crossing
corridors. We hope that both parties can come together
again to further the border demarcation discussions.

There continues to be an agreement on the
centreline of the Safe Demilitarized Border Zone,
a decision of the extraordinary meeting of the Joint
Political and Security Mechanism in Addis Ababa on
14 October 2015, thereby providing the Joint Border
Verification and Monitoring Mechanism with a defined
area of operations. Since the latest resolution, there has
been considerable progress in terms of full freedom of

movement for Joint Border Verification and Monitoring
Mechanism operations, with the helipad at Gok Machar
now fully functional and expedited approval procedures
in place to clear aerial patrols.
In conclusion, let me reiterate that UNISFA has
clearly had a stabilizing role in Abyei and along the
border region between the Sudan and South Sudan.
Neither the Abyei Area nor the border area have seen
any major confrontation between the forces of the two
countries. I urge both Governments to consolidate the
gains achieved by UNISFA at the local level by actively
engaging in discussions to resolve the deadlock over
establishing the temporary arrangements that should
lead to determining the final status of Abyei.

Progress on the operationalization of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism
remains dependent upon the active collaboration of
the parties, and is yet to meet all the benchmarks set
by the Secretary-General to proceed to full operating
capability. Both countries pledged to address challenges
facing the Mechanism in the joint letter of 23 September
I mentioned, highlighting the importance of the Joint
Border Verification and Monitoring Mechanism as
a confidence-building measure. In that context, we
encourage the parties to use the mechanisms they
have established to address their security issues and
normalize their relations.

In that regard, it is imperative to preserve the
achievements of relative stability realized through the
work of UNISFA, both towards maintaining peace
and stability in the Abyei Area and in preventing
confrontations along the Sudan-South Sudan border
area. Bearing that in mind, I would like to echo the
recommendations of the Secretary-General for the
Security Council to extend UNISFA's mandate for an
additional six months.

