The President (spoke in Chinese): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Brazil, Cuba, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Maldives, Morocco,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Qatar, the
Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sweden, the Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand,
Tunisia, Turkey and Viet Nam to participate in
this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the observer of
the Observer State of Palestine to the United Nations
to participate in the meeting, in accordance with the
provisional rules of procedure and the previous practice
in this regard.

It is so decided.

In accordance with rule 39 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. J 050 Pedro Vale de Almeida, Head of the Delegation
of the European Union to the United Nations, and His
Excellency Mr. Wilfried I. Emvula, Vice-Chair of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People, to participate in this meeting.

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give
the floor.

The Secretary- General: Ithank you, Mr. President,
for this opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in the Middle East.

In just a few days, the Jewish people will celebrate
one of Judaism's most important holidays, Passover.
I extend my best wishes to my Jewish friends and
colleagues for a happy and peaceful holiday.

Allow me to begin with my visit to Lebanon, Iraq,
Jordan and Tunisia three weeks ago with the President
of the World Bank, Mr. Jim Yong Kim. Our trip
sought to highlight the need to increase development
assistance through innovative financing mechanisms
for countries, like Lebanon and Jordan, that are
disproportionately impacted by the conflict in Syria.
Last Friday, together with the Presidents of the World
Bank and the Islamic Development Bank, I co-chaired
a ministerial-level conference to garner the financial
support for that initiative. I am pleased to inform
members that we had an encouraging response. Eight
countries and the European Union generously pledged
$1 billion for a concessional loan facility, $141 million
in grants and $500 million for a guarantee facility. In
addition, many other countries expressed support for
this innovative initiative and their intention to provide
financial support. I hope that donors will continue to
respond to this effort to invest in peace and stability in
the region.

For over six months, Israel and the occupied
Palestinian territory have been gripped by a surge
in violence, triggered by individual terrorist attacks
by Palestinians. Approximately 30 Israelis and
200 Palestinians have been killed, with most of the
Palestinians killed while reportedly carrying out knife,
gun or car-ramming attacks. I condemn all such attacks
unreservedly. There can never be any justification for
stabbings, vehicle attacks, shootings, incitement to
violence or the glorification of killers.

I welcome the joint Palestinian-Israeli efforts that
have contributed to a reduction of tensions in recent
weeks. However, these latest killings have only deepened
the divisiveness, hatred and grief. I also welcome
the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian security discussions
on Area A. I urge all sides to recognize the risks of
failing to reach a lasting understanding on this pressing
matter. I acknowledge the recent public statements
by President Abbas rejecting violence and terror and
firmly supporting continued security coordination with
Israel. President Abbas and I discussed the importance
of those and other issues in Amman on 27 March. I
encourage more such statements, backed by concrete
actions. Israelis and Palestinians need their leaders to
elevate public discourse above mutual accusations and
to engage in a constructive dialogue that can rebuild the
trust that has all but evaporated.

The Middle East Quartet is moving forward on
a report that will review the situation on the ground
and the threats to a two-State solution and provide
recommendations on how to advance peace. The report
is intended to help inform international discussions
to advance the two-State solution: a sovereign and
independent State of Palestine living side by side in
peace and security with the State of Israel. Tragically,
that solution seems more distant than it has for many
decades. A 20-year-01d Palestinian living under
occupation has seen no political progress at all during
his or her lifetime. Impatience and despair at that fact
is one of the root causes of the violence that blights
Israeli and Palestinian communities, prevents economic
development and growth and denies the human potential
of millions of people. It is incumbent upon all of us to
do everything in our power to secure lasting peace.

Our collective efforts face dynamics in Israel and
Palestine that call into question the willingness of the
parties to overcome the hurdles to peace. Israel continues
to demolish Palestinian structures in the occupied
West Bank at an alarming rate. The total number of
demolitions in 2015 was exceeded in early April of this
year. More than 840 people have been displaced. Most
of the structures concerned are deemed illegal by Israel
because they were built without permits; yet Israel
makes it almost impossible for Palestinians to acquire
permits. These acts raise concerns that Israel intends to
implement over 11,000 outstanding demolition orders
in Area C of the West Bank.

I am also concerned by the continued punitive
demolitions of homes belonging to families of
alleged Palestinian perpetrators of attacks against
Israelis. Punitive demolitions are a form of collective
punishment, which is prohibited under international law.
They are unproven as a deterrent and they fuel tensions
by exacerbating feelings ofinjustice and hatred.

Meanwhile, settlement plans and retroactive
legalizations continue to advance in almost untraceable
steps through the complicated planning process. Those
steps, together with last month's declaration of "State
land" - the first in over 18 months - signal that
Israel's strategic settlement enterprise continues to
expand on land intended for a future Palestinian State.
I once again reiterate that settlements are illegal under
international law and undermine the two-State solution.

The creation of new facts on the ground through
demolitions and settlement-building raises questions
about whether Israel's ultimate goal is in fact to drive
Palestinians out of certain parts of the West Bank,
thereby undermining any prospect for a transition to a
viable Palestinian State.

On the Palestinian political front, I regret the
continued failure of intra-Palestinian discussions to
achieve genuine unity on the basis of non-violence,
democracy and the Palestine Liberation Organization
principles. I reiterate my call on Palestinian factions
to demonstrate their commitment to reconciliation,
which is integral to reaching the goal of Palestinian
statehood and to securing a just and lasting resolution
to the conflict. It is imperative for all factions to
ensure that both Gaza and the West Bank are returned
to the control of a single, democratic and legitimate
Palestinian Authority.

I am extremely concerned by today's announcement
on the uncovering of a tunnel crossing from Gaza into
Israel - the first such discovery since the 2014 Gaza
conflict. I strongly condemn the construction of attack
tunnels as dangerous and provocative moves that not
only threaten the lives of Israelis and Palestinians, but
also undermine efforts to rebuild Gaza. Furthermore,
three rockets were fired from Gaza towards Israel on
14 April, all of which landed short ofIsraeI. No injuries
were reported. I call upon all parties to refrain from
any actions that could lead to renewed conflict in Gaza.

The Palestinian Government has laid out an
ambitious $3.8 billion agenda for stabilizing Gaza,
repairing damage from the 2014 conflict and getting
a recovery under way. Economic development and
rebuilding critical electricity and water infrastructure
are essential. On 8 April, the Gaza power plant shut
down, meaning that residents of Gaza are now supplied
with electricity for just four to six hours per day. More
than a year and a half after the conflict in Gaza, those
conditions are intolerable. I strongly encourage all
Member States to fulfil their commitments to support
the reconstruction and development of Gaza.

More positively, on 3 April, Israel expanded the
Gaza fishing zone from six to nine nautical miles. I
welcome that development and encourage Israel to
expedite further easing measures to support the long-
suffering people of Gaza.

Turning briefly to Lebanon, I had an opportunity
to address political and security issues with Lebanese
leaders in Beirut on 24 and 25 March, consistent
with the concerns of the Council. These include the
importance of preserving Lebanon's model of pluralism
and coexistence from regional tensions; the urgency
of electing a president without further delay; the need
for all parties to work with Prime Minister Tammam
Salam to enable the Government to function effectively
and to continue to engage in political dialogue; the
importance of sustained international support for the
Lebanese Armed Forces; and the expectation that both
Lebanon and Israel will work to consolidate stability
along the Blue Line and advance the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006).

I also discussed the importance of actively
supporting the work of the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East,
particularly in the light of the recent buildup of tensions
in Palestinian camps, including a car bomb on 12 April
that killed a camp official near Ein e1 Hilweh.

Turning to the Golan, I note the statements made
yesterday by Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel.
This is a long-standing issue that all parties have a
responsibility to help resolve. I remind Israel of its
obligation to implement Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 497 (1981) in all of their parts.

The path out of the current political deadlock
requires commitment, compromise, mutual respect
and leadership on both sides. It also requires the
acceptance - demonstrated by deeds as well as
words - that the two-State solution is the only road
to peace that meets the national aspirations of both
peoples: Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, security and mutual recognition.

The President (spoke in Chinese): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.


