Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
the outset, I wish to thank Under-Secretary-General
Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.

We have been closely following the situation in
Venezuela. We call on all the relevant parties in the
country to be rational and calm, taking into account
the fundamental interests of the country and its
people in seeking a political solution to the issues
through peaceful dialogue, within the framework
of the Venezuelan Constitution. China supports the
efforts made by the Venezuelan Government to uphold
national sovereignty, independence and stability.
China maintains that all countries should abide by the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, especially the norms governing international
relations and the principles of international law, such
as non-interference in the internal affairs of States,
mutual respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity
and refraining from the threat of the use of force.

China always upholds the principle of
non-interference in the internal affairs of other
States, and therefore opposes foreign interference
in Venezuela's domestic affairs. The situation in
Venezuela is a domestic matter. It does not constitute a
threat to international peace and security and is not on
the agenda of the Security Council. China is opposed
to adding the situation in Venezuela to the Council's
agenda. Venezuelan affairs must be handled and dealt
with by the Venezuelans themselves. We call on all the
relevant parties to respect the will of the Venezuelan
people. Maintaining stability and development in
Venezuela serves the interests of all parties. We hope
that all parties can contribute more to the stability of
Venezuela and that the international community can
together create favourable conditions to that end.

The representative of the United States just made
unreasonable accusations against the position held
by China. China is firmly opposed to such accusations. It
is well-known that China has always been committed to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United

Nations and respect for the sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity of all countries. China
does not interfere in the internal affairs of other
countries. We hope the country that accuses others of
doing so will practice what it preaches.

