Mr. Seetre (Norway): Together with many others,
Norway welcomes the publication of the Quartet's
report and we would like to thank France for convening
the Paris conference. The key message from both is
the urgency of decisive action to save the two-State
solution. There is no other credible path to durable
peace. Nevertheless, the trends on the ground point
unequivocally towards a one-State reality that is
not compatible with that Vision nor with the parties'
stated interests.

Norway urges the parties to address the imminent
threats to the two-State solution by implementing the
recommendations in the Quartet report. The parties
must demonstrate their serious commitment and show
leadership in reversing the most disturbing trends,
such as settlement expansion and the continuation of
violence. Settlement expansion and related activities
must stop. They are major obstacles to peace and
are corroding the prospects for a two-State solution.
Violence and terror must be curtailed.

The international community cannot assume
the parties' responsibility to resolve the conflict.
Nevertheless, we must play an active role in developing
a credible framework, based on existing agreements and
United Nations resolutions, for resolving all final status
issues. While we continue to encourage the return to
negotiations, the world urgently needs to rally around
the task of building the two-State reality.

Through our chairmanship of the international donor
group for Palestine, the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee for
the Coordination of the International Assistance to
Palestinians (AHLC), Norway remains actively engaged
in preparing Palestinian institutions for statehood
and sustaining the Palestinian economy on a pathway
towards greater self-reliance and independence. These
efforts are helping to pave the way towards a two-State
reality and are crucial to keeping this vision alive.
Effective mechanisms for direct economic cooperation
between the parties, combined with an international
capacity for regular monitoring and reporting on the
Palestinian economy - the essence of the AHLC's
work - have proven to be worthwhile. This remains an
exceptional model in the region.

At the latest AHLC meeting in Brussels, the parties
agreed - together with the donors - on a two-year
strategy that includes consolidating the budget by
closing fiscal gaps and facilitating long-term economic
development, including private sector investment.
The next ministerial AHLC meeting is planned for
19 September, on the margins of the General Assembly
in New York. The need to find a political solution to the
conflict in Syria is more urgent than ever. Norway fully
supports Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura's efforts in
this regard. All sides bear a heavy responsibility to
turn the talks into a credible negotiating process that
can lead to a genuine political transition. The parties
must start tackling the difficult questions set out in
resolution 2254 (2015).

In Libya too, a political solution is key to defeating
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and building
a lasting defence against this scourge and future
mutations that may arise. Now is the time for all parties
to come together under one legitimate Government
of National Accord, in accordance with the Libyan
political agreement.

