The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Georgia and Germany, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the consideration
of the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity
with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of
the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the consideration of the item without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lomaia
(Georgia), took a seat at the Council table;
Mr. Matnssek (Germany) took the seat reserved
for him at the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them
document 8/2009/310, which contains the text of a
draft resolution submitted by Austria, Croatia, France,
Germany, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland and the United States of America.

Members of the Council also have before them
document 8/2009/254, containing the report of the
Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council
resolutions 1808 (2008), 1839 (2008) and 1866 (2009).

I Wish to draw the attention of Council members
to the photocopies of two letters dated 10 June 2009
from the Permanent Representative of Georgia
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which will be issued as documents S/2009/305 and
8/2009/306, respectively.

It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.
2
Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council who wish to make statements before the
voting.


