Mr. Bliss (Australia): We thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her frank briefing this morning. We could not
agree more with her analysis. We are grateful that the
Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) continues to do all that it can in difficult
circumstances to investigate Rome Statute crimes
committed in Darfur since the Council's referral of the
situation in 2005.

Once again, the Prosecutor has advised us of
allegations that Rome Statute crimes continue to be
committed in the setting ofunabated violence in Darfur,
confirming information received in the context of
briefings on the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We deplore these acts
and express deep concern at their impact on the civilian
population, and on the peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers seeking to provide assistance.

On 19 November, the Council expressed concern
at reports that hundreds of women had been raped
in Thabit in North Darfur on 30 and 31 October (see SC/ 11658) and called on the Government of the Sudan
to investigate the allegations. We note that the report
of the enquiries conducted by the Sudan's Office of
the Prosecutor General for Darfur Crimes has now
been circulated to the Council. The report's advice
that the criminal investigation undertaken by the
Prosecutor General and his aides lasted only four hours
is concerning, as are statements in the report that "no
such grave crimes could have happened while men
would not move a finger or have some reaction" and
"from their demeanour and psychological posturing,
there appeared no signs of rape or sexual violence".

Taking into account the well-known challenges
associated with the investigation of crimes of sexual
violence, in relation to which victims and witnesses
may be unwilling to come forward, we urge the Sudan
to ensure that its domestic criminal investigations
meet international standards. The Sudan must also
cooperate fully with UNAMID to enable a thorough
and independent investigation of these allegations,
including by providing full and unimpeded access to
the relevant locations. More generally, we reiterate the
importance of accurate and comprehensive reporting
by UNAMID, which is critical to the work of both the
Security Council and the International Criminal Court.

While it continues to be important that the Council
provide strong support to political reconciliation efforts
in the Sudan, the ongoing violence demonstrates
the challenges this process faces and, therefore, the
importance of ensuring that those responsible for such
violence are held to account. Without justice, it will
be difficult to bring an inclusive and lasting peace to
Darfur.

Australia is acutely aware that this is the twentieth
briefing by the Prosecutor to the Council on the Darfur
referral. Those briefings have provided a consistent
message. The ICC cannot achieve its mandate - a
mandate given to the Court by the Council - unless
the Darfur suspects are arrested and transferred to The
Hague. We are deeply concerned that the Sudan has
still taken no meaningful steps to apprehend the four
individuals against whom there are outstanding arrest
warrants, and that other States in a position to do so
have not done so either. We take note of the Prosecutor's
advice in her report that her Office will soon file a
motion with the Pre-Trial Chamber requesting another
formal finding of non-cooperation against the Sudan.

In this context, we remind the Sudan and other
parties to the conflict in Darfur of their obligation
under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate with the
Court. States parties to the Rome Statute also have
cooperation obligations under part IX of the Statute.
The ICC Pre-Trial Chamber clearly concluded that
Head of State immunity does not apply in the current
circumstances, and we remind all other States, as well
as concerned regional and international organizations,
that the Council has urged them to cooperate fully with
the Court. We also call in this context for the strict
implementation of the Secretary-General's guidelines
on non-essential contact with persons subject to a
warrant of arrest.

The Prosecutor's has asked us again this morning
what amount of suffering Darfur's victims should endure
before the Council will act decisively. The answer to this
question for Australia is clear. The Council has failed
the victims of Darfur. It is not, however, too late to take
action. As we have said before, sanctions committees
should give consideration to ICC arrest warrants with
a view to ensuring consistency between sanctions lists
and ICC indictments. The Council should also establish
a forum for legal experts to discuss how to strengthen
cooperation between the Council and the Court.

Our most pressing immediate task, however, is to
respond to the ICC's eight unanswered letters regarding
non-cooperation in relation to the situation in Darfur.
To have completely ignored eight successive letters sent
to the Council in accordance with the Rome Statute is
an indictment of the Council's commitment to ending
impunity for serious international crimes. After
two years as a Security Council member, Australia's
conviction that the fight against impunity is essential
to the maintenance of international peace and security
has only strengthened. Our support for the ICC and our
efforts to ensure accountability will continue.

