Mr. Parham (United Kingdom): May I start by
welcoming Foreign Minister Bangura to the Council
today and thanking her for her very helpful briefing.
We also welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2009/267) and the briefing we have just received
from his Executive Representative, Mr. Von der
Schulenburg. We also very much appreciate and
strongly support the work that Ambassador McNee has
been doing to prepare for the special session of the
Peacebuilding Commission on Wednesday. We
encourage all Member States to give that meeting their
strong support.

As we have heard, Sierra Leone is making
progress in dealing with immediate threats to its peace
and security. The President's Agenda for Change
recognizes that development needs a stable, secure and
peaceful society. The combination of national
leadership and continued international support is
crucial to consolidate the gains that have been made
since the end of the war. Particularly crucial is the
progress made towards an effective, independent
security sector that has earned the trust of the public it
was designed to serve.

Security, good governance and the rule of law are
the bedrock upon which everything else stands or falls.
Thus the March outbreak of political violence was an
unwelcome reminder of the divisions that have scarred
Sierra Leone's past and also of the role and power that
the media can have in fuelling political intolerance. We
commend Mr. Von der Schulenburg for the leading role
he played in marshalling the response of the
international community to those events.

The joint communique between the political
parties has given a clear focus to the political role and
profile of the United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding
Office in Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). The task now is to
ensure that local institutions gain the political maturity
to assume such a brokering role in the future.

Perhaps it is too early to say whether a potential
return to conflict has been averted, or that the adoption
of a joint communique and the undertakings it
contained will provide a lasting solution to the
divisions and tensions that gave rise to the violence -
although of course we hope that they will. There has to
be sustained pressure for implementation of the joint
communique commitments.

Regarding UNIPSIL, we note with concern that,
as of the end of June, it will - it is hoped - still have
reached just over 70 per cent of authorized staffing
levels, and we would welcome some further
explanation of why that is and of what is being done to
ensure at least that relevant experts are in place in all
the key areas.

Regarding the benchmarks, we note that they
have now been agreed under the 1+4 priority areas of
the Joint Vision. It is important that the substantive
unit responsible for each area gets down to work. It is
right that the benchmarks are challenging. We also
need to keep in the back of our mind the kind of
mission we want to move towards in the longer term
and how UNIPSIL may need to evolve towards that.
Current plans appear to assume a steady state through
to 2012, but what intermediate outcomes will tell us
whether UNIPSIL is on or off track?

The report sets out initial steps to integrate
United Nations agencies, programmes and funds and to
share facilities and costs. We welcome these, but we
would suggest that bigger challenges lie ahead. The
proposed sub-offices will be a welcome platform for
joint working, but they do not guarantee it. That
requires compromises and willingness on the part of all
agencies to adapt and buy into the common United
Nations Vision, particularly UNICEF and the United
Nations Development Programme. Any reluctance to
do so could ultimately undermine the whole United
Nations effort and risk it re-splintering into
uncoordinated, competing and often unfocused
projects. We would welcome hearing more about what
else can be done to lock United Nations partners into
the Joint Vision.

