King Philippe (spoke in French): 1 thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Chergui and Ms. Becker for their enlightening briefings and calls to action. Thirty years ago here in New York, King Baudouin addressed the Heads of State and Government gathered at the World Summit for Children on the occasion of the entry into force of the Convention on the Rights of the Child. He recalled the importance of making Governments and the public aware of the fragility and vulnerability of children and the importance of their family environment. Since then, the United Nations has done impressive work to defend the cause of children affected by armed conflict. Belgium has made thatissue a constant priority of its foreign policy. Queen Mathilde has been dedicated to it for many years. The subject remains a burning issue as geopolitical tensions have reached their boiling point since the beginning of the century. Today, one child in five suffers the negative impact of armed conflict throughout the world. That statistic cannot leave us indifferent. It represents real instances of girls and boys who are fleeing clashes, maimed, exploited, killed, sexually abused and recruited by armed groups - millions of young lives injured in both body and spirt. Saving those children requires an ongoing policy, joint prevention and remediation efforts and the tireless marshalling of financial and human resources. We must help these children to recover and thrive. We must revive their hope and help them regain their lives. By listening to them, acknowledging their suffering and reintegrating them into society through unrelenting support, we will break the cycle of violence and make lasting peace possible. In 1999, the Security Council adopted resolution 1261 (1999), the first of its kind on the situation of children in conflict. Since then, the Council has continuously called for peace processes to incorporate, from the outset, essential elements for the protection of children's rights. In several peace negotiations, the protection of children has received meaningful attention, which is to be welcomed, but inclusive processes remain the exception. Too often, the plight of children remains neglected. Their voices, rights and needs are hardly taken into account. We need to do much better. The future of societies affected by hostilities is at stake. Experience shows that, at times, parties to conflict can agree more easily on measures to assist children than on other issues. That focus on children can build trust. A child protection agreement can serve as a springboard and catalyst for broader agreements. It is with that in mind that the guidelines on the protection of children in negotiations and peace processes have been developed. Their integration into peace negotiations will lead to concrete improvements in the lives of children affected by conflict. Belgium is deeply committed to multilateralism and the United Nations. My country is committed to defending, not its own interests, but the fundamental values that inspire the Charter of the United Nations and form the basis of decent societies. That sincere conviction is reflected in our contribution to the work of the United Nations - in the participation of Belgian soldiers in peacekeeping operations and in our investment in all organs of the United Nations, including the Security Council. It is also reflected in the concern that brings us together today. Every child has the right to grow up in a home and in a safe environment and to receive quality education. Every time we save a child from war, help her rebuild or return her to school, those dreams are again made possible. It is a lifelong victory. We facilitate reconciliation and, perhaps, even prevent the emergence of another conflict. That is the responsibility we all shoulder. The year 2019 marked the end of a very challenging decade for children in conflict zones. It is up to us all to ensure - with just and concrete measures - that 2020 marks the start of a decade of hope for all children.
