Sir John Weston (United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland): The Security Council is meeting
today to respond to the latest in a series of incidents in
which the Iraqi authorities have sought to impose conditions
on the rights of the United Nations Special Commission
(UNSCOM) - rights which are explicitly set out in
resolutions of this Council. Such actions by Iraq are
completely unacceptable; the Council is about to condemn
them.
The blockage of UN SCOM. inspections which
occurred on 10 and 12 June is part of a clear pattern of
concealment, harassment and obstruction aimed at limiting
UNSCOM's access. This Iraqi campaign to prevent the
Special Commission carrying out the mandate given to it
by this Council is obviously directed from the highest
levels in Baghdad.

We continue to witness examples of non-cooperation
on the part of Iraq, for example over UNSCOM
Inspection 155 in July last year, the saga over the missile
debris in December, the recent endangerment of
UNSCOM. helicopters, and now these two latest incidents.

The Executive Chairman of the Special Commission
has declared that Iraq has violated the Joint Programme
of Action and the sensitive site modalities drawn up by
him in June 1996. He has appealed for the Council's
support. We must heed his call. The measures proposed
in this resolution are targeted and limited, but they are a
clear demonstration of our support.

UN SCOM' s investigations have clearly demonstrated
that from the outset the Government of Iraq has engaged
in a coordinated attempt to conceal from the Special
Commission the full extent of its activities, both before
and after the passage of Security Council resolution 687
(1991), related to weapons of mass destruction. It is
simply incredible for Iraq to claim that this campaign of
concealment was the work of the late Hussein Kamil and
a few associates. If this Council is ever to have
confidence that Iraq has fully complied with resolution
687 (1991), it is essential that this mechanism of
deception and concealment is fully exposed and brought
to an end. Otherwise we cannot know whether caches of
equipment, documents, facilities, or entire programmes
still exist of which we are unaware and which will
therefore not be subject to monitoring.

The Executive Chairman has told us that the
organizations responsible for this concealment are closely
linked to those responsible for the highest levels of
national security in Iraq. It is thus clearly within
UNSCOM'S mandate to investigate these organizations.
If the Government of Iraq finds this uncomfortable, the
remedy is in its hands. It must be completely open with
the Special Commission and cease all obstruction and
harassment. Only then can there be progress towards

 

fulfilling the requirements of section C of resolution 687
(1991).

Iraq has repeatedly assured this Council of its
commitment to furnishing full cooperation to UNSCOM. but
has failed to translate these assurances into reality. The
United Kingdom delegation believes that it is now time to
remind Iraq, in a real but measured way, of its obligations
to this Council and to the Special Commission. We believe
that the draft resolution currently before us is reasonable,
proportionate and focused, and for this reason my
delegation has sponsored, and will be voting in support of,
this text.

