The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.

I thank the Executive Director of the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) for his
briefing. The topics of drugs, crime and corruption are
not at the heart of the Security Council's mandate;
those subjects are dealt with in a comprehensive way
by the General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. In that respect, we welcome the General
Assembly's initiative in organizing for the next quarter,
within the framework of the tenth anniversary of the
Palermo Convention, a special high-level meeting
devoted to organized transnational crime.

Nonetheless, the large-scale development of these
cross-cutting problems, above all drug trafficking and
transnational organized crime, is having a growing
impact on States' security and, beyond, on regional and
international stability and security. The Council has
observed this phenomenon as it relates to several items
on its agenda, be it in West Africa, Haiti or
Afghanistan. When the consequences of the activity of
these criminal networks threaten international peace
and stability, it is the responsibility of the Security
Council to deal with them. Such threats can weaken or
destabilize States, damaging their good governance and
slowing their economic development. They compete
with legal economic systems and promote corruption.
They hamper the post-crisis reconstruction efforts of
public institutions and development organizations led
by national authorities and the international community.

Criminal networks not only benefit from weak or
failed States; their activities also help to exacerbate
political tensions, inter alia, by financing non-
governmental armed groups and insurgency movements.
Moreover, the links between the various drug
trafficking networks and international terrorism seem
to be getting stronger. Due to their transnational
character, these threats can destabilize entire regions;
challenging them demands close international and
regional cooperation with a view in particular to
strengthening the capacity of weaker States through
technical assistance.

Aware of the growing reach of organized crime,
in 2000 the international community adopted the
United Nations Convention against Transnational
Organized Crime. However, we can only observe that
criminal networks have learned since then to adapt and
to take advantage of changes that have occurred in our
societies, be it in improved information and
communications technologies or the opening up of
financial markets. As a result, we call more than ever
for the universalization of the Palermo Convention and
its additional protocols, and we hope that the upcoming
Conference of the Parties will be directed towards
more effective implementation of its texts.

We welcome the important role played by
UNODC, as well as the quality of its assistance to
States and its projects throughout the world. We also
encourage the Secretariat and its various components
to step up their activities in the area of cross-cutting
threats, especially through networking efforts with the
Department of Political Affairs, the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations and the United Nations
Development Programme - in close cooperation, of
course, with UNODC.

In the Security Council, we are in favour of
taking further into account these cross-cutting threats
when we look at conflict analysis, prevention strategies,
integrated missions and peacekeeping missions. In that
regard, we attach the greatest importance to all the
elements that the Secretariat may be able to convey in
its various reports to the Council.
Lastly, we welcome regional initiatives on drug-
trafficking, including the Praia Regional Plan of Action
adopted in October 2008 by the West African States,
and that adopted in San Domingo in March 2009 by the
Caribbean region. Since 2003, at the initiative first of
France and then of Russia, the Paris Pact, renewed in
Moscow, has made it possible to implement operational
cooperation within the framework of the fight against
heroin trafficking out of Afghanistan, and to raise
genuine awareness of the problem posed by the
diversion of chemical precursors. I support the
proposals that have been submitted by the Russian
Federation in that regard.

The briefing by the Executive Director of
UNODC has given us a thorough picture of the threats
we face. Drug-trafficking networks and organized
crime have taken on a global dimension and are
endangering international peace and security through
their activities. We hope that the Council will remain
engaged in this matter, which has direct consequences
for our work, and that we can be given regular
briefings by the Executive Director of UNODC so that
we can keep the Council thoroughly informed on the
evolution of these cross-cutting threats.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to Mr. Costa to respond to the
comments that have been made.

