Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): We thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this important debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. We also wish to thank
Under-Secretary-General Holmes for the information
he provided today.

International humanitarian law is implemented in
times of war to protect persons who are not
participating or no longer participate in hostilities
because they have been wounded or taken prisoner. In
addition, it imposes restrictions on the methods and
means of combat. The main instruments of such law
are the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and its
Protocols Additional, which are nearly universally
accepted. I say "nearly" because this debate is
occurring in the face of a concrete case of the violation
and non-application of those international instruments.
This is the case in Israel's terrible aggression carried
out by land, sea and air against the civilian inhabitants
of the Gaza Strip. We are witnesses to the fact that in
Gaza, the very bases of society - houses, civilian
infrastructure, public health facilities, universities and
schools - are being destroyed.

On Tuesday, the United Nations Committee on
the Rights of the Child denounced the devastating
effects of the Gaza conflict on children. The
Committee's 18 experts recalled that the international
instruments to which Israel has acceded prohibit the
targeting of children in situations of armed conflict and
direct attacks on objects protected under international
law, including places that generally have a significant
presence of children, such as schools and hospitals.

My delegation wonders: Who is stopping the
violation of the most fundamental rights of these
thousands of civilians, children and women who are
being massacred? What body of our Organization is
implementing on the ground the provision, set out in
the first paragraph of Article 1 of the Charter of the
United Nations, for the suppression of acts of
aggression or other breaches of the peace? How many
more children will have to die in Gaza before the
United Nations takes action?

In accordance with the instruments of
international humanitarian law that I mentioned
previously, in the event of hostilities every possible
precaution must be taken to avoid causing the
collateral death or injury of civilians, or damaging
civilian property. The distinction must be made
between property of a civilian nature, such as homes
and places of worship, and military targets.

However, Israel seems to have a contrary
understanding of these provisions and has taken every
possible measure, such as the use of the most
technologically advanced weapons - including
weapons of which the use is prohibited in international
humanitarian law - to cause the largest possible
number of civilian victims and the destruction of
civilian property. The banned weapons that are being
used, as borne out by independent experts in Gaza,
include white phosphorus and cluster munitions, which
are strictly banned in densely populated areas, such as
those we are talking about here.

Given this tragic situation, I would like to express
the profound disappointment of the people and the
Government of Nicaragua that the Security Council has
not been able to date to take real and concrete
measures on the ground or to comply with its
responsibility to immediately halt the Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people. This concern is all the
greater given the possibility that the conflict could
spread through the region.

The number of civilian victims in the Gaza Strip
has doubled since the adoption of resolution 1860
(2009), as have the derision and disdain of Israel of the
adopted resolution, of the body that adopted it, and of
the members of that body, particularly the permanent
members, and of the international community in
general. And this disdain does not end there, since the
Israeli slaughter and barbarity continues against the
Palestinian civilian population.

As a State Member of the United Nations, we
urge this body to comply with its responsibilities, take
the measures necessary to implement resolution 1860
(2009), and establish a ceasefire leading to a
withdrawal of the Israeli occupying forces, thus halting
the genocide that is being practiced against the civilian
population of the Gaza Strip and ensuring the
unfettered delivery of humanitarian assistance. The
resolutions of the principal body of the United Nations
for the maintenance of international peace and security
must be complied with on the ground, all the more so
when human lives are at stake. We must act to protect
the civilians in the armed conflict in Gaza from the
Israeli armed aggression.

Given this situation of inertia, my Government
supports the call by the President of the General
Assembly, who at the request of the countries of the
Non-Aligned Movement has decided to reconvene the
tenth emergency special session of the Assembly. We
support the Secretary-General in all his initiatives on
the Middle East and any other international initiative
that will bring an end to the slaughter once and for all.
We have the unshirkable responsibility to protect
civilian populations in armed conflict.

