Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Assistant Secretary-General Fernandez-Taranco for his
briefing.
I will begin on a welcome and even hopeful note.
King Abdullah and the Jordanian Government have
taken a bold step and shown tremendous leadership in
bringing the parties together for direct meetings in
coordination with the Quartet. The discussions are
showing promise, and we are encouraged that the
parties have already met several times this month in
Amman. We believe strongly that the Council's focus
should be on offering support to the Jordanian effort
and on urging the parties to take full advantage of this
opportunity.

Last Wednesday, the Council discussed the
humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza, as
well as in southern Israel. The discussion today has
already focused a great deal on counterproductive
actions taken by both sides. I want to encourage my
colleagues on the Council to join in encouraging the
parties to refrain from unhelpful actions and to
promote an environment that is conducive to progress.
We join in condemning in the strongest possible terms
both incitement to violence and continued terrorist
attacks on civilians in Israel, including rocket attacks
from Gaza. We also reiterate our ongoing concern
about the humanitarian situation in Gaza and our
support for increased measures to ensure the safety and
well-being of Gazans. We likewise urge Israel to
continue and to step up its efforts to deter, confront and
prosecute anti-Palestinian violence and extremist hate
crimes. Let me also reiterate that we do not accept the
legitimacy of continued Israeli settlement activity.

We should not lose sight of our shared goal of a
comprehensive, just and lasting resolution to this
conflict. Last year, in May, President Obama laid out
his vision for a lasting peace that would involve two
States, for two peoples: Israel as a Jewish State and the
homeland for the Jewish people and the State of
Palestine as the homeland for the Palestinian people,
each State enjoying self-determination, mutual
recognition and peace. President Obama reiterated that
goal in his speech before the General Assembly in
September (see A/66/PV.11). He reaffirmed the basis
for successful negotiations, which is well known to all
of us. Israelis must know that any agreement provides
assurances for their security, and Palestinians deserve
to know the territorial basis of their State.

In an effort to operationalize the President's
vision, on 23 September 2001 the Quartet issued a
statement calling on the parties "to overcome the
current obstacles and resume direct, bilateral Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations without delay or
preconditions." (see SG/2178) That statement, taken as
a whole, presents a robust framework for resuming
direct negotiations between the parties. We are now at
a critical juncture. The Government of Jordan deserves
our gratitude for facilitating re-engagement by the
parties. With Jordan and the Quartet's help, the parties
have begun a difficult but necessary process. It is
imperative that we do everything we can to contribute
to the success of that pathway.

I shall turn now to Syria. The situation there
continues to deteriorate dramatically. Despite the
presence of Arab League monitors, the Al-Assad
regime is ignoring its commitments to the Arab league
plan, including by failing to end all acts of violence
and to protect Syrian civilians. Scores of civilians are
killed every day. Thousands of political detainees
remain incarcerated across the country, many at serious
risk of torture. As a result of the regime's failure to
fulfil the requirements of the Arab League plan, there
are more and more calls from the region for Security
Council involvement.

On Sunday in Cairo, the Arab League approved a
resolution that calls for Al-Assad to hand over powers
to his Vice-President in order to form a unity
Government, enabling a political transition to begin in
Syria. We welcome the Arab League's continued
leadership and efforts to facilitate a transition and
broker a political solution to the more than 10 months
of brutality by the Al-Assad regime. We believe that it
is essential that the international community work
together to support a stable transition, and we
commend the Arab League for putting forth a transition
plan. The Council should fully support the Arab
League's efforts to broker an end to the bloodshed and
a peaceful transition to democracy in Syria.

The United States has been very clear in our
approach to the crisis in Syria. We have long said that
Al-Assad, who has shunned all opportunities to
institute real reforms that address basic human rights
issues, needs to step aside and let a peaceful transition
in Syria occur. We first imposed sanctions on the
Al-Assad regime and its enablers last spring, and have
increased them as Al-Assad has refused to end the
violence. Many others in the international community
have enacted similar measures. The European Union
approved yet more sanctions yesterday, and sanctions
have been part of the Arab League's initiative since last
November. It is long past time that the Council adopt a
strong resolution that supports the Arab League's
efforts to end the crisis and restore peace to Syria.

We call again on the Syrian Government to
permit access to the commission of inquiry created by
the United Nations Human Rights Council in August.
The United States fully supports the Syrian people's
demands for a democratic, representative and inclusive
Government that respects human rights and provides
equal protection under the law for all citizens,
regardless of sect, ethnicity or gender.

The United States continues to call on the
opposition to refrain from violence, while recognizing
that exercising such restraint becomes more and more
difficult as the regime ratchets up its repression. The
Arab League's Secretary General stated very clearly in
his report this week that

"the opposition had to carry arms in response to
the excessive use of force by the Syrian
Government to counter protests, the use of
repression, detention and torture and violations of
human rights by security agencies".

We hold the Syrian regime fully responsible for the
worsening cycle of violence.

We are concerned by recent reports of shipments
of arms and munitions to the Syrian Government. We
call on supplier countries to voluntarily halt arms
transfers to the regime. We encourage all nations to
join the widening effort to stop the flow of weapons to
the Al-Assad regime.

I will conclude with the situation in Lebanon. We
remain committed to the full implementation of
resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680 (2006) and 1701 (2006),
and urge the Government of Lebanon to adhere to
those and other international obligations and
commitments, including with respect to the Special
Tribunal for Lebanon. We condemn the terrorist attack
against peacekeepers of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon on 9 December 2011, the third such
attack in less than a year. The United States calls on the
Government of Lebanon to investigate those incidents
and bring those responsible to justice. We welcome the
Secretary-General's recent visit to Lebanon, including
his remarks on the importance of disarming Hizbullah,
an international obligation established by resolutions
1559 (2004) and 1701 (2006).
The United States continues to support the
Lebanese Armed Forces and recognizes the critical role
that they and the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) play in maintaining stability
throughout Lebanon. We thank Major General Alberto
Asarta Cuevas for his leadership during his tenure and
welcome incoming UNIFIL Force Commander
Brigadier General Paolo Serra.

