The President (spoke in French): I will now
speak in my national capacity.

I will speak briefly, particularly since
Ambassador Jean De Ruyt will be speaking on behalf
of the European Union. France, of course, will support
everything he has to say.

I wish to thank Wolfgang Petritsch and Jacques
Paul Klein for their statements, as well as for the work
they have accomplished on the ground.

Since the changeover of political power in favour
of a coalition of multi-ethnic modern parties, hope has
reappeared in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the last few
months, first steps have been taken towards reform,
towards coming closer to Europe and towards the
Bosnians taking charge of their own future. The
adoption in late August, finally, of the Election Law
was the most important indication of this.

More generally, we, like others, welcome the
resolve expressed by Mr. Lagumdzija and his
Government to maintain the momentum of reform. We
hope that this momentum will be maintained over the
long term, beyond the elections of October 2002.

Today, the priorities to us seem to be improving
the functioning of institutions, economic reform, the
strengthening of the judicial system and the fight
against corruption.

There is still some cause for disappointment. I am
thinking, in particular, about the draft legislation on the
civil service that the Council of Ministers adopted in
early September. As it stands, that draft legislation will
not be able to guarantee protection for civil servants
against political power. We encourage the Bosnian
authorities to do what they can to build a modern State
and a civil service governed by democratic principles
that are incontestable. We believe this will be a key
issue in the coming months.

At the economic level, we believe that the rate of
reform must be accelerated. A single economic area
must be established as soon as possible. Improving the
political and social framework and taking strong action
against corruption are prerequisites for attracting
foreign investors and stimulating the spirit of enterprise
among Bosnians.

I would now like to turn to the question of
restructuring the international presence in Bosnia. The
international community has asked the High
Representative to formulate proposals, and the process
is now fully under way, under his guidance and that of
our friend Donald Hays. That work, however, is
significantly behind schedule. It is thus even more
important for the work to continue without delay, in
close cooperation with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, as well as those in charge of
other international agencies that have a presence in
Sarajevo.

As the discussion in the Steering Board on 13
September showed, it will be necessary to give further
thought to and update the international community's
objectives and time frames in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We believe that it is equally important to do a better
job of identifying the essential functions of the
international community in the future as the Bosnians
themselves increasingly begin to take control of
developments. The role of the Office of the High
Representative will remain central throughout this
process.

For its part, the United Nations Mission in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is discharging its mandate in an
impeccable manner. I would like to commend in
particular the improved performance of the police, their
increasing professionalism and the building of a State
based on the rule of law.

In the spirit of the recommendations of the
Brahimi report, Mr. Jacques Paul Klein has prepared a
plan with a genuine exit strategy for the end of 2002.
We believe, however, that there must be an
international police presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina even after the mission of the International
Police Task Force (IPTF) has come to an end. We look
forward to receiving specific proposals from the Office
of the High Representative by December about the
various options for how the IPTF mission might
continue. We noted with great interest the ideas and
thoughts that were put forward, in particular by
Mr. Jacques Paul Klein.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I call on the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

