Mr. Moraes Cabral (Portugal) (spoke in Spanish):
Thank you, Madam President, for presiding over the
Council. It is always an honour and a pleasure to have
you with us. I would like to congratulate the Colombian
presidency of the Council for having organized this
important debate. I should also like to thank you,
Madam, for the excellent concept note (S/2012/511, annex) that your delegation prepared.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement, as well as our colleagues from
Rwanda and Bangladesh for their very useful briefings
and for their leadership. I also wish to say a word of
appreciation to Mr. Von Amsberg for his presentation.

Portugal naturally shares the positions that will
be presented later during this debate by Ambassador
Mayr-Harting on behalf of the European Union.

There is no denying that, over the past six years,
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) has established
itself as a unique actor within the United Nations
architecture for post-conflict peace consolidation. The
report (S/2012/70) we are considering today testifies
to that effect and provides a comprehensive account
of how the Commission and its various configurations
have evolved and developed new forms of engagement
with fragile countries, as well as with the wider donor
community. Of course, much can still and should be
done.

One distinctive aspect of the PBC that Portugal
particularly values is the way it brings together security
and development as interrelated elements of peace
consolidation. Making sure that those two dimensions
are treated in an integrated manner from the early
stages of peacekeeping requires bringing our political,
development, security and humanitarian instruments
into a single consistent framework. In each of the
countries where it is involved - including in the four
configurations that Portugal is a part of - the PBC
certainly contributes to the United Nations effort to
devise such a framework.

The PBC's singularity derives also from its
membership, which brings together Member States and
international organizations, and from its engagement
with national actors in the definition of peacebuilding
priorities. Its approach, based on mutual engagement
between the PBC and the authorities of the countries
on its agenda, provides a strong incentive for national
ownership of peace consolidation processes.

The issue at stake here today is how to make the
best use of those singular features of the PBC in order
to ensure a more coherent and effective United Nations
presence on the ground, but also greater visibility for
the PBC's work. As the annual report indicates, one
of the PBC's main tasks is the mobilization of donors'
resources and the identification of financing gaps and
of the priorities for international assistance. Yet, that
should translate into the actual work being carried
out on the ground. Besides the regular planning and
articulation with national authorities, we strongly
believe that the PBC should, early on, be more
systematically involved with other actors, first and
foremost with United Nations agencies, but also with
bilateral partners, international financial institutions
and regional organizations. By engaging with the
different partners, the PBC can play a very important
role in bridging potential gaps between what each actor
is doing. In that respect, the partnership established
with the African Development Bank is a very positive
step, which will hopefully yield concrete results in the
near future.

Another crucial aspect is that of political dialogue.
The statements ofmutual agreement, as well as the visits
by the Chairs of the country-specific configurations,
constitute excellent opportunities for conveying
political messages regarding the situation in the
countries on the PBC's agenda. Yet, we must admit that
more needs to be done to articulate the political role of
the PBC configuration Chairs with that of other United
Nations actors, namely, the Special Representatives of
the Secretary-General, in order to avoid duplication or,
even worse, contradictions.

Priority areas for PBC intervention should also
be carefully considered, taking into account the
mandate of United Nations missions on the ground.
While the current trend for a stronger focus by the
PBC configurations on security sector reform (SSR)
activities is, in our view, a positive development, it is
critical to ensure that such focus does not duplicate the
work carried out by United Nations missions whose
mandates already include SSR assistance as priority
tasks.

The same applies, to a large extent, to initiatives
aimed at promoting the effective participation of
women in political transition and economic recovery.
We value the initiatives of the PBC to tackle what we
believe is a fundamental aspect of peace consolidation
in the various countries on its agenda, and can only
encourage the different configurations to work with the
missions on the ground, as well as with relevant United
Nations organs and international partners, to ensure
better coordination of existing activities.

Still on the issue of priority areas, we believe
that recent debates on cross-national issues, such as
the ones on transnational organized crime in West
Africa, are very promising and represent an attempt to
provide a regional dimension to the work of the PBC.
In that respect, we encourage the configurations to
work closely with United Nations regional offices in
the implementation of concrete projects for combating
organized crime.

The answer to the issues I have identified here
require a broader refection on the relation between
the PBC and other organs of the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council. The PBC's annual
report acknowledges some progress in the interaction
between the two organs and provides recommendations
on how that relationship can be strengthened.

We should work collectively to improve our working
methods in order to allow us, on a regular basis, to
draw upon the advice of the Chairs of country-specific
configurations. The interactive dialogue to be held
tomorrow represents a positive step in that direction,
but there is certainly room for the Council to seek, and
make a better use of, the PBC's advice, especially when
discussing the renewal of mandates, but also as an early
warning for potential setbacks in peace consolidation in
specific countries.

In conclusion, as always, Portugal stands ready
to engage in an open and creative discussion on ways
to advance the PBC's contributions to more efficient
and integrated action on the part of the international
community throughout the various stages of
post-conflict and peace consolidation in the countries
involved. The success of the PBC in fulfilling its
functions represents our collective success towards
achieving sustainable peace.

