The President: I thank the representative of
Spain. I understand that proposal has been accepted
and the draft presidential statement is being amended
accordingly.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of the United States.

Terrorism is an ever-present threat. Those who
engage in it do so because they are not interested in
peace. Yesterday, an American diplomatic convoy was
bombed in Gaza. The Americans who were attacked
were pursuing a vision for a better future for the
Palestinian people. They were there to interview young
Palestinian candidates for Fulbright scholarships to
study in the United States. We send our heartfelt
condolences to the families of the brave Americans
who were killed and injured serving our country and its
ideals. We not only condemn the attacks, we warn the
attackers: you can run but you cannot hide.

Two years ago, this body met to adopt Security
Council resolution 1373 (2001), a central component of
the Council's robust response to the horrific attacks of
11 September 2001. The Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) was established to monitor, promote and assist
in its implementation.

As we endorse the Committee's work programme
for the next 90 days, it is worth both recalling some of
the Committee's accomplishments and reminding this
body of the important challenges that remain.

As one of the key Security Council counter-
terrorist instruments, the CTC has given new,
important, international legal and political authority to
the counter-terrorism efforts of many nations and
intergovernmental organizations. It has placed the issue
of terrorism and the international community's
capabilities to confront it on the agenda of the United
Nations and other intergovernmental bodies. It has
spurred organizations around the world to undertake
enhanced counter-terrorism planning with their
member States. It is recognized as the worldwide
clearinghouse for counter-terrorism information,
assistance, and cooperation. It has achieved universal
engagement in resolution 1373 (2001), with all 191
Member States submitting reports on their counter-
terrorism capabilities and on the steps they have taken
to implement the resolution.

Through the CTC's efforts, the number of States
joining the international conventions relating to
terrorism, and the progress of many States in enacting
domestic legislation implementing those conventions,
has been significantly increased.

While much of the material submitted by States is
as yet unverified - and must be verified - this
universal engagement constitutes a significant
mobilization of political will and the first-ever
worldwide audit of States' counter-terrorism
capabilities. In short, the Committee has focused and
organized States' attention on counter-terrorism and
laid the foundation for significant upgrades in capacity-
building.

Although the Committee should be proud of these
accomplishments, it must not be complacent. Based on
the work programme laid out last March, in the coming
months we would like to see the Committee take steps
to build on the work already done. Working with
relevant functional and regional organizations, the
Committee should verify more effectively than
heretofore the steps that States have taken to
implement the resolution. It is not simply the accession
to conventions and protocols, nor the enacting of
domestic legislation, that will show the CTC'S
accomplishments, but the actual effectiveness of each
country in fighting terrorism.

To help accomplish this goal, Committee experts
working with experts from the relevant functional and
regional organizations, should visit several capitals to
discuss implementation of resolution 1373 (2003). For
example, officials in many capitals can benefit from
discussing both the specifics in the CTC's letters
directly with the Committee's experts, as well as the
assistance that might be available to address needs. As
with the Committee's work to date, these consultations
in country capitals would aim to learn more about the
areas where implementation is incomplete and where
Member States need assistance, and that message
would be carried back to the Committee and to other
intergovernmental organizations and States that can
assist.

A number of global and regional organizations
are already sending representatives on such missions to
discuss matters that relate to some elements of
resolution 1373 (2001). For the Committee to maintain
its long-term primacy and relevance, it should,
whenever appropriate, participate in these missions.
The March meeting with those Organizations showed
that they are interested in working cooperatively with
each other and with the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) in this area.

Given the important work that remains to be
done, it is essential that the Committee receive
increased support from Member States, all parts of the
United Nations system and organizations engaged in
the fight against terrorism. It must act with a renewed
sense of urgency, as if 9/11 took place yesterday - not
more than two years ago. The Committee must not wait
for the next major terrorist act to occur in order to
become re-energized. As the Committee begins its next
phase of work, it must never forget that we will all be
vulnerable to terrorism as long as States have counter-
terrorism needs that are not being addressed.

In addition, the Council must continue to play an
active role in the fight against terrorism. While its
subsidiary bodies, such as the CTC, are important
instruments, there are times when Council action will
be necessary. The Council must therefore be prepared
to act. We look forward to the coming reports of
Ambassador Arias to the CTC and the Council, as he
works to take the Committee to an intensified level of
action and effectiveness.

Before concluding, I would like to echo the words
of praise spoken here for Chairman Arias, his dedicated
staff at the Spanish Mission and the Committee's
experts and secretarial staff. All of them deserve our
heartfelt congratulations for their work in making the
Committee the success that it is. Through the vigorous
and committed leadership and creativity of Chairman
Arias, we are confident that the Committee will meet
the challenges that lie ahead. We all owe him our
strongest support.

I resume my function as President of the Council.

In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take seats at the Council
table. When a speaker is taking the floor, the
Conference Officer will seat the next speaker on the
list at the table.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, to whom
I now give the floor.

