Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank Special Envoy Martin Griffiths for his realistic
briefing to us today, as well as for his persistence
and resilience.

Iwill address three issues: first, the politicalprocess;
secondly, the effects of the conflict on the civilian
population; and, thirdly, the humanitarian situation.

First, with regard to the political process, we share
Martin's disappointment that one party did not make
it to the highly anticipated consultations in Geneva
last weekend. However, the beginning of those kinds
of consultations is never easy, especially not following
two years of growing distrust between the parties since
the last negotiations took place, in Kuwait. Confidence
has to be rebuilt one step at a time, and we commend
Martin's efforts in making that happen.

Confidence-building measures, as proposed and
discussed in Geneva, are focused on the most crucial
of issues that we face in Yemen - the well-being of
ordinary Yemeni citizens and issues such as resuming
medical flights out of Sana'a airport and addressing
Yemen's failing economy. We strongly support that
approach and call on the parties to show good faith at this
critical juncture. They should engage with the Special
Envoy by taking meaningful steps to achieve them.

This weekend's minor setback can, and must, be
overcome. It should not be used to justify an escalation
on the battlefield. A sustainable, peaceful, political
solution is the only way forward. Unfortunately,
already we have seen an increase in clashes in
Al-Hudaydah, as well as enhanced tensions in Aden.
We call on all sides to demonstrate their commitment
to peace. They should show restraint, de-escalate and
engage without preconditions with the United Nations-
facilitated process.

Let me also take this opportunity to express
particular appreciation for Martin's efforts in
strengthening female participation in the process, a
point which he just elaborated.

Secondly, with regard to the effects of the conflict
on the civilian population, the last time the Council met
in consultations we discussed the worrying spike in
civilian casualties as hostilities increased. Since then,
we have witnessed more violations of international
humanitarian law. Those violations include an attack
on a World Food Programme food truck, an air strike
in Ad Durayhimi and the injuring of civilians as a
result of a shot-down Houthi missile. We condemn
those practices. As the Council, we must continue to
send a clear signal that all parties must comply with
international humanitarian law and should address its
violations. Accountability must continue to feature
high on our agenda, including to sustain a future
political agreement.

Thirdly, with regard to the humanitarian situation,
the concerns raised by the Special Envoy about the
devastating humanitarian impact of any further
escalation in Al-Hudaydah and Aden are as prominent
as they have ever been, and the Council has expressed
itself several times in that regard. In line with the
presidential statement of March (S/PRST/2018/5), we
continue to insist on the full and sustained opening
of the ports of Al-Hudaydah and Saleef, as well as
the unimpeded distribution of supplies throughout
the country. That includes access for ships carrying
containers and fuel, as facilitated by the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism.

In conclusion, the reinvigoration of the political
process and bringing it to a successful resolution will
likely be a long process. The first steps have now been
taken. In order to keep the process moving all parties
need to take their responsibility. They need to move
beyond words and show their commitment by taking
concrete steps to restore confidence. We will stay
closely engaged as Mr. Griffiths' work progresses.
Let me express the hope that the Security Council will
stay united in supporting the Special Envoy in finding
a peaceful, political and sustainable solution in the
interests of the people of Yemen.
