Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): I thank you, Sir, for
organizing this public meeting on Afghanistan, where
the situation on all fronts seems only to be getting
worse on a daily basis - the latest scenario being the
edict that the Taliban has issued against minority
communities.

We deeply appreciate the important briefing
provided to the Council this morning by Ambassador
Valdivieso and we felicitate Mr. Menkerios and
members of the Committee of Experts for their
comprehensive and important report.

Today's discussion has to focus on the report, and
in that connection my delegation has noted the many
highly commendable suggestions that have been made
by the Committee. Among the important suggestions,
we note the following: publication of information
concerning violations of end-user certificate
provisions, including the names of companies,
countries and individuals involved, as well as cases of
unauthorized re-transfer of weapons to third parties, as
referred to in paragraph 39 of the report; the need for
assistance in providing data on aircraft movements in
and out of Afghanistan, which would help to monitor
illegal flights, as referred to in paragraph 40; the need
for neighbouring Pakistan to regulate the curricula at
the madrassas, as referred to in paragraph 43; the
return or repatriation of foreign terrorists under
international supervision, as referred to in paragraph
48; and the idea of creating a dual-control sanctions
monitoring mechanism, as referred to in paragraph 77.

My delegation strongly supports those
recommendations, which are in line with the mandate
of the Committee to deal with the growing problems in
Afghanistan. We believe that they are important
guidelines for the management of sanctions in general.
We agree with the observation made in the report that
the close cooperation of neighbouring countries is
imperative in resolving the Afghanistan problem. We
appeal to the neighbouring countries to cooperate fully
with the international community in this regard, and we
hope that they will.

The proposal for a sanctions monitoring
mechanism is very commendable, but we have to
assure ourselves that such a body will not become a
mere reporting panel for further action by others.
Instead, it must have a solid structure, with all financial
and human resources to effectively deal with sanctions-
busting cases. We believe that the monitoring body
should be financed out of assessed contributions and
supported by voluntary funds from donors. The body
should work in close cooperation with the sanctions
Committee and report its findings to the Committee for
action as appropriate.

Finally, we hope that, in the course of this month,
the Security Council will hold an open debate that will
allow the Members of the United Nations to express
their views on a more comprehensive basis on all
aspects of the Afghanistan question.

