Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
first like to extend my thanks to your predecessor,
Mr. President, the Permanent Representative of
Azerbaijan, and to congratulate him on his exemplary
conduct of the work of the Council last month. I would
also like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency for this month. We are confident that,
with your well-known expertise, you will conduct the
work of the Council in all impartiality and justice.

I should like to begin by putting on record the
fact that our participation in this meeting does not in
any way indicate recognition of or interaction with
the International Criminal Court (ICC). The Sudan is
not party to the Court. We would like to reiterate that
we are compelled to participate in order to correct the
fallacious information included in the fifteenth report of
the Office of the Prosecutor, information also included
in his previous reports. That is the sole reason for our
participation.

Establishing a link between a judicial entity and
a political entity, as is the case between the Security
Council and the International Criminal Court, is not a
step that serves to ensure justice, and perhaps I should
not speak at length on this issue. Legal experts have
always spoken of the independence of the judiciary, in
particular from political powers. That is a fact that any
first-year law student would know. Also, the contractual
relationship between the Security Council and the Court
should be confined to the parties to the Rome Statute
only. I do not need to remind those who represent the
Court of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties,
which is a cornerstone of international law. A State that
is not a party to a convention does not have obligations
under it.

I would like to add that the Council's referral of
the conflict in Darfur to the Court through resolution
1593 (2005), calling it a threat to international peace
and security, was not based on any sound logic, since it
is an internal conflict not reaching outside the borders
of the Sudan. It is therefore not a threat even to regional
peace and security, to say nothing of international
peace and security. The whole issue is therefore based
on merely political motives and is being implemented
by individuals within the Court who are serving the
political agendas of certain States.

The Court is not one of the entities established by
the United Nations Charter. Consequently, it is not a
judicial arm of the United Nations. It is a court of the
States parties to the Rome Statute. As I have said, the
Sudan is not a party to that Statute, which founded the
Court. In the same way, eight members of the Council,
primarily among the non-permanent members, are not
parties to the Statute.
I would like to shed some light on what is for us
the most important issue regarding the International
Criminal Court, namely, the behaviour of the Prosecutor.
In that context, I would like to quote, for a second time
(see S/PV.6688), the words of Condoleezza Rice, former
Secretary of State of the United States of America, on
this subject.

(spoke in English)

"We opposed the ICC on the grounds, among
others, that its prosecutor is not accountable to any
Government. For us this was an issue of sovereignty
and a step that looks a bit too much like "world
government'." (No Higher Honor: A Memoir of My Years in Washington, p. 188.)

(spoke in Arabic)

What we heard only moments ago from the
Prosecutor reaffirms Ms. Rice's words. He speaks as if
he were president of the world, issuing his instructions
to the Security Council and suggesting options about
which he will speak at a later time. Even a cursory
evaluation of Ms. Rice's words about the Prosecutor
shows her to be correct, because it has been proved that
in practice there is no system providing accountability
on the part of the Prosecutor, leading him to stray from
legitimacy and legal professionalism. All the claims
he has levelled a based on political motives - that
what happened in Darfur was ethnic cleansing have
been refuted by testimony from prominent international
figures, who have denied that the crime of ethnic
cleansing took place in Darfur.

In the most recent Council meeting on this subject
I outlined that testimony in detail (see S/PV.6688).
However, for the record, since the Prosecutor is repeating
the same claims, I too would like to repeat some of
those who have refuted those claims. Among them is
the late Judge Antonio Cassisi, expert on international
law and head of the International Commission of
Inquiry on Darfur, who denied the commission of the
crime of ethnic cleansing. Compare that denial by such
a prominent legal expert with the statements made by
people on the Court who are just beginning their careers
and learning the basics of the law.

Also among those refuting the claims are
Dr. Mercedes Taty and Dr. Jean-Herve Bradol of
Medecins sans frontieres - neither of whom is from
the Sudan, or Africa or Asia - who worked in Darfur
for over 10 years. They stated that ethnic cleansing
was not committed in Darfur. The former United States
Special Envoy for Peace in Darfur, Mr. John Danforth,
said that the repeated claims that ethnic cleansing had
been committed in Darfur were nothing but an excuse
for United States interference in the internal affairs of
the Sudan. He, too, is neither Sudanese nor African.
He commands credibility, and his statement will be
remembered by history and the whole of humankind.
The official spokesperson of the European Union
fact-finding mission - a European - has also denied
the commission of ethnic cleansing in Darfur.

All of those statements are documented. In
addition to them, former Nigerian President Obasanjo
and the former United Nations Special Rapporteur
on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
Ms. Asma Jahangir, have also stated that ethnic cleansing
was not committed in Darfur. I leave it to the wisdom of
the members of the Council to compare the testimony
of such prominent figures with false claims driven by
political and personal motives.

Further proof of the Prosecutor's lack of credibility
is that a reader of his report would feel that he is speaking
of a Darfur other than the one that is currently enjoying
stability and security. We now see a Darfur in which
the Sudan has gone a long way towards implementing
the Doha Document for Peace, a Darfur in which the
authorities have begun to carry out their duties in
accordance with that agreement.

The report before the Council reiterates erroneous
information whose value has been superseded by
events on the ground in Darfur. For example, I would
like to mention here what the report calls the lack of
national judicial measures. That is incorrect. The Doha
Document for Peace, which includes straightforward
provisions on justice and reconciliation, is the best
evidence of the Sudan's commitment to implementing
the national judicial measures required to investigate
the crimes perpetrated in Darfur. The Doha Document
even stipulates, in paragraph 295, that
"immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of their
official status or functions shall not obstruct the
speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they prevent
the combating of impunity."

That provision is in addition to other commitments
set forth in the Doha Document designed to bring about
justice and reconciliation as the two main vectors for the
establishment of peace in Darfur.

Those mechanisms have begun to work in the
general context of launching the work of the Transitional
Darfur Regional Authority headed by Mr. Tijani
el-Sissi, who represents the coalition of 11 factions that
had previously engaged in armed struggle against the
Government. They have all been involved in running
Darfur; the leaders in Darfur are thus sons of Darfur.
They have been involved in the work of reconstruction
and in the return of the displaced.

In the light of all those positive tangible
developments on the ground, it is now necessary for
those who speak of Darfur to call upon the international
community to assist in completing the march towards
peace and not to throw more fuel on the fire, cause
instability or intimidate the inhabitants of the region.

The Doha Document also addresses other issues
related to Darfur, laying out a road map for their
solution. The cessation of violence and the return of the
displaced, the establishment of stability and peace and
the resumption of reconstruction are all results of the
Doha Document. In that regard, I would like to quote
Mr. Dan Smith, the United States envoy for Darfur,
who visited Darfur a few days ago. He actually goes to
Darfur almost every month. He said,

(spoke in English)

"Darfur is quite a different place from 2003 [when]
18 per cent of the population lived in urban areas.
Now about 50 per cent of the population is living in
urban areas."

(spoke in Arabic)

When we present such facts and quote the United
States envoy, who visits Darfur monthly, who has
greater credibility? Is it the person I have just quoted or
the person who has never visited Darfur? Who has more
credibility in this case?
The positive developments in Darfur were
recognized in a recently completed review undertaken
by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), which concluded that the
military units should be reduced, leading to a savings of
$79.9 million in the 2012-2013 budget.

In view of everything to which I have referred,
would it not have been better for the Prosecutor to
take the right and optimistic path that is strewn with
positive developments, instead of dwelling on the past,
inciting the Security Council to take action against the
Government of the Sudan and beating the drums of
war and interference, which would only lead to further
instability? Law can never be established except where
there is stability and security, not war.

The Prosecutor has today devised a new approach
through which he attempts to instigate the Council to take
action the Government of the Sudan. In his arguments,
he relies on the Council's resolutions on the conflict in
Darfur. In that regard, two other United Nations bodies
charged with the implementation of those resolutions,
the foremost of which, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO), has not presented to the Council
such flagrantly provocative reports. The Council has
before it the two latest reports of the Secretary-General
on the situation in Darfur and the implementation of
the UNAMID mandate, which speak of the reduction of
violence and the drop in crime rates.

The Prosecutor, in mentioning what he calls the lack
of cooperation by the Government of the Sudan and its
non-compliance with Security Council resolutions, has
deliberately ignored the United Nations Charter and its
provisions for the respect of the legitimacy of States and
their sovereignty. He has also ignored the provisions of
the Vienna Convention, as I mentioned earlier, which
hold that any State that is not party to a convention is
not bound by it.

If the Prosecutor wishes to speak of law, he should
really speak of the law. But if he is speaking of politics
and not of law, or if he has other motives, then that is
another story. Why does the Prosecutor continue to
confuse the issues and incite the Security Council to take
action against the Government of the Sudan, which has
been able to turn the page of war in Darfur and devote
all its potential and resources to developing that region
and to rebuild it and restore peaceful coexistence among
the different tribes that live there.

We condemn and denounce in the strongest terms the
recommendations of the Prosecutor asking the Security
Council to take other legal measures to implement what
he calls arrest warrants, as well as his incitement of the
Council to call on States Members of this Organization
and regional organizations to do the same.

We would recall that the President of the Republic,
Omer Hassan Ahmed Al-Bashir, was elected by the
Sudanese people in elections whose free and democratic
nature was recognized by the United Nations, regional
organizations, European observers and the Carter
Centre. We would recall also that other Sudanese
leaders accused by the Prosecutor are members of an
elected Government and that the people of the Sudan
will therefore not think twice about defending the
sovereignty of their country and the symbols of its
dignity and independence.

We would also remind the Prosecutor that
threatening to interfere in the affairs of States by force
will not break the determination of free people, and that
contemporary African history offers ample testimony
to that effect. We would like also to draw the attention
of the new Prosecutor of the Court to the serious and
dangerous nature of her predecessor's approach.

I reiterate that the Government of the Sudan will
continue to cooperate with the Council and with the
mediators, particularly the brotherly country of Qatar,
in the continuing efforts to establish fully the peace
and stability process in Darfur, taking into account
the fact that peace is a necessary foundation for
stability and justice, and recognizing the importance
of ensuring justice, reaching settlements and providing
compensation in accordance with the stipulations of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur.

I should like to conclude by saying that the people of
Darfur are dear to the hearts of the people of the Sudan
and that the Government of the Sudan is more concerned
than anyone else with realizing their aspirations, tending
to their wounds and easing their bitterness. We hope that
the Council will give precedence to the voice ofwisdom
and logic and act on the basis of the key principles upon
which the United Nations was founded - to bring about
justice and to assist States in their efforts to bring about
peace and security.

I appeal to the Council to bring pressure to bear,
and even to take punitive measures, against the rebel
armed movements in Darfur that have refused to listen
to reason or sit at the negotiating table. That should be
the substance of our efforts: to continue on the path that
we have chosen and to sit with those who have rejected
peace and negotiate with them, with a view to turning
a new page instead of opting for the culture of war
and conflict, which does not lead to peace, justice or
stability.

I call on the Council to disregard calls for measures
that do not serve to bring about stability and peace,
which is the main objective of the United Nations. I am
confident that it will do so.

