Mr. Park (Republic of Korea): I wish to express my
appreciation to the Caucus of the Non-Aligned Movement
for the initiative it has taken and the excellent job it has

 

done in working out the draft resolution before the Council
today.

The Republic of Korea condemns international
terrorism in all its forms. We condemn in particular State-
sponsored acts of terrorism against a Head of State as a
major source of threats to international peace and security.
The imperative need for the international community to
eradicate terrorism from the face of the earth cannot be
over-emphasized.

My Government's firm commitment to the eradication
of State-sponsored terrorism is based upon our own
traumatic experiences in the recent past. As members of the
Council may recall, in October 1983 the entourage of the
President of the Republic of Korea was subjected to a
bomb attack in Myanmar during the President's State visit
to that country. In this terrorist attack, aimed at the
President himself, 17 members of the official entourage,
including four Cabinet members of the Korean Government,
lost their lives. Although the perpetrators of this attack were
brought to justice, and irrefutable evidence establishing the
sponsorship of a State was presented to the United Nations
by the Myanmar Government, as contained in document
A/39/456, the sponsor of this act of terrorism was left
unpunished.

This impunity led to another act of terrorism four
years later by the same State - this time against a
commercial airliner of my country, resulting in the killing
of 115 people on board. This incident was considered on 17
February 1988 by the Council - in the proceedings of
which I myself participated - but the Council failed to act
on the overwhelming evidence of State sponsorship. We
believe that the half-hearted manner in which these acts of
terrorism were then handled by the United Nations sent a
wrong signal to potential sponsors of State terrorism. As
with all crimes, the culture of impunity towards acts of
terrorism breeds terrorism.

I mention my country's own tragic experience here
simply to underline my Government's serious concern over
the persistence of terrorism and the crucial responsibility of
the Council for dealing resolutely with them. By adopting
the draft resolution before us today, the Council will be
making amends for its past mistake of inaction in a similar
case during the dark years of the cold war.

Having said that, I wish to make it clear that we have
no intention at this stage of prejudging the merits of the
case at hand. However, given the gravity of the case and its
potential consequences for the peace and stability of the
countries concerned and of the region, the Council has a
moral and political responsibility to bring the three
suspects wanted in connection with the assassination
attempt to justice and thus bring the truth of the case to
light.

The most practical step towards this end at this stage
would be to support the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity (OAU) in the African regional context. In
fact, this is what the draft resolution before the Council
is about. It should be noted that the draft resolution does
not deviate from the decisions made by the OAU. By
endorsing the actions taken by the OAU, the Council can
strengthen the authority and capability of that
Organization in the field of conflict prevention,
management and resolution in the region.

While we are inclined to read a positive indication
of Sudan's willingness to cooperate with the OAU to
resolve this problem in the Sudanese Foreign Minister's
letter of 25 January addressed to the OAU Secretary-
General, we regret that OAU requests for the extradition
of the three suspects have not been complied with. We
believe that the best way for the Government of Sudan to
disprove its responsibility is to apprehend and extradite
the three suspects without delay, in compliance with the
OAU decisions and on the basis of the 1964 Extradition
Treaty between Ethiopia and Sudan.

In the light of these remarks, we will vote in favour
of the draft resolution before the Council.
