Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency during the month of August,
during which you presided over two open debates (see S/PV.7753 and S/PV.7758) and two straw polls, two
straw polls. The straw polls showed that the Council's
procedures, which you, Sir, very effectively managed,
indeed work. The best proof of that lies in the fact that
the Council was able methodically to move forward
in a unified manner on the very demanding work of
selecting the individual who will lead the Organization
as of next year. At the appropriate time, the Council
willl have to make its recommendation to the General
Assembly, pursuant to Article 97 of the Charter of the
United Nations, in such a way as to enable the man or
woman who will become the next Secretary-General to
prepare for that difficult task.

I would also like to say a few words on Syria,
which calls for the Security Council to assume its
responsibilities. The consultations that took place
yesterday following the submission of the report of
the Joint Investigative Mechanism served to bring us
face-to-face with our responsibilities. That is not vague
wording, but a reality. The use of chemical weapons
by the Syrian regime and by Da'esh, as the report
clearly established, constitutes a step backward that
we cannot allow to go without a response, or there will
be serious consequences. Those who committed those
crimes - who are now known to us - must face up to
their weighty responsibility.

The month of August also saw the Council closely
following the very worrying humanitarian situation
in Syria. The Security Council held an important and
disturbing Arria Formula meeting on 8 August. I hope
that it will contribute to raising greater awareness about
the disaster in Aleppo. I would like to thank all the
delegations that took part, even if some of them felt
that they were implicated. The Council moved to act
on the situation in Aleppo owing to the humanitarian
crisis. In the consultations that took place on 9 August,
Mr. Stephen O'Brien and Mr. Staffan de Mistura
expressed their deep concern and called upon the two
co-Chairs of the International Syria Support Group
to find a solution during their discussions in Geneva.
On 22 August (see S/PV.7756), Mr. O'Brien spoke
here of his great concern about the failure to deliver
humanitarian aid to all the besieged towns in the
country. He also expressed his hope that that would
be the last time he had to ask for humanitarian access,
which is an obligation guaranteed under international
humanitarian law. Unfortunately, we are very far from
that. On this issue too, the Council must show itself to
be up to its responsibilities.

Ijust mentioned the chemical weapons in Syria.
In fact, the issue of non-proliferation issue was also
at the centre of the Council's work this month. You,
Mr. President, convened an open debate (see S/PV.7758)
on the isue. However, the Council also dealt with the
situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. Fortunately, we regained our unity this month,
following a further, irresponsible provocation by the
authorities in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. The Council condemned in no uncertain terms
the ballistic missile tests undertaken by Pyongyang,
which constitute a direct threat to its neighbours.
I recall that a missile landed this past month in the
territorial waters of Japan, a Member of the United
Nations and ofthe Security Council. It was also a threat
to the non-proliferation regime, on which our collective
security is based. We must reinforce our message and
specify new listings so that the authorities in Pyongyang
have no misunderstanding as to our determination to
prevent them from continuing to advance their illegal
nuclear and ballistic missile programmes.

By way of conclusion, on the issue of South
Sudan, the month of August included follow-up by the
Council with regard to the worsening of the situation
in that country since July with the outbreak of violence
in Juba. It was important for the Council to remind
everyone of the importance it gives to the protection of
civilians. The United Nations Mission in South Sudan
is operating in a particularly difficult environment and
is encountering a number of obstacles in implementing
its mandate. It was therefore important for the Council
to reiterate its full support for the Mission. The Council
also reminded the parties that they should recommit
themselves to peace. Along with its regional partners,
such as Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the African Union, the Council must continue to
assume its responsibilities, as it will do in the coming
days by undertaking a visit to South Sudan. It is high
time for the Council to finally put in place an essential
arms embargo for that beleaguered country - a
common sense decision that we should have taken a
long time ago.

I should like to conclude by mentioning Lebanon
and pointing out that we adopted a strong presidential
statement at the end of July (S/PRST/20l6/10) to deplore
the vacancy in the presidency. During the consultations
with the Department of Peacekeeping Operations on
24 August, we pointed to the situation in southern
Lebanon 10 years after the adoption of resolution 1701
(2006). We reiterated our collective support for the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
in carrying out its mandate to safeguard the cessation
of hostilities. On 30 August, we unanimously adopted
resolution 2305 (2016) to extend the mission's mandate
for another year. We welcome the Council's support for
UNIFIL and for the stability of southern Lebanon - in
a region, the Middle East, that does not deserve another
crisis.

The month of August has therefore been one of
great substance, and I would like to thank you, Sir, for
your work during your presidency. I also welcome the
presidency of New Zealand for the month of September,
which will be equally busy.

