The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as representative of the United Kingdom.
I am grateful to the Under-Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs for his briefing today. In the view
of the United Kingdom, the protection of civilians is
central to the Security Council's work. It matters
morally and it matters legally. It matters because
effective protection of civilians increases the
possibility of achieving a sustainable peace in any
given conflict. Protecting civilians helps reduce further
violence caused by the deep frustration and tensions
that result from displacement, human rights abuses and
revenge attacks. Like others, we believe that a more
consistent and systematic consideration of the
protection of civilians by the Council would lead to
progress in our ability to act to protect those whose
lives have been torn apart by conflict. We hope to
continue our dialogue with other Council members to
find the best way to do that. We look forward to the
next report of the Secretary-General, which will inform
our efforts.

The Council will also have a chance to review the
effectiveness of United Nations action to protect
civilians next week when we are in Africa and will talk
to United Nations teams and political leaders in
Somalia, Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, three countries where the challenge of
protecting civilians is especially acute.

As well as protecting civilians in situations of
armed conflict, the international community has
committed itself to assist States that are under stress
before crises and conflicts break out. In that regard, we
reaffirm our support for the concept of the
responsibility to protect, as agreed by Member States at
the World Summit in 2005. It is an important
commitment, which should result in earlier and more
decisive action to prevent genocide, war crimes, ethnic
cleansing and crimes against humanity.

The scourge of sexual and gender-based violence
was rightly highlighted in Mr. Holmes's briefing. It is
another element that undermines efforts to secure a
lasting peace. The targeted use of sexual violence,
sometimes as a deliberate weapon of war, is an
unacceptable practice that is not only terrible in itself,
but also has a destabilizing effect on post-conflict
peacebuilding. As the Under-Secretary-General has
said, we must end the climate of impunity that fuels
those grave abuses. We listened with interest to his
ideas on accountability and look forward to discussing
these issues further next month under the United States
presidency of the Security Council.

As the Secretary-General has said, humanitarian
access is the fundamental prerequisite for humanitarian
action and protection. We have heard today that there
are many reasons why humanitarian access is not
always possible. We welcome the work of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs on this
issue. Some obstacles are caused by geography. But
when the obstacles are man-made and malign, for
example in the imposition of bureaucratic
impediments, it is incumbent upon all of us to ensure
that those obstacles are challenged and removed.

It is only by putting in place mechanisms to
reduce the suffering of civilians in armed conflict and
ensuring their protection that we can succeed in our
attempts to bring an end to conflict and establish
sustainable peace.

I agree with those other Council members who
shared Mr. Holmes's concern that humanitarian access
is also a critical issue in situations of natural disaster,
as we see currently in Burma. We welcome the
Secretary-General's leadership on that issue. As Under-
Secretary-General Holmes said, the implementation of
the agreements reached in Rangoon this weekend is
now the key. The eyes of the world remain very much
on the terrible situation there.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Australia.

