The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

I would like to thank Mr. Feltman, Mr. Simonovie
and Mr. Ging for their briefings. Their presentations
have helped to provide valuable insight into the overall
situation in Ukraine.

The Security Council, through its resolution
2202 (2015), has brought all its weight to bear on the
efforts to end the crisis that is the subject of the Minsk
agreements, which the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) is in charge of
implementing. After having heard the representative of
the OSCE last week (see S/PV.7391), it seems useful
for the Council to have information for evaluating the
overall situation. All aspects are relevant for efforts to
support the crisis resolution process initiated in Minsk,
which is the priority for all of us. In that regard, it is
important to remember that the package of measures
for the implementation of the Minsk agreements
devotes an entire paragraph to humanitarian issues:
The signatories have committed to ensuring

"safe access, delivery, storage, and distribution of

humanitarian assistance to those in need, on the

basis of an international mechanism" (resolution 
2202 (2015), annex 1, para. 7).

The human rights situation in Ukraine has
continued to deteriorate in recent months. Here in
the Council in mid-November (see S/PV.7311), we
denounced the arrival from abroad of reinforcements
in terms of weapons and fighters in support of the
separatists, which fuelled a new wave of violence that
peaked in early February 2015. Mr. Simonovie's report
is illuminating on that issue. Nearly 6,000 people have
died since the beginning of the crisis in April 2014,
including the 298 passengers on the Malaysian Airlines
flight.

Civilians have been the main victims of this
escalation. I note in particular, and with horror, the
ongoing bombing of the evacuation corridors used by
people fleeing the combat zones, which has endangered
the evacuation operations organized by the Ukrainian
Government. Thousands of civilians, such as those in
the city of Debaltseve, have found themselves trapped
in combat zones.

This conflagration has also given rise to an increase
in the number of human rights violations, including
acts of torture, summary executions and abductions.
International standards have been violated by all
parties to the conflict. The east of the country, which
is controlled mainly by the separatists, has been turned
into a zone of lawlessness. Accordingly, the report
emphasizes the importance seeing the perpetrators of
those crimes, including most serious crimes, found and
brought to justice.

In that context, the humanitarian situation requires
the attention of all. The response must be coordinated.
The precarious conditions in which people live in
eastern Ukraine do not justify Russia's open violations
of the sovereignty of the country by bringing in so-
called humanitarian convoys without notice, which are
only partially monitored by the Ukrainian authorities.

Finally, we remain particularly concerned about the
situation of the population of Crimea under the de facto
yoke of Russian law. Mr. Simonovie's report describes
a situation of arbitrariness and legal uncertainty, where
civilians, especially the Tatars, experience regular
violations of their human rights and are criminally
charged under the Russian justice system for events
that took place prior to the illegal annexation of the
territory.

With the signing on 12 February of the package
of measures for the implementation of the Minsk
agreements, a new dynamic has emerged. The ceasefire
that entered into force on 15 February is now generally
respected, although it remains fragile. It has helped to
reduce the overall level of violence. De-escalation has
been observed on the ground, and the beginning of the
withdrawal of heavy weapons extends this dynamic. It
is the OSCE's responsibility to verify the withdrawal,
as provided for in paragraph 3 of the Minsk package of
measures. Other measures relating to human rights and
the humanitarian situation must now be encouraged. In
that respect, two points would establish confidence.

First, with regard to all the hostages and illegally
detained persons, the Minsk agreements provide for
their release and exchange on the basis of the principle
of "all against all". In that regard, we call on Russia to
stop holding people wrongfully detained in its territory,
particularly Nadiya Savchenko. Her release would
strengthen the first encouraging exchanges of prisoners
that have been taking place since 12 February, including
138 Ukrainian soldiers and 52 separatist fighters on
21 February.

Secondly, progress must be made quickly in the
coordination of humanitarian assistance, as provided
for in paragraph 7 of the Minsk package of measures.
All parties to the conflict must guarantee access for
international humanitarian assistance to all areas.
We welcome the announcement by the Ukrainian
Government of the creation of a platform for discussions
between Ukrainian officials and representatives of the
humanitarian community.

In addition, we support the proposals of
Ms. Heidi Tagliavini, Special Representative of the
OSCE Chairperson-in-Office in Ukraine, to create
a working group that would work to resolve all
humanitarian, economic and rehabilitation issues.
That group would cover the many outstanding issues:
the voluntary return of internally displaced persons
and refugees, the reconstruction of housing, food and
medical aid, the provision to civilians of food, clothing,
schools, and so on. The efforts of all sides will be
needed in that regard.

To give substance to the Minsk agreements,
all parties must respect all of the points. Full and
unconditional access and the security of the OSCE
observers, as well as the transmission of information,
especially to confirm the withdrawal of heavy weapons,
must imperatively be guaranteed by all parties. We
expect Russia to encourage the separatist elements to
fully implement the commitments they made in Minsk.

In addition, all parties must courageously address
all of the political points of the road map drawn up in
Minsk to advance towards a comprehensive and peaceful
settlement of the crisis. Progress will be possible when
all parties are willing to move forward. The Council may
be assured of the resolute and continued commitment of
France with its partners in the Normandy format and
in the framework of the Council to continue on the
difficult and demanding path of peace.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of Ukraine.

