Mr. Skoog (Sweden): Ithank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui and Special Envoy
Djinnit for their briefings. I extend my gratitude to the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
as well as the co-leads France, Equatorial Guinea and
Bolivia, the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO) and the United Nations country team
for organizing our visit to the Democratic Republic
of the Congo last week. The visit, although limited
to Kinshasa, offered very useful impressions of the
progress on the electoral calendar, but also on remaining
challenges, the human rights situation, humanitarian
needs and security.

Today I will address the elections, the overall
security and human rights situation and the role of the
United Nations, and will share a few thoughts on the
way forward.

When Sweden joined the Council in January 2017,
a major crisis had just been avoided by the signing
of the 31 December 2016 agreement. The agreement
provides the road map towards peaceful, credible and
inclusive elections on 23 December - elections that are
indeed critical to peace and stability in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in the broader region.

Those elections are now less than three months
away. Important progress has made in recent months.
We welcome the important preparatory steps that
have been taken. Efforts are now urgently needed to
implement all parts of the agreement, including the
confidence-building measures. The opening of equal
democratic space for all is essential, including the
freedom of assembly and of expression. As in any other
country, the Government has a special role to play in
ensuring the fulfilment of those measures. Everyone
must be able to campaign freely and peacefully, political
prisoners must be released, and the political rights of all
must be safeguarded.

Women's full and equal participation in the
elections is vital and must be supported and encouraged.
Unfortunately, the conditions for women's participation
still look dire. Much more needs to be done to mitigate
the political, economic, security and social impediments
to women's participation on equal terms.

The Independent National Electoral Commission
has a critical role to play. As preparations proceed,
there is need for more proactive outreach and increased
public information about the electoral process. That
includes clear guidance on the functioning of the voter
registry and the voting machines. Legitimate concerns
and recommendations on how to improve those
processes should be taken on board and considered in
a transparent and collaborative fashion. Independent
election observers would bring further credibility
to the electoral process and help to bring added trust
and confidence. We welcome the intention of the
Southern African Development Community to provide
support with an observation mission, and encourage
the Democratic Republic of the Congo to also engage
with other national, regional and international actors.
The continued readiness of MONUSCO to assist with
technical and logistical support is welcomed.

The ambitious efforts of the Conference episcopale
nationale du Congo (CENCO) to train and deploy
national observers should be encouraged and supported.
Further efforts are clearly needed to build confidence
and for the elections to be widely accepted among the
Congolese people. Good offices functions by CENCO
or the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
as needed, are important in that regard. Any concerns
about the conduct of the elections should be addressed
peacefully and through established channels and
institutions, and be duly considered in accordance with
international standards.

Continued regional leadership and international
unity are key. The recent discussions in Kampala
on advancing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Region, as referred to by Special Envoy Djinnit,
highlight the importance of regional coordination,
including for the conduct of credible elections in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. The joint statement
of the Security Council and the African Union Peace and
Security Council earlier in July illustrated international
unity on the need for those elections to be credible.

We condemn continued human rights violations by
armed groups in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
We are especially concerned about the escalation of
violence and attacks in and around Beni, in the Kasai
region and most recently in the mining town of Rubaya.
Sexual and gender-based violence is widespread.
The destabilizing activities of armed groups are of
grave concern.

It is important never to let violence and human
rights violations become the new normal, and all
parties are responsible for that. The Government has a
particular responsibility to address violence and abuse,
including sexual and gender-based violence. The high
percentage of violations that are attributed to State
agents is of great concern. Fighting impunity is key.
We call on the Government to continue to strengthen
efforts to ensure that those responsible for violations
are held to account.

The fragile security situation has also had a
negative impact on the Ebola response, as well as other
humanitarian efforts. We call for a period of tranquillity
to allow for addressing the threat of Ebola. More
funding is needed for the overall humanitarian response
and, not least, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access
must be granted.

We commend the work of MONUSCO, which
operates under difficult conditions and with an extensive
mandate. We appreciate the more proactive posture of
the Mission, which has enabled better protection for both
civilians and peacekeepers. With limited resources,
MONUSCO has been able to deliver important results.
We fully support the mandate of the Mission and the
continued good offices of Special Representative Leila
Zerrougui. It is important that MONUSCO be prepared
to manage violence and insecurity in connection with
the elections, including in the post-election context.
Continued efforts for the transfer of capacity can, we
hope, be explored after the elections.

TheUnitedNationscountryteamalsodeserves credit
for its important work, exploring a broader peace and
development agenda amid honourable efforts to provide
humanitarian assistance in difficult circumstances. In
an ideal scenario, venues will open up after the elections
for a stronger development focus, based on a credible
Government plan focusing on the long-term needs of
the population for socioeconomic development, based
on the Sustainable Development Goals.
I want to take this opportunity to note some
new dynamics in the trial and investigation into the
murders of United Nations experts Zaida Catalan and
Michael Sharp, which were also raised by my American
colleague. We underscore the continued need for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities to fully
cooperate with the follow-on mechanism, initiated by the
Secretary-General and led by Mr. Robert Petit, as well
as national investigations. It is also important that the
national investigations take note of recommendations
made by the mechanism, especially in terms of
conducting thorough and legally robust investigations
without artificial timelines for its completion. We
welcome the anticipated extension of the mechanism.
The Swedish investigation is still experiencing issues
relating to cooperation with Democratic Republic of the
Congo authorities. We would also like to acknowledge
the ongoing efforts of the Secretariat to improve the
overall security and conditions for United Nations
experts, an issue that requires the Council's further
attention and support.

Just as we landed in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, we were met with the announcement that Dr.
Mukwege and the Panzi hospital had been awarded the
Nobel Peace Prize. That is very significant recognition
for all women affected by sexual abuse, and it has shed
light on the tremendous suffering that conflict-related
sexual violence imposes on victims, their families and
entire societies in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and elsewhere. Let us hope that the prize will help turn
the corner towards putting an end once and for all to
that most horrendous of crimes and that women will be
empowered to play a full and equal part in the future of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The Congolese people have suffered for too long.
The upcoming elections and the subsequent democratic
transfer of power will offer an opportunity for renewed
momentum in putting the interests of the people first.
Credible and peaceful elections are necessary but not
sufficient on the road ahead for the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Moving from constant emergency mode
and humanitarian crisis towards real development based
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the enjoyment by all Congolese of their fundamental
rights is necessary. All national stakeholders, countries
in the region and the international community must
now focus efforts on ensuring that the opportunity to
change the trajectory in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo is seized.

