Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Special Envoy Michel Kafando
for his briefing on the evolving situation in Burundi.
We listened with grateful interest to the report by
Ambassador Jiirg Lauber of Sweden, in his capacity
as Chair of the Burundi country configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), following his trip
to Bujumbura and other countries of the region. We
commend the configuration's balanced approach, which
has enabled it to remain a valuable channel for dialogue
with Bujumbura, and we support the PBC's efforts to
revitalize its interaction with the Burundians by focusing
on issues related to socioeconomic development and the
re-establishment of donor confidence.

We believe that overall, Burundi's internal political
processes are trending towards stabilization. With
regard to the country's political situation, we want to
point out that on 17 May it held a peaceful, constitutional
referendum. In response to the criticism of that event
from the opposition and a number of Western States, the
voter turnout was a staggering - indeed unprecedented
for an African country - total of 96.24 per cent, of
which an overwhelming majority of 73.26 per cent also
voted for constitutional change. We also understand
that it was preceded by a democratic and transparent
publicity campaign.

In the view of the Russian Federation, the issue of
the presidential and parliamentary elections planned
for 2020 is Burundi's internal affair. We call on the
authorities and the opposition to refrain from negative
rhetoric and to concentrate on preparing for the
election cycle, especially since President Nkurunziza
has announced that he will not be participating in the
presidential race.

With regard to the problems in advancing the
inter-Burundian dialogue, we want to point out that
ascribing responsibility for it to one side alone is
counterproductive and even dangerous. Rather than
shielding the intransigent opposition, it would behove
the Secretariat and a number of our Western colleagues
to urge all the Burundian parties to work to resume
a full-scale negotiation process, which could lead to
the achievement of sustainable peace and stability in
Burundi, as soon as possible.

In the light of the intention of former President
Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania to consider rethinking his
role in the mediation process, we would like to note that
this does not cancel our commitment to the principle
of African solutions to African problems. We call on
the African community to continue its active mediation
efforts aimed at facilitating constructive negotiations
between the parties.

The fact that the process of the return of refugees
from neighbouring countries to Burundi has begun is
evidence of the gradual improvement in the country's
situation. At the same time, the humanitarian situation
in Burundi remains problematic. It is regrettable that the
humanitarian appeal for support to the country has not
been fully funded. We urge donor countries to abandon
their double standards. We continue to stand firmly for
the principles of humanism, neutrality and impartiality
in United Nations efforts to deliver humanitarian
assistance with the consent of the host country.

We have taken note of the information in the
Secretary-General's report (S/2018/1028) on the
alleged major human rights violations in Burundi. We
should point out, however, that the information in the
September report (A/HRC/39/63) of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
(OHCHR), from which it is borrowed, is far from
unambiguous, and we should therefore draw no specific
conclusions from it. It should be sufficient to point out
that the OHCHR report is based on data that comes only
from representatives of the radical opposition, which has
been an unrelenting critic of the Burundian authorities
for a number of years and also conducts its activities
from outside the country. That can hardly be considered
an impartial source of information. In any case, as we
all know, in accordance with the division of labour in
the United Nations, human rights issues are dealt with
by the Human Rights Council, where Burundi is already
the subject of discussion. We want to point out that the
entire responsibility for ensuring that human rights
are upheld in the territory of Burundi, including by
armed and non-State entities, belongs to the Burundian
authorities, and needless to say the Security Council
should proceed from that understanding in its work. As
a matter of principle, we support respect for Burundi's
sovereignty and categorically reject any interference in
Bujumbura's internal affairs.

In general, we would like to emphasize that the
information we have heard today is not evidence
of the kind of problems in Burundi that would merit
keeping the situation there on the Security Council's
agenda. We once again urge our colleagues on the
Council to focus on more serious issues. In any
case, we certainly do not see the need for quarterly
discussions on the situation in Burundi. In general, we
believe that the Council's ongoing focus on Burundi is
becoming counterproductive and is essentially merely a
convenient excuse for the unreconcilable opposition to
complicate its internal political processes.

