Mr. Gasana (Rwanda) (spoke in French): I
should like to thank the Security Council for its ever-
growing interest in the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) by inviting us from time to time to contribute to
the Council's lofty undertaking, as enormous and
invaluable as it is for human kind as a whole. Allow
me also to formally reiterate my congratulations, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council
for this month.

(spoke in English)

The Peacebuilding Commission has prioritized
national ownership as a central principle in ensuring
sustainable peace and preventing a relapse into
conflict. To that end, beyond rhetoric and slogans, the
Commission believes that ownership is best understood
and meaningful in the context of three primary areas,
namely, first, a national vision for, and leadership of,
the political and peacebuilding processes; secondly,
adequate human and institutional capacities in critical
areas of security, governance and economic generation;
and, thirdly, the inclusiveness of all segments of the
society.

The Commission considers the review of civilian
capacity as a window of opportunity for the
international community to address the second area,
namely, the adequate development of human and
institutional capacities, and to recognize the urgency
with which we need to improve our collective response
to that challenging task. In the context of taking
forward the relevant recommendations from the 2010
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, the Commission has prioritized national
capacity development for the countries on its agenda as
a key area requiring immediate attention this year.

In that connection, the Commission was
periodically engaged throughout the consultative
process which produced the ambitious report
(S/2011/85) that is before us today. The members of the
Commission have also been closely involved through
the informal consultative group chaired by Canada, a
member of the Commission and the Chair of its Sierra
Leone configuration. Recently, following the release of
the report, the Commission had informal interactions
with our outstanding and efficient Under-Secretary-
General, Susana Malcorra, Chair of the Steering
Group, who shared with us her thinking on the next
steps to be taken.

There is a need to operationalize actions across
the four areas covered by the report: ownership,
partnership, expertise and nimbleness. We appreciate
the fact that in order to operationalize the outcome of
the review, we must prioritize those actions that could
deliver the most immediate and tangible improvements
in the field. However, we recognize also that high
expectations have already been generated by the
process. We hope that we can, to the extent possible,
match practicality with expectations, and realism with
the urgency of introducing changes. I am not
suggesting that this will be a simple task for the
Secretary-General, as it will necessarily feed into the
broader efforts of United Nations reform.

On substance, I would like to touch on the
following elements, which the Commission deems of
particular significance in going forward.

First, capacity needs in the countries concerned
must be viewed within the framework of the most
pressing peacebuilding needs and priorities, which are
country-specific and time-bound. Therefore, the
priority-setting exercise must be owned nationally, and
our response must be demand-driven.

Secondly, we need to improve the way in which
we identify and classify existing national and local
capacities. Practical mechanisms that could enable,
train and deploy such capacities, including among the
diaspora, must be put in place. Our focus must be on
enabling, not substituting for, local capacities.

Thirdly, leveraging capacities and expertise in the
neighbouring regions, the global South and among
women and civil society actors is a key feature of the
review. We recognize, however, that translating that
objective into practical reality will be particularly
challenging, not least on the funding front. Enabling a

more peacebuilding-oriented focus and the
interoperability of existing South-South cooperation
and capacity-building mechanisms with United Nations
system-wide mechanisms deserves our immediate
attention.

Fourthly, women's empowerment must remain a
high-priority area in the context of this exercise. We
need to approach this area in conjunction with ongoing
efforts to strengthen women's participation in
peacebuilding processes, as indicated in the recent
report of the Secretary-General (S/2010/466) and his
seven-point action plan.

Member States have expressed their wish to
remain closely engaged in and consulted throughout
the process leading to the Secretary-General's
submission of his report on operationalizing the
review. As a forum that works across organizational
boundaries and addresses the entire continuum of
peacebuilding activities, the Peacebuilding
Commission stands ready to offer a space for such
consultations, bringing together a broad range of
stakeholders. That might help to facilitate coherence
and complementarity with ongoing efforts and
initiatives, such as the operationalizing of the World
Development Report 201]. In that connection, we also
look forward to performing our function as an advisory
body to the Security Council and the General Assembly
as the two organs take forward their respective
legislative mandates.

