Mr. Natalegawa (Indonesia): I should like to
begin by once again, and formally, congratulating
Mr. Mike Smith on assuming the responsibilities of
Executive Director of the Counter-Terrorism Executive
Directorate (CTED). We thank him very much for
submitting the revised organizational plan for CTED,
as required by resolution 1787 (2007). The revised
organizational plan offers the potential to strengthen
the role of CTED in monitoring the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1373 (2001).
My delegation specifically notes with
appreciation the emphasis of CTED on the guiding
principles of cooperation, transparency and even-
handedness. Those guiding principles are essential, not

only to uphold the credibility of the work of CTED, but
also to ensure that its work will be guided by a clearer
platform in achieving concrete, practical and
measurable results within its mandate. In addition to
the current key activities, Indonesia welcomes the
recommendation that the CTED give greater priority to
three additional activities.

With regard to its comprehensive strategy with
donors, CTED should ensure that technical assistance
aimed at increasing the national capabilities of Member
States in the fight against terrorism be guided by their
specific needs.

As for its communication strategy, my delegation
hopes that it will serve as primary framework for
CTED in conducting a tailored dialogue among CTED,
the Counter-Terrorism Committee and Member States.

On the cooperation between the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and other counter-terrorism
related subsidiary bodies, it is our view that CTED
should develop new mechanisms and practices with a
view to strengthening such cooperation.

As far as CTED visits are concerned, Indonesia
supports the idea of developing a more flexible system
in order to allow for tailored and focused visits to
countries in all regions. In that regard, my delegation
would also like to reiterate the need for CTED to
employ a more balanced geographical approach in
proposing States to be visited to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee.

My delegation underscores the need for CTED, in
undertaking its activities, to continue to respect
international human rights, refugee and humanitarian
law. We deem that it is important for CTED to continue
to advise the Counter-Terrorism Committee on issues
relating to laws in relation with the identification and
implementation of effective measures to implement
resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005).

Indonesia also wishes to stress the need for
CTED to present an accurate picture in finalizing the
global survey of the implementation of resolution 1373
(2001). My delegation reiterates its view that CTED
should ensure a consistent method of work and a
balanced approach in preparing the global survey.
With regard to the implementation of resolution
1624 (2005), Indonesia encourages CTED to continue
to provide necessary support for the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee in developing a more
effective strategy to promote its dialogue with Member
States and to assist their capacity-building to
implement resolution 1624 (2005). In implementing the
resolution, Indonesia continues its efforts to promote
dialogue, tolerance and mutual understanding between
faiths and civilizations. Indonesia is quite willing to
share its experience in sponsoring a number of
interfaith dialogues aimed at enhancing dialogue and
broadening understanding among civilizations.

Indonesia maintains that the full implementation
of resolutions 1373 (2001) and 1624 (2005) constitutes
only part of the comprehensive efforts at combating the
threat of terror. Indonesia attaches great importance to
the effective implementation of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy as an integrated
approach in addressing terrorism. Therefore, the active
participation of CTED and support of all relevant
activities under the Strategy is important. It is also
important that CTED play a more active role in
promoting regional cooperation on counter-terrorism.

Not least, the implementation of resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005) should complement regional
and national efforts on counter-terrorism. Such national
and regional efforts have yielded concrete results.
Indonesia has spearheaded cooperation in law
enforcement, border control and the enactment of
legislative frameworks for counter-terrorism. The Bali
counter-terrorism process, for instance, has established
strong bonds of collaboration among legal and law
enforcement practitioners in the region. We have
developed practical solutions to some of the challenges
facing effective national and regional counter-terrorism
efforts. The Jakarta Centre for Law Enforcement
Cooperation, which was referred to by Mr. Spatafora
just now, has, for several years now, provided
structured training for law enforcement officers of the
region. It has also served as a venue for various
specialized regional workshops, with an intensive
focus on counter-terrorism. The contribution of
Indonesia was also evident in the regional effort to
bring about the conclusion of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations Convention on Counter-
Terrorism.

Finally, recognizing the work of the CTED,
Indonesia supports the renewal of the mandate of
CTED and the implementation of the recommendations
contained in its revised organizational plan. We believe
that it will enable CTED to promote global collective
action, intensify regional efforts and strengthen
national endeavours in countering terrorism.

