Ms. Rasi (Finland): Mr. President, I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union. The Central and
Eastern European countries associated with the European
Union - Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania and Slovakia - and the
associated countries of Cyprus and Malta, as well as the
European Free Trade Association country member of the
European Economic Area, Iceland, align themselves with
this statement.

For too many years the conflict in Afghanistan has
caused enormous suffering for the Afghan people, who
continue to bear the consequences of the civil war. The
civilian population longs for peace, justice and order.
Furthermore, the chronic fighting threatens the stability of
the region and its economic development, causing
repercussions far beyond Afghanistan and its neighbours.

The European Union is deeply concerned at the recent
escalation of the military confrontation in Afghanistan. We
are dismayed that the Taliban have ignored the call in the
Tashkent Declaration for the Afghan conflict to be settled
through peaceful political negotiation and have instead
launched a major offensive. The European Union is
particularly concerned about the suffering that the fighting
has caused to the civilian population and about the
deteriorating humanitarian condition of the increasing
number of internally displaced people.

The European Union is profoundly disturbed by the
reports of forced deportation of civilians by the Taliban
from their places of residence. We urge the Taliban to
end this practice immediately and to allow those forcibly
deported to return. We are also concerned about the
reports of forcible separation of men from their families
and other forms of harassment.

The European Union reiterates its position, as
expressed in its Common Position of 25 January 1999,
that there is no military solution to this conflict, and that
only a political settlement, aimed at the establishment of
a fully representative, broad-based Government, can lead
to peace and reconciliation. We therefore appeal to all
factions to agree on an immediate cease-fire and enter
negotiations under United Nations auspices.
The European Union reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence, territorial
integrity and national unity of Afghanistan. The Union
strongly condemns all foreign interference in Afghanistan
and urges that the supply of weapons, munitions and other
material for military use to the warring factions, as well
as the involvement of foreign military, para-military and
secret service personnel should stop.

In this context, we wish to recall that the European
Union continues to enforce the embargo on the export of
arms, munitions, and military equipment provided for in
its Common Position of 17 December 1996 on
Afghanistan, and urges other countries to adopt a similar
policy of restraint. Moreover, we encourage all countries
in the region to support the United Nations efforts to
promote peace in Afghanistan and to use any influence
they have in a positive way to convince the Afghan
parties to cooperate with the United Nations.

Furthermore, the European Union strongly urges the
Afghan factions to put a complete halt to the use of
landmines and to support and participate in mine-clearing
programmes in Afghanistan.

 

No society can achieve an acceptable degree of peace,
justice and stability without full respect for all human rights
and fundamental freedoms. The European Union is deeply
disturbed by reports of the killing and harassment of
innocent civilians and persistent human rights violations, as
well as breaches of humanitarian law in Afghanistan. We
are also gravely concerned over reports of the involvement
of children in the conflict, and we urge the warring factions
to take immediate steps to end this practice.

The European Union calls on all Afghan factions, and
in particular the Taliban, to recognize, protect and promote
all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including the
right to life, liberty and security of persons and fully
respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and
other international instruments to which Afghanistan has
subscribed.

In this context, we welcome the efforts of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights to investigate reports on grave human rights
violations in Afghanistan which occurred during 1997 and
1998.

The European Union also strongly supports the
Secretary- General's proposal to add a new function to the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan (UNSMA)
by establishing a separate civil affairs unit within the
Mission whose primary objectives would be to promote
respect for humanitarian standards and deter massive and
systematic violations of human rights and humanitarian law
in the future. We are looking forward to the establishment
of this unit.

The European Union denounces the continuing gender
discrimination in Afghanistan. We urge Afghan factions,
and in particular the Taliban, to end discriminatory policies
and to recognize, protect and promote the equal rights of
men and women, including access to education and health
facilities, employment, personal security and freedom from
intimidation and harassment. The European Union will
continue to take into account discriminatory policies for our
future decisions regarding the supply of aid and to support
aid programmes in Afghanistan which integrate gender
concerns and actively attempt to promote equitable
participation of both men and women.

For years the European Union has been the largest
donor of humanitarian aid to Afghanistan. The European
Commission had to suspend funding for projects in Kabul
in July 1998 because it had become increasingly difficult
for agencies to deliver humanitarian aid in an efficient,
effective and principled manner, especially in the health
and education sectors. Subsequently, the European
Commission had to scale down humanitarian assistance to
Afghanistan for security reasons. Humanitarian activities
were, nevertheless, resumed later, in the beginning of
1999, and we desire to continue helping the Afghan
people. We wish to recall, however, that aid can continue
only where it can be delivered in an effective manner,
without discrimination, and where humanitarian
organizations are able to carry out their work freely and
safely. The absence of national reconciliation has a
negative impact on donors engaged.

The European Union notes the Secretary-General's
decision of 12 March to allow a limited and phased return
of United Nations international staff to Afghanistan. They
were withdrawn from Afghanistan in August 1998,
following the fatal attacks on United Nations personnel
and other threats to the safety and security of the
Organization's workers in Afghanistan. However, the
European Union remains deeply concerned about the
continuous restrictions imposed on the activities of United
Nations and other humanitarian personnel. In this context,
the Union calls upon the Taliban to fully implement the
agreements signed with the United Nations on the safety
and security of United Nations personnel. We urge the
warring factions to ensure freedom of movement as well
as free and safe access of national and international
humanitarian personnel to all those in need, without
restrictions based on gender, race, religion or nationality,
and to cooperate fully and sincerely with humanitarian
organizations.

The European Union strongly supports efforts to
improve the effectiveness of aid through close
coordination and complementarity between United
Nations peace efforts and the aid effort, as envisaged in
the strategic framework common to the international
donor community and United Nations organizations.

Furthermore, the European Union reiterates its call
for the Taliban to thoroughly investigate the murders of
the United Nations staff members, as well as the killing
of Iranian diplomats during the Taliban attack against
Mazar-e-Sharif in August 1998.

The European Union attaches high importance to the
fight against illegal drugs and terrorism. Therefore, we are
concerned at the increasing production of and trafficking
in drugs in Afghanistan, which threatens regional stability

 

and damages the health and well-being of the populations
of Afghanistan, of neighbouring States and elsewhere.

Furthermore, the European Union calls on all Afghan
parties to refrain from financing, providing training or
shelter for terrorist organizations, or otherwise supporting
terrorist activities. We reiterate our call on all Afghan
factions, and in particular the Taliban, to close down
training camps for foreign terrorists inside Afghanistan and
to take necessary steps to ensure that those responsible for
terrorist acts are brought to justice.

In conclusion, the European Union is determined to
play an effective role in efforts to stop the fighting and to
restore peace, stability and respect for international law and
human rights in Afghanistan. We are committed to using all
our influence to bring about a sustainable peace in
Afghanistan, put an end to foreign intervention and
encourage intra-Afghan dialogue, in particular through
support for the central role of the United Nations. We will
also continue to give our full support to United Nations
efforts in promoting peace and security in Afghanistan.

Finally, we would like to thank the Special Envoy of
the Secretary-General for his commitment to bringing about
an end to the conflict, and the members of UNSMA for
their continued courage and dedication.

