Mr. Lauber (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the public briefings by the
Chairpersons of the three counter-terrorism and
sanctions Committees. Today's meeting provides an
excellent opportunity for non-members of the Security
Council to be briefed about the activities of the
Committees and to comment on issues of global
concern with regard to the work of the Committees.

In this context, we also look forward to studying
the fifth report of the 1267 Committee's Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team - which,
unfortunately, was just published yesterday - and we
hope that delegations will soon have the opportunity to
express their views on it.

Switzerland has stressed on many occasions the
need to strengthen the sanctions regimes by
introducing fair and clear procedures for the listing and
de-listing of individuals and entities on sanctions lists,
as well as for granting humanitarian exemptions. That
concern was clearly reflected in the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1),
which called on the Security Council to introduce such
improvements. More recently, this was emphasized as a
priority measure in the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy adopted by the General Assembly in
its resolution 60/288.

As the 1267 Committee's discussions on the
revision of its guidelines continue, so do our concerns
persist. Today, I wish to draw attention to two specific
documents from among the numerous
recommendations and studies that were recently
submitted by States and independent experts on the
issue of fair and clear procedures. The first document
is the letter from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council, to which the
Legal Counsel of the United Nations referred in his
statement during the Council's 22 June 2006 open
debate on strengthening international law (see S/PV.5474). The Secretary-General's letter addresses

the listing and de-listing of individuals and entities on
sanctions lists, and outlines the minimum standards
required to ensure that the procedures are fair and
transparent. Switzerland fully subscribes to the
recommendations of the Secretary-General.

The second document is the study commissioned
by the Governments of Switzerland, Germany and
Sweden and undertaken by the Watson Institute for
International Studies at Brown University. Switzerland
is happy to see that the paper, entitled "Strengthening
targeted sanctions through fair and clear procedures",
has finally been published as document S/2006/331 and
is thus available in all six official languages of the
Organization.

We encourage the sanctions Committees, in
particular the 1267 Committee, to take fully into
account that study and the recommendations; we look
forward to learning about the outcome of the
Committees' efforts to strengthen the sanctions regimes
by introducing fair and clear procedures for the listing
and de-listing of individuals and entities on the
sanctions lists. Switzerland stands ready to contribute
constructively to the efforts of the Security Council
and its Committees.

