Mr. Fabius (France) (spoke in French): I have some
observations to make on this very important subject.
My first, which I think we would all agree on, is that
when the Arab Spring, as we call it, began almost
two years ago, it gave rise at the start to many hopes
for peace, dignity, freedom and democracy. Today,
however, we are concerned. We are concerned about
violence, extremism, radicalization, exploitation of
religious beliefs and certain groups' willingness to
provoke confrontation between Islam and the West.

It seems to me that in the face of such challenges,
there are few possible positions - indeed, only one or
two - to take. Certainly that is France's understanding.
We should show solidarity with these movements,
because in those of our countries where there have been
revolutions, even when the circumstances have been
different, we know from experience that revolutions go
through highs and lows. Events are never linear, and
we must show our solidarity with the best parts of such
movements, while at the same time - and I stress this
point - maintaining high expectations. That is because
the way in which the Arab spring has sometimes
progressed, and sometimes gone off the rails, shows
that we should be very careful about a number of central
issues: human rights, women's rights, the rejection of
terrorism and respect for communities and minorities.
That is the first comment I have to make, which I think
will be shared by everyone here.

My second observation concerns Syria. It would
be strange if we did not mention this tragic situation.
When I was preparing this short statement, I wrote that
on that day, the conflict had resulted in 27,000 deaths.
We understand from recent reports that the number
is now 30,000, and according to our Joint Special
Representative, Mr. Brahimi, it is growing.

I am sure we all agree that it is shocking to
international public opinion that we, the Security
Council of the United Nations, have so far been unable
to ensure the unity and security of these nations. I
will not point a finger, but it is shocking that so far
the Council has been unable to act. I would like to
emphasize two risks, which are not mutually exclusive,
in the Syrian crisis. If the situation continues, there is
a very high risk that Syria will explode, and I use that
expression advisedly. And everyone who wishes to see
stability in a region that has already been profoundly
affected will find that it is a dramatic explosion and
one for which, at that point, there will be no solution.
At the same time, we run the risk - already partly a
reality - that extremism will gain ground. We all here
have the same information: whatever beliefs any one
of us may hold, we must acknowledge that there are
extremists who have invaded Syrian territory.

In that regard, I would like to make another
observation. If, as we sometimes do, we could discuss
matters among ourselves, away from the cameras, I
know of no one in the Council who would support the
notion that Bashar Al-Assad's regime will ultimately
still be there. I do not want to mention anyone in
particular, but no one with whom I have discussed the
issue would support the possibility of Mr. Al-Assad's
remaining in place for any length of time; yet he is still
there.

So that is the question: since we know that this
regime will come to an end - and from the point of
view of France, the sooner the better - how can we
reconcile those two things? He is there, but he must
go. How can we ensure that that happens in the most
peaceful manner possible and without plunging the
country into even worse chaos? As it stands, we have
not been able to provide an answer to that, but what
the entire world has been demanding of us is to live up
to our name. The Security Council should be able, we
hope, to provide an answer in the next few weeks.

France, for its part, has mobilized its efforts in
several areas: humanitarian and medical aid; the
unification, as far as possible, of the Syrian resistance;
and the consolidation of the liberated zones. We are
ready to help on all those fronts.

Here I would like to highlight the remarkable role
that Secretary General of the League of Arab States
has played, since the beginning, in the Syrian crisis
and the excellent cooperation that he has headed up
with the United Nations. He has reacted quickly, firmly
and with courage since the beginning of the crisis.
He suspended Syria from the League, which was not
easy. He did not hesitate to adopt sanctions to cut off
the regime's financing and weapons supply routes.
He introduced the idea of a political transition being
necessary in Syria, a goal that is now at the heart of the
mandate entrusted to our Joint Special Representative,
Mr. Brahimi. When the Council decided to send an
observation mission to Syria, it was able to benefit
from the experience that the League had gained. The
League launched an important process, which included
Morocco's presentation of a draft resolution to the
Council and the General Assembly's adoption of two
resolutions presented by the Arab League (resolutions 66/253 A and B). Those resolutions were adopted by
an overwhelming majority of Member States, thus
confirming that Bashar Al-Assad's regime is isolated
on all sides. I want, therefore, to pay tribute to the work
that the Secretary General of the League has carried out,
together with his colleagues, and take this opportunity
to call on our Council once again to voice its complete
confidence in Mr. Brahimi in carrying out his mission,
which is, of course, very difficult.
The last point I would like to highlight, as others
before me, is that it is impossible to deal with the issues
facing the Arab world - and in a more general sense,
the entire world - without highlighting the stalemate
in the peace process between Israel and Palestine.
France hopes for a relaunching of the peace process.
We encourage the parties to return to negotiations. I
reiterate once again that the goal must be to achieve
an independent, viable and peaceful Palestinian State
and to guarantee Israel's security. But here too I would
caution that, for years and years - and this goes for all
of us who were following this matter - we have known,
deep down, what the solution was. The problem has
been to get the parties to agree, and we did not succeed.
But today, given the developments on the ground, the
danger is that the solution itself could be compromised,
and that danger is extremely serious.

I would like to again pay tribute to the commitment
of the League of Arab States to resolving the Israeli/
Palestinian conflict. I would hope that solutions would
be found very quickly to the Palestinian Authority's
financial difficulties and thus progress would be made.
I would add once again that there is no lasting peace
without justice, and there will be no lasting peace in
that area of the world if we do not ourselves provide a
solution to the problem that has dragged on for decades.

I conclude by once again thanking our friend,
Minister Guido Westerwelle, for having taken the
initiative of holding this meeting. It enables us to
reiterate the importance that we attach to the work of
the League of Arab States and our hope that the United
Nations and the League will be able to work increasingly
well together, with full determination and success.

