I thank Ambassador Kridelka, Chair of the Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, for his briefing. In recent months, the political process in Somalia has continued to make progress. Consensus has been reached on the 2020/2021 elections. The preparations for the elections are advancing steadily. The Somali transition plan is gradually updated. Meanwhile, the security situation in Somalia remains grave. Incidents of violence and terrorist activities occur from time to time. Terrorist groups still have strong destructive capabilities. The international community, including the sanctions committee, should continue to support Somalia's efforts to pursue peace, stability and development. It is our consistent position that sanctions are a means, not an end. Any action taken by the Committee should be aimed at maintaining peace and stability in Somalia, and avoid any negative impact on the country's development and the lives and property of the Somali people. The legitimate requests made by the Somali side should be given due attention and consideration. We welcome the clarification of the allegations against General Sadak Omar Mohamed, the commander of the Somali Police Force. China takes note of the improvement of relations between the Panel of Experts on Somalia and the Somali Government. We call on the Panel to continue to maintain good relations with the Somali Government, and we encourage both sides to enhance mutual trust and continue coordination and cooperation. The Panel should strive to improve the quality of its reports, verify the facts, assess the consequences and risks that may arise from the publication of reports and make prudent arrangements in advance. We are concerned over the recurrent leakage of the Panel's reports, which has a negative impact on the parties concerned. China requests the Panel and the Secretariat to take concrete steps to prevent it from happening again. Next month the Security Council will renew the sanctions on Somalia. We think that relevant sanctions measures should be updated in the light of the new developments so as to meet the need to strengthen the capacity-building of the Somali security institutions, effectively combat terrorist groups and help address the root causes of violent conflict. Language with no direct relevance should not be included in the resolution. We hope that the Council members will conduct full consultations on the draft resolution and make every effort to reach consensus.
