Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
thank Mr. Oscar Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing
this morning.

Peace in the Middle East is a key priority for the
United Kingdom. The launch of direct negotiations
between Prime Minister Netanyahu and President
Abbas more than a month ago was welcome progress
towards achieving the outcome that we all want to see:
a secure and universally recognized Israel living
alongside a sovereign and viable Palestinian State, with
Jerusalem as the capital of both States and a just
settlement for refugees. We commend United States
efforts to bring the parties to the negotiating table and
the leadership shown by both sides in agreeing to direct
talks after a long pause.

But the process has hit a serious obstacle.
Negotiations are now on hold. If there is to be
sustainable peace, both parties must do what is
necessary to enable talks to resume. We are therefore
disappointed that Israel failed to renew the settlement
moratorium that expired on 26 September and that
settlement activity has resumed throughout the
occupied West Bank. The reported approval last week
of a further 238 housing units in East Jerusalem is
deeply concerning and will only further erode trust
between the parties. Settlement activity, including in
East Jerusalem, is illegal. It undermines the viability of
a Palestinian State and is damaging to the peace
process.

We must be clear that meaningful reinstatement
of the moratorium, which itself falls far short of
Israel's legal obligations, is not an unreasonable
expectation. It is essential to keep open the path to
peace. Creating facts on the ground makes the
necessary compromises harder to achieve. It destroys
trust. In the end, it can close off the possibility of a
deal entirely. We urge Prime Minister Netanyahu and
his Government to demonstrate the leadership required
to resolve this problem so that the parties can focus on
the considerable challenges ahead. Doing so would
inject some much-needed trust back into the process
and create a fairer basis for negotiations. We have
made this point to the Israeli Government at all levels.

The Palestinians must play their part, too. My
Foreign Secretary spoke with President Abbas last
week and was impressed by his resolve to return to
direct negotiations under the right circumstances. We
welcome the significant progress achieved by the
Palestinians in recent years on security and institution-
building - the foundations of a viable Palestinian
State. This work must continue.

But there is also tough work to be done on intra-
Palestinian reconciliation. A unified leadership is a
crucial component of creating the conditions for a
sustainable Palestinian State. Negotiations between the
two leaders remain the best way of achieving the desired
outcome. Alternative options, some of which were
floated by the Arab League in its statement of 9 October,
are less than ideal. But it is a fact that those options will
receive increasing attention if compromises are not
made to get the negotiations back on track, so again we
urge both leaders to make those necessary compromises.

If peace is to succeed, it is imperative that there
be progress on Gaza. We have been clear that the
situation is unsustainable and counterproductive.
Israel's decision in the summer to move from a list of
permitted goods to a list of specific prohibited items
has led to some improvement, but more needs to be
done. The United Nations has said that at current rates
of approval it would take 75 years to bring in what is
required to implement the Gaza reconstruction plan of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East. This is not good
enough. All parties must now work together to deliver
real change on the ground, including by allowing
essential reconstruction to take place and supporting
the development of the legal Gazan economy through
exports.

Israel has legitimate security concerns, and we
continue to call on Hamas to renounce all violence and
take immediate and concrete steps towards the Quartet
principles. The United Kingdom has long called for
Gilad Shalit's immediate and unconditional release. It
is also vital that Hamas allow the International
Committee of the Red Cross to visit Shalit
immediately. Shalit's continued captivity, without any
Red Cross access, and with only very minimal contact
with his family, is unacceptable.

Any solution must involve the entire region
within a comprehensive peace, so we are concerned
about increasing rhetoric aimed at undermining the
Special Tribunal for Lebanon. The Tribunal should be
allowed to continue its work unimpeded. We strongly
support the Secretary-General's unequivocal statement
of 6 October reaffirming the Tribunal's independence
and urging Lebanese and regional actors to avoid
interfering with its work.

We continue to believe that a negotiated peace in
the Middle East is achievable. The international

community expects it. The people of Israel and
Palestine deserve it. It is up to the Israeli and
Palestinian leaders to make the compromises needed to
deliver it.

