Mr. Baja (Philippines): I wish to thank you, Sir,
for organizing this important debate on small arms.
Indeed, as pointed out by the representative of
Tanzania, the prevention of the proliferation of those
arms is a key task of the Security Council in the
discharge of its mandate for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

We are also grateful to Under-Secretary-General
Abe for his comprehensive briefing and introduction of
the report of the Secretary-General on the subject, and
to the former Japanese Foreign Minister for her
important statement in this debate.

A leading university has estimated that, in 2003,
639 million firearms were in circulation the world
over, 80 per cent of which were purchased by civilians.
Out of this number of civilian firearms, manufactured
mainly in developed countries, 41 per cent, or over 200
million firearms, are illicit. In other words, there was a
ratio of one illicit - uncontrolled, unlicensed, illegal
or unauthorized - weapon to every 25 persons in the
world. It would be interesting to know last year's
statistics.

In large parts of the world, small arms and light
weapons are weapons of mass destruction. The
availability of small arms and light weapons stokes
conflicts, causes a high number of casualties,
complicates peacekeeping operations and hampers
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR)
and the peaceful settlement of disputes. Thus, in 1994,
the General Assembly adopted, for the first time, a
resolution - resolution 48/75 F - recognizing the
threat posed by small arms to national and regional
security and their contribution to the destabilization of
States.

Since that time, no regulatory regime to control
the proliferation of illicit small arms has emerged. In
the view of my delegation, the problem of small arms
and light weapons is a global one requiring a
comprehensive and coordinated response at the
national, subregional and international levels. The
problem goes beyond the military and disarmament
domains; it has humanitarian as well as socio-
economic consequences. There is need, therefore, for
international cooperation, capacity-building and
financial assistance to developing countries in
addressing the problem. Also, weapons-exporting
countries need to assume a greater degree of
responsibility in their operations relative to small arms
and light weapons.

My delegation endorses the negotiations on two
important international instruments proposed under the
United Nations Programme of Action dealing,
respectively, with marking and tracing and with the
illicit brokering of small arms and light weapons. The
successful and early conclusion of those two
instruments is urgently needed for cohesion in
preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit trade
in small arms and light weapons. It will ensure that
national legislation, as well as bilateral, subregional
and regional arrangements, will be aligned or re-
aligned accordingly. Unless such instruments are in
force, disparate approaches at the national, subregional
and regional levels will give the highly organized
illegal traffickers and brokers ample room to carry out
their trade with impunity.

Every effort should be made to conclude
negotiations on the draft international instrument on
marking and tracing by June 2005. The issue of
whether or not the instrument should be legally binding
should not be a wedge issue anymore, taking into
account the fact that the illicit trafficking of small arms
and light weapons is already criminalized in many
jurisdictions. In this context, the Philippines will
endorse the recommendation of the High-level Panel
on Threats, Challenges and Change that

"Member States should expedite and conclude
negotiations on legally binding agreements on the
marking and tracing, as well as the brokering and
transfer, of small arms and light weapons".
(A/59/565, report, para. 96)

It is cause for regret that negotiations on a draft
international instrument on brokering have been
pushed back to the second half of 2006.

The Philippines pointed out last year that the
Security Council and the General Assembly are both
seized of the issue of small arms. In that regard, my
delegation reiterates its proposal for interaction
between the Council and the Assembly to facilitate
complementary action on the problem. We strongly
support the convening this year of the first consultation
and coordination between the Council and the
Assembly to set into motion the much-needed
interaction of the two United Nations organs most
concerned with the subject of the illicit trade in small
arms.

In conclusion, and as the former Foreign Minister
of Japan said, the issue of small arms and light
weapons is a multidisciplinary issue. We should
continue to engage the assistance and cooperation of
civil society, whose members look at this issue through
the prism of humanitarian considerations. They can
provide impetus for Governments to move forward and
avoid unnecessary delay. My delegation's strong
support for giving a role to civil society upholds the
provision of the Programme of Action which
encourages non-governmental organizations and civil
society to engage, as appropriate, in all aspects of
international, subregional and national efforts to
implement the Programme.

We are, of course, grateful to the Japanese
Mission for negotiating the draft presidential statement
to be adopted at the end of today's meeting.

