Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I have the honour to
brief the members of the Security Council in my capacity
as Chair ofthe Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2127 (2013), concerning the
Central African Republic. In my statement I intend
to highlight the work of the Committee and the Panel
of Experts since my last briefing in the Chamber on
11 July (see S/PV.7215).

On 22 July, following the Committee's consideration
of the Panel's interim report (see S/2014/452) and
recommendations, the Chair sent letters to the Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations of Cameroon,
Chad, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Republic of the Congo, South Sudan and the Sudan,
as well as INTERPOL, the Economic Community of
Central African States and the African Union, drawing
attention to the Panel's recommendation for the
enhancement of information-sharing and joint action
to investigate and combat regional criminal networks
involved in the illegal exploitation and trade in natural
resources, including wildlife and wildlife products.
On 22 July, the Committee also issued a press release
highlighting that recommendation.

During the Committee's informal consultations
on 1 August, the Panel coordinator provided further
information concerning individuals and entities
that, in the Panel's view, met the designation criteria
in accordance with paragraph 41 of resolution 2134
(2014), namely, five individuals and two entities. The
Panel recommended that the Committee might wish to
postpone its consideration of the possible designation of
one individual and two entities until after 1 September.
On 19 September, the Panel conveyed the view that
the one individual and two entities met the designation
criteria. On 20 October, the Panel presented eight
additional statements of case for seven individuals and
one entity that in its view met the designation criteria,
as well as several updates to the sanctions list. In that
connection, I would like to reiterate my willingness to
convene informal consultations of the Committee or any
other meetings that would facilitate the Committee's
consideration of future designations.

On 24 October, the Committee met with the
Panel of Experts to consider its final report (see S/20l4/762) and recommendations. According to the
report, armed groups remain in control of, or still
exert influence over, almost all inhabited areas of the
Central African Republic despite the signing of the
cessation of hostilities agreement in July 2014. The
increasing fragmentation of the main armed groups
active in the country also poses significant challenges
to the stabilization of the political landscape, while the
competition among political representatives of armed
groups for ministerial positions, as well as among
military commanders for control of resources, accounts
for the recent infighting among the key armed groups
of the country. In that context, the Panel noted little
progress in terms of voluntary or forced disarmament
since March 2014.
Providing an update to the final report since its
submission to the Committee, on 17 September, the
Panel mentioned that, as of 20 October, it had compiled
reports indicating that a total number of 3,232 civilians
had been killed since the imposition of the arms
embargo on 5 December 2013, including the killings
of 23 humanitarian aid workers. On 14 November, in
connection with the Committee's consideration of the
final report and recommendations, the Chair sent letters
to the Permanent Missions of Belgium, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, India, Israel, Lebanon, the Republic of the
Congo, Senegal, the Sudan and the United Arab Emirates
in connection with particular recommendations.
Letters from the Chair were also sent to the Chair of the
Kimberly Process, the President of the World Diamond
Council and the Executive Secretary of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region. In the United
Nations system, the Chair transmitted the letters to the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic (MINUSCA), the Executive Director of the
United Nations Children's Fund and the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights.

On 14 November, a Security Council press release
(SC/11647) was also published, in English and French,
in connection with the Panel's recommendation that the
Committee urge exporters,importers, processors and
consumers of Central African gold to mitigate the risk of
further exacerbating the conflict in the Central African

Republic by following due diligence guidance as it is
being implemented through the Regional Certification
Mechanism of the International Conference on the
Great Lakes Region. There was no consensus in the
Committee to take similar action on a recommendation
by the Panel concerning diamonds, nor was consensus
reached on a recommendation that a Committee request
the neighbouring States to convey, on a confidential
and annual basis, complete statistics on the import and
export of natural resources.

On 2 December, following the receipt of information
from the Panel of Experts concerning the reported
death, on 15 November, of one of the three sanctioned
individuals, Mr. Levi Yakete, the Committee agreed
to update the sanctions list to reflect the reported
death and to contact the designating States for official
confirmation and, in that connection, sent letters to the
concerned States seeking additional information.

On 3 December, the Committee convened its
second formal meeting with the Permanent Missions
to the United Nations of the Central African Republic
and its neighbouring States, which were invited to
provide their views on the final report of the Panel of
Experts. During the discussion, the Chair welcomed
the views of Committee member Chad, as well as
the representatives of the Central African Republic,
Cameroon, the Republic of the Congo and South
Sudan. In their remarks, participating Member States
highlighted a number of challenges in implementing
the sanctions measures, such as porous borders and the
absence of border monitoring. One of the invited States
expressed concerns with the Panel's recommendation
that the Committee request neighbouring States to
convey, on a confidential and annual basis, complete
statistics on the import and export of natural resources.

I would now like to update the Council on the
implementation reports the Committee has received
from Member States to date. To date, the Committee
has received reports from 31 Member States, as well as
five addendums from three States. Only two African
States have submitted implementation reports, with
none from the immediate region. All the reports
received have been posted on the Committee's website.
Of the 15 Committee members, 11 have submitted
reports to date. I have encouraged the members to lead
by example and to submit their implementation reports
in a timely manner. Along those lines, I would also like
to encourage those recipients of the Chair's letters, in
connection with the Panel's interim and final reports,
to kindly provide the Committee with timely responses.

I intend to continue my outreach activities to the
Central African Republic and its neighbours, some of
which highlighted during the 3 December meeting the
need for implementation assistance, as well as further
clarification concerning the exemption procedures.
In that regard, the Chair plans to invite the regional
States and the Secretariat to the third informal informal
meeting at the Permanent Mission of Lithuania during
the second half of December to review the exemptions
procedures and to discuss ways in which States may
possibly seek donor assistance to help them implement
the sanctions regime.

It is also my intention to visit the Central African
Republic early next year with a view to engaging the
transitional authorities, MINUSCA, civil society,
religious leaders and others to echo the message that
resonated in the Committee meeting on 3 December,
namely, that a sanctions regime should be seen not
as a punitive measure but as a collaborative tool of
engagement. As one delegation best phrased it, this
engagement is an expression of the Committee's
solidarity with the Central African Republic, through
which the authorities in Bangui can strengthen State
authority and target spoilers. I intend to inform
members ofthe Committee of the details of my planned
visit in due course.

In concluding, I would like to assure Council
members that as Chair of the Committee I will do
my utmost to ensure that the Committee makes a
significant contribution to the efforts of the Council,
MINUSCA and other international partners to bring
an end to the ongoing violence that threatens the
Central African Republic and to set the country on a
path to reconciliation, durable peace and sustainable
development.

