Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): I,
too, would like to thank Mr. Moreno-Ocampo for his
briefing.

The Chinese position on the International
Criminal Court remains unchanged. We attach great
importance to combating impunity and achieving
justice. China has always believed that the pursuit of
justice should be premised on the core values of
safeguarding peace and security and maintaining
international peace and harmony.

At present, the crisis in Libya shows no signs of
abating, and efforts to end it have reached a stalemate.

At the same time, the humanitarian situation continues
to deteriorate and the civilian population continues to
suffer grave consequences. China expresses its serious
concern in this regard.

China calls for the complete and strict
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the
Security Council. The international community must
respect the sovereignty, independence, unity and
territorial integrity of Libya. The internal affairs and
fate of Libya must be left up to the Libyan people to
decide. We are not in favour of any arbitrary
interpretation of the Council's resolutions or of any
actions going beyond those mandated by the Council.

China believes that the priority for the time being
must be to achieve a complete and unconditional
ceasefire, as called for by the Council, and to establish
a ceasefire monitoring system under the auspices of the
United Nations.

Peaceful dialogue and negotiations are the best
way forward towards a political solution to this crisis.
We endorse the efforts made by all interested parties,
especially the African Union. We endorse the five-
point road map proposed by the African Union.

The United Nations and the Security Council
must play a leading role in properly resolving the
Libyan crisis. We would like to see the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Al-Khatib, playing a
stronger role on the political track. At the same time,
we would like to ensure that the International Criminal
Court properly assesses the requirements to resolve in
crisis in Libya appropriately in its efforts to implement
resolution 1970 (2011) and to play a positive and
constructive role in promptly restoring peace, security
and order in Libya.

