The President (interpretation from Russian): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior

consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General contained in document S/ 1998/532.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the

following statement on behalf of the Council.

"The Security Council has considered the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Afghanistan of 19 June 1998 (A/52/957-S/l998/532).

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of Afghanistan,
and respect for its cultural and historical heritage. It
reiterates its concern at the increasingly ethnic nature
of the conflict, and at the continuing threat this poses

to the unity of the Afghan State.

"The Security Council expresses its grave
concern at the continued Afghan conflict, which is a
serious threat to regional and international security,
and causes extensive human suffering, further
destruction, refugee flows and other forcible

displacement of large numbers of people.

"The Security Council deplores the fact that
military support, including the supplies of arms and
other related materiel, from outside Afghanistan to the
warring factions continues unabated, despite repeated
pleas to halt it made by the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Secretary-General. It
reiterates its call to all States, in particular those in the

region, to cease such interference immediately.
"The Security Council considers it necessary
that more active efforts be undertaken under the
aegis of the United Nations and with the
participation of interested countries aimed at a
peaceful settlement of the Afghan conflict, taking
into account the interests of all ethnic and religious
groups and political forces involved therein.

"The Security Council deplores the breakdown
of the intra-Afghan talks in Islamabad and calls
upon the parties to respect the wishes of the
overwhelming majority of Afghans, to stop the
fighting, to return without delay and preconditions to
the negotiating table and to engage in a political
dialogue aimed at achieving national reconciliation,
a lasting political settlement of the conflict, which
has no military solution, and the formation of a
broad-based fully representative government. As an
initial step towards that goal, the Council calls upon
the parties to agree immediately on a ceasefire, an
exchange of prisoners, and the lifting of all
restrictions on the shipments of humanitarian
supplies throughout the country.

"The Security Council reiterates its position
that the United Nations, as a universally recognized
intermediary, must continue to play its central and
impartial role in international efforts towards a
peaceful resolution of the Afghan conflict, and
extends its full support for the activities of the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan and
those of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Afghanistan.

"The Security Council takes note of the
assessment of the Secretary-General that 'Loya
Jirgah' as an informal, time-honoured Afghan
method of settling disputes, advocated by some
leaders of non-warring Afghan factions, continues to
deserve attention, and encourages the United Nations
Special Mission to Afghanistan to continue to
maintain useful contacts with them.

"The Security Council commends the work of
the 'six plus two' group and calls upon all countries
involved in the group to continue to participate in
good faith with the aim of elaborating, on the basis
of the agreed talking points, a coherent approach to
the peacemaking efforts in Afghanistan, including
the problem of curbing the flow of arms and other
related materiel into Afghanistan in an effective and
even-handed manner. It welcomes and encourages

 

the additional support of other Member States for this
process.

"The Security Council urges all Afghan factions
to cooperate fully with the United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan and international humanitarian
organizations and calls upon them, in particular the
Taliban, to take all necessary steps to assure the safety
and freedom of movement of such personnel.

"The Security Council acknowledges the signing
of the Memorandum of Understanding between the
United Nations and the Taliban on humanitarian issues
and stresses the importance of its full implementation,
including full respect for immunities of United
Nations staff and for the assistance of the United
Nations in health and education. Noting that some of
the obstacles to the provision of assistance to
Hazaraj at have been overcome, it nevertheless remains
concerned at the continuing use by the Taliban of
United Nations humanitarian aid as a weapon against
the Hazara and demands that this practice cease
immediately. The Council also remains concerned at
the lack of supplies coming from the northern route
due to insecurity and looting. It calls upon all Afghan
factions to lift unconditionally any blockade of
humanitarian relief supplies.

"The Security Council is concerned at recent
reports of harassment of humanitarian organizations
and at the unilateral decision by the Taliban to
relocate humanitarian organizations' offices in Kabul.
It calls upon all factions to facilitate the work of
international agencies to the greatest extent possible.

"The Security Council remains deeply
concerned at the continuing discrimination against
girls and women and other violations of human
rights, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council supports the steps of the
Secretary-General to launch investigations into
alleged mass killings of prisoners of war and
civilians in Afghanistan, the outcome of which will
be submitted to the General Assembly and the
Security Council as soon as it becomes available.

"The Security Council reiterates that the
continuation of the conflict in Afghanistan provides
a fertile ground for terrorism and illegal drug
production and trafficking, which destabilize the
region and beyond, and calls upon the leaders of the
Afghan parties to halt such activities.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter and requests the Secretary-General to
continue to keep it regularly informed of the
situation in Afghanistan."
This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ 1998/22.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m.
