I would like at the outset to thank the briefers for their statements. I wish to highlight four points. First, I would like to reiterate France's determination to pursue, along with its international partners, the fight against Da'esh within the framework of the international coalition. Da'esh lost its territorial foothold with the fall of Baghouz in March 2019, but the group still has many supporters in the Levant and beyond. It has shown its determination to exploit the opportunities created by the current health context to step up its violent actions not only in Syria and Iraq but also, through its affiliated groups, in Afghanistan, South-East Asia and Africa. The threat is far from having disappeared. We will continue our efforts, both militarily and politically, to address the root causes of Da'esh's emergence. In that regard, I would like to reiterate our conviction that there will be no complete and lasting victory against Daesh without a political solution to the Syrian crisis in accordance with the terms of resolution 2254 (2015). France is continuing to work to that end in support of the work of the United Nations Special Envoy. It is also contributing to the recovery of the Syrian territories and populations that were liberated from Da'esh thanks to the action of the international coalition and that are now facing a difficult humanitarian situation. In Iraq, it is essential for the international community to stand resolutely by the authorities to help the country strengthen its sovereignty and enable the economic development of its entire territory. It is also necessary to continue our efforts to effectively protect children from recruitment and indoctrination, including by terrorist groups. As the Council recognized five years ago in its resolution 2242 (2015), girls are particularly vulnerable to such recruitment strategies. In the same vein, we must continue our efforts in the area of humanitarian assistance to ensure dignified living conditions for the thousands of refugees and vulnerable persons in regions affected by terrorism and thus prevent them to the extent possible from joining the ranks of terrorist groups. Secondly, I wish to recall the need to effectively combat the financing of terrorism. Daesh's financial capabilities remain at a high level. Those resources, which are diversifying, must be dried up. This is a priority for France, which drafted resolution 2462 (2019), adopted in March 2019. We call for its full implementation, including with regard to States' compliance with their obligations under international humanitarian law. Thirdly, I would like to stress the importance of combating the use of the Internet for terrorist purposes. The Christchurch Call that we launched together with New Zealand in May 2019 now brings together some 50 States and partners, including major Internet companies. The participation of the latter is an essential condition for ensuring the effectiveness of the fight against online terrorist content. Because the coronavirus disease pandemic has led, during periods of containment, to increased exposure to online terrorist propaganda, it is essential to regulate the use of the Internet, which cannot be a lawless zone, while imperatively respecting freedom of expression. This brings me to my fourth point. I would like to stress that the fight against terrorism, radicalization and violent extremism must be conducted in accordance with international humanitarian, refugee and human rights law. Similarly, that fight cannot justify attacks against civilians or the targeting of humanitarian actors and infrastructure. Respect for human rights and the rule of law, as well as education, inclusion and social cohesion, are in the long term key factors in any strategy to prevent and combat terrorism. Finally, I would like to conclude with a mention of the victims of Da'esh and their families. I am thinking in particular of the Yazidis in the Sinjar district of Iraq, who, exactly six years ago, were victims of war crimes and abuses committed by Da'esh. Friday's tribute to the victims of terrorism recalled the importance of placing victims at the heart of our collective action against terrorism. They have a right to justice. In that regard, France supports the activities carried out in Iraq by the United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, as it supports initiatives aimed at combating impunity by prosecuting the alleged perpetrators of crimes as close as possible to where the crimes were committed.
