Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank Minister for Foreign
Affairs Delcy Rodriguez Gomez of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela for having organized this
important debate, as well as to express our appreciation
for the Venezuelan proposal to reflect on the purposes
and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations.

(spoke in English)

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for his
instructive briefing.

As the concept note (S/2016/103, annex)
presented by Venezuela correctly points out, despite
considerable obstacles and numerous shortcomings,
the United Nations has been able to foster dialogue and
cooperation among nations in the past 70 years, while
promoting sustainable development and human rights,
consolidating the rule of international law and avoiding
the outbreak of a new global conflict. The multilateral
system founded in San Francisco in 1945 was able to
establish its credibility and rise to new challenges,
precisely because it was based on universal purposes
and principles.

In setting the maintenance of international peace
and security as a fundamental purpose, the Charter
of the United Nations banned the use of war as an
instrument of State policy and affirmed the primacy
of prevention and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
The universal and non-selective applicability of those
principles could not be clearer, as Article 2 of the
Charter explicitly affirms and reiterates a number
of times that "all Members" shall act in accordance
with them. The Charter does not distinguish among
categories of members in that regard, and establishes
without ambiguity that all Members shall fulfil in good
faith the obligations assumed in becoming part of the
Organization.

Throughout the years, however, this basic premise
has been repeatedly challenged. Violations of the
Charter have been frequent. Disregard of the purposes
and principles has taken place in all regions of the
world. The role of the United Nations as a platform for
dialogue and diplomacy has been debilitated by attempts
to resolve controversies through unilateral coercive
measures, including unauthorized resort to military
action. Countering these corrosive trends demands
a genuine collective recommitment to the purposes
and principles of the Charter, a true recommitment to
multilateralism, as all Members undertook by adopting
General Assembly resolution 70/3 in celebrating the
seventieth anniversary of the Organization last year.

In the emerging multipolar world we are
experiencing, it is necessary to re-establish an
international pact on the inadmissibility of the use
of force outside the Charter provisions and without
proper authorization by the Security Council. But we
should look even further and agree that, whenever
authorized, the use of force should be employed
responsibly - meaning that action should be judicious,
proportionate and strictly limited to the objectives of
the mandate and in line with international humanitarian
law.

While a renewed commitment to the purposes
and principles of the United Nations seems desirable
and warranted, it is also necessary to update our
governance structures. Since its foundation, shifts in
the international landscape and the emergence of new
challenges have required that the United Nations system
adapt to new realities. When the United Nations was
created, critical issues we face today, such as the threats
posed by terrorism or climate change, were not fully
anticipated. Overcoming these truly global challenges
requires cooperation and coordinated efforts within a
robust multilateral framework.

It is possible to affirm with respect to two of the
three main pillars of the United Nations that important
and transformative changes have been possible in
recent years - with respect to development, through
the decisions taken at the United Nations Conference
on Sustainable Development and the adoption of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (General Assembly resolution 70/1)), and on the human rights
front, with the creation of the Human Rights Council
and the establishment of a universal periodic review.
Many other examples could be provided, including the
successful negotiations on climate change undertaken
in Paris last December.

In the field of peace and security, despite
developments unforeseen in the original Charter
framework, such as peacekeeping operations, we are
facing a credibility deficit and have yet to overcome
deeply ingrained resistance to long-awaited reforms.
As a result, this body has gradually lost the capacity
to live up to the high moral and political standards
rightly expected from the peoples we represent. It must
be recognized that, unfortunately, the Security Council
has not always fulfilled its obligations as outlined in
the purposes and principles of the Charter and in other
relevant Charter provisions.

But let us look at the glass being half-full. There
are several opportunities before us. Important inputs
for reflection and decision have been provided by the
recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel
on Peace Operations, the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture, the
High-level Advisory Group on Resolution 1325 (2000)
on Women, Peace and Security, as well as by the
Secretary-General's Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism. Likewise, on the humanitarian front, we
will have a chance to make progress in dealing with
crucial challenges and responding to the plight of
civilians affected by the conflicts we have failed to
resolve in the forthcoming Istanbul humanitarian
summit and in the General Assembly High-Level
Meeting on Addressing Large Movements of Refugees
and Migrants in September 2016.

Furthermore, the seventieth session of the General
Assembly provides an opportunity that cannot be
missed for achieving a concrete outcome on the crucial
matter of updating our collective security governance
framework. Reforming the Security Council by ensuring
that the voices of all members are heard through a
process that guarantees equitable representation and
improved decision-making is the indispensable mission
to strengthen an international order fit for the twenty-
first century based on the principles and purposes of
the Charter of the United Nations .

