Mr. Martinez Blanco (Honduras) (interpretation from Spanish): Since October 1994, when former
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide returned to Haiti, the
international community has seen progress achieved in
that country in strengthening its democracy and
institutions, goals towards which the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) has made a significant
contribution.

 

Indeed, the presidential elections held in December
1995 were an essential element in the consolidation of
constitutional order in Haiti. However, some aspects related
to the internal security and economic and social
development of that country remain unresolved. In Haiti,
enormous social and humanitarian problems must still be
faced, the roots of instability and insecurity eradicated and
the achievements of democracy shored up.

One of the most sensitive aspects in Haiti is the
question of internal security and common crime. Despite
the progress that has been made in the training of police
personnel and the provision to them of some equipment,
with the assistance of several States and the cooperation of
UNMIH, much remains to be done to ensure that Haiti has
a sufficiently large and properly trained and equipped police
force.

We therefore call on the States Members of this
Organization to continue to contribute the financial and
technical resources necessary to establish a professional
Haitian National Police force. Similarly, contributions must
be made to improve the prison and judiciary systems,
which, according to the Secretary-General's report, are in
a critical situation and lack the infrastructure and equipment
necessary for normal functioning.

Another important aspect for the consolidation of
democracy in Haiti that my delegation wishes to stress, and
which was correctly identified by various financial
institutions in December 1995, is the indissoluble link in
Haiti between security and development. In recognizing that
principle, many institutions have affirmed that the main
objective of United Nations system's involvement in Haiti
should be to alleviate poverty, that to ensure sustainable
development, better governance is needed and the
environment must be protected and regenerated.

In truth, to ensure development in Haiti, it is important
for international economic cooperation to continue, because
the island's socio-economic prospects remain weak. It is
encouraging to know that the Bretton Woods institutions,
the Inter-American Development Bank and the European
Union will pursue the negotiations with the new
Government that were initiated in January this year on a set
of structural adjustment measures that are crucial to the
Haitian economy.

We must recognize that, thanks to the activities of the
United Nations Mission in Haiti, it has been possible to
maintain a climate of stability in the country, as witnessed
in the peaceful and orderly transfer of power to the new
President, Rene Preval.

My delegation feels that the continued United
Nations presence in that country is necessary to
consolidate the progress achieved and to assist the Haitian
Government in fulfilling its obligations to maintain
conditions of security and stability and to establish a
professional Haitian National Police force, activities that
are set out in the Secretary-General's "An Agenda for
Peace" and its supplement as post-conflict peace-building
measures. We therefore agree that UNMIH's mandate
should be extended.

We hope that the adoption of the draft resolution
before us will be accompanied by a renewed commitment
on the part of the people and the Government of Haiti to
peace, democracy and national reconstruction, because in
the final analysis they are the architects of their own
destiny.

