Mr. Alhariri (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me at the outset, Mr. President, to
commend your leadership of the Security Council for
this month. My delegation would also like to join
others in thanking Ambassadors Loj, Mayoral and
Burian for their briefings to the Security Council this
morning.

Syria would like to reaffirm its condemnation of
international terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations, including State terrorism. Syria has
been a victim of horrific acts of terrorism, and was
among the first countries to sound the warning of that
looming danger. Syria has called for national and
international strategies to combat terrorism. Syria has
also shared its experience in combating terrorism with
many countries of the world, which has contributed to
saving the lives of many innocent persons of various
nationalities and to breaking up many international
terrorist cells.

Syria is implementing its commitments vis-a-vis
the Consolidated List. The relevant authorities have
incorporated names on the List into the electronic entry
control system at all Syrian border control posts, in
addition to distributing those names in hard copy.

We note with appreciation that the 1267
Committee is making great efforts to carry out its
mandate. Nevertheless, despite those efforts, the
Security Council has yet to seriously take up the
reference by the General Assembly in last September's
World Summit Outcome to the need for fairness in
dealing with the issues of listing, delisting and
amending the Consolidated List and making exceptions
to it. That is in addition to the problems encountered in
the implementation of the provisions of the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council - especially the
great gaps that exist with regard to identifying
elements for a number of names on the list, and in
particular the fact that many names are similar and
some are repeated and that spelling is not standardized.
The time has come for a comprehensive review to
update the List and to eliminate all doubt as to the
information it contains.

S/l'V.5446

 

Syria notes the efforts being made by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) to deal with the backlog of State reports. We
call for further efforts to fully eliminate the backlog of
such reports. Syria will soon present its fifth report to
the CTC, which will include the latest legislative steps
taken by Syria with regard to its national law to combat
terrorism and its financing. Let me also point to the
burden faced by States, including mine, in responding
to the many reporting requirements.

I would like to say that the body created under
the law to combat money laundering and the financing
of terrorism is taking a very active and effective role,
especially in opening up the banking sector and in the
future establishment of a stock market in Syria. That
body has also held a number of workshops, in
cooperation with various international bodies,
including the World Bank. A regional conference for
the Middle East and North Africa was held in
Damascus entitled "Development of an effective
system to combat money laundering and the financing
of terrorism". The Arab Banking Union, in cooperation
with Syria's central bank, held a seminar on combating
the financing of terrorism and money laundering.
Moreover, the Middle East and North Africa Financial
Action Task Force has also expressed its satisfaction
with Syrian transparency in the area of combating
terrorism, as well as with our country's full
commitment to implement the recommendations of the
Task Force.

The anti-terrorism financing and money
laundering body is also signing memorandums of
understanding in order to share information with a
number of other States. That body has also requested
membership in the Egmont Group of Financial
Intelligence Units, and will attend the Group's next
meeting, to be held in Cyprus in mid-June, as an
observer.

With regard to the work of the 1540 Committee,
we continue to believe that that Committee's work can
in no way be seen as an alternative to the various
international disarmament mechanisms. We must avoid
attempting to inject the Security Council into the
activities of the General Assembly. I should also add
that we have submitted our report under that resolution.
Syria has also responded to further questions by the
Committee. Those clarifications also referred to the
fact that the law on combating terrorism and money
laundering includes language criminalizing any trade
in radioactive materials.

Syria is committed to cooperating with various
Security Council bodies on terrorism. We are making
sincere efforts to update our domestic legislation and to
establish effective ways to combat terrorism. We also
welcome the coordinating efforts of the three
Committees to implement their mandates. We call upon
them to avoid duplication and to streamline the many
reporting requirements, as called for at September's
Summit. We also call on the Committees to avoid
duplication of the efforts being made by the General
Assembly, which is the sole legislative authority of the
United Nations.

In dealing with international terrorism, which
does in fact threaten international peace and security,
we call upon the Security Council to avoid intervening
in matters that fall strictly within the purview of the
General Assembly - especially as regards legislative
matters, for that would affect the legal nature of
Security Council measures and open the way to the
possibility of appealing against them.

The Arab region is suffering from terrorism in
general, and from State terrorism in particular, as
represented by the terrorism of Israel, which continues
to occupy Arab lands, to kill Palestinian citizens and to
destroy their property and to build a wall of separation
of Palestinian land. While noting the role of the
Security Council in international efforts to combat
global terrorism, we call on the States members of the
Security Council to avoid double standards in fighting
terrorism. Combating terrorism must be based on strict
legal criteria, and not on flimsy political
considerations.

In that regard, I must stress that Israel is duty-
bound to cease its cheap blackmail against the United
Nations. Israel is well aware that the international
community knows about the terrorist acts it has
perpetrated since coming to the region. Its gangs have
assassinated many international personalities, including
those sent by the United Nations to investigate the
situation in the region. Everyone is aware of the fact
that the source of terrorism in the region is Israel's
continuing occupation of Arab lands, the ejection of
Palestinians from their land, the confiscation of that
land and Israel's ongoing aggression against Arabs and
its denial of their basic rights.

Sll'V.5446

 

The important point is that, in his statement, the
representative of Israel referred to and insisted on the
need to implement resolutions 1680 (2006) and 1559
(2004). I should like the statement we made to the
sponsors of those resolutions when they were
introduced to be clearly reflected in the records of the
Security Council. We said that the objective of the
resolutions was to serve the regional interests and
agenda of Israel and its supporters and not the cause of
peace and security in the Middle East.

The representative of Israel did not mention
Israel's huge nuclear arsenal. He seeks to confuse the
legitimate rights of those living under occupation and
whose lands have been usurped with the rights of those
who perpetrate terrorism. Perhaps he should read the
United Nations Charter, which was drafted to save
generations from the scourge of war and from foreign
occupation. Those who are ignorant of these facts may
be illiterate, and if they are illiterate they ought not to
be here at the United Nations.

I will be brief. Israel's terrorism is known to all.
Most regrettably, Israel can fool some people some of
the time; however, it cannot fool everyone all of the
time. Occupation is rejected. Right is might, and it is
the legitimate right of all people to combat occupation.
Neither Israel nor anyone else can prevent peoples
under occupation from resisting it.

Syria believes that the United Nations is a unique
framework for strengthening collective action towards
cooperation between all States to combat terrorism and
to identify its root causes. My delegation attaches the
utmost importance to the efforts of the General
Assembly to update international counter-terrorism
conventions and to ensure the discharge by all States of
their international obligations. In that regard, I would
stress that we shall effectively cooperate in
forthcoming discussions to establish a comprehensive
strategy to combat international terrorism.

We believe that any comprehensive strategy must
recognize certain basic elements, most important of
which are a clear and accurate definition of terrorism
and the need to address its fundamental roots,
particularly foreign occupation. The struggle against
terrorism must not be exploited for political ends. We
must therefore differentiate between criminal terrorism
and the rights of peoples under occupation and foreign
hegemony to struggle towards their independence and
self-determination. We believe that the strategy must
target terrorism perpetrated by individuals, groups and
States, and we therefore feel that State terrorism must
be addressed by the comprehensive strategy.

We look forward to the best possible
implementation by the three committees of their
mandates in order to enhance international cooperation,
promote international peace and security, and eliminate
all sources of tension in our world.

