Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I would like to align myself
with the statement to be delivered later by the observer
of the European Union (EU).

I would like to thank you and your country,
Mr. President, for taking the initiative to bring the
comprehensive issue of regional cooperation and the
links between security and development in Central
Asia and Afghanistan to the attention of the Security
Council. I also welcome the participation in today's
meeting of such senior-level ministers from other
Central Asian States, and we are very pleased to
have young Afghan women, the future leaders of
Afghanistan, here in the Chamber as well. I also want
to compliment Ambassador Kairat Umarov for the
excellent visit to Afghanistan this weekend that he and
his team organized for the Security Council, and to
thank the Government of Afghanistan for hosting us.

We welcome the Secretary-General's briefing
this morning, as well as his steadfast commitment to
preventive diplomacy and sustainable development,
including in Central Asia.

We commend all of the countries of Central Asia
for their efforts to invigorate and strengthen regional
cooperation, including with Afghanistan. Such concrete
steps as resolving long-standing border issues, easing
border crossings, strengthening people-to-people
contacts and lower barriers to trade are very welcome.
Those actions serve as recognition of the fact that each
country is better offifits neighbours also prosper.

Long-term peace and economic development for the
individual countries of the region are intimately linked
to regional security and development. The countries
of Central Asia have seen progress on multiple fronts
since independence 25 years ago, not least in poverty
reduction and steady economic growth, and, as we see
from Kazakhstan's membership on the Council, Central
Asian States are playing an increasingly important role
on the world stage.

Remaining challenges, many of which are common
to the countries of the region, can be overcome through
stronger regional cooperation. They include security
threats and radicalization, managing shared water and
energy resources and addressing the effects of climate
change. Efforts are also needed to strengthen good
governance, create j obs for a rapidly growing population,
develop interconnectivity and reduce barriers to trade.
Through regional cooperation those challenges can be
overcome and transformed into mutually beneficial
opportunities for the countries of the region, thereby
creating a zone of peace, cooperation and prosperity
that benefits all of the people of Central Asia as well
as Afghanistan.

As we have heard many times in this Chamber
in recent months, interconnected security challenges
require joint and comprehensive approaches that
integrate security, development and human rights. The
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development provides
the blueprint for such an approach. We welcome the
firm commitment of the Central Asian countries to the
Sustainable Development Goals and their inclusion in
their respective development strategies. As member of
the European Union, we are contributing to a strong
and durable relationship between the countries of the
region and the European Union aimed at fostering
prosperous, sustainable and stable socioeconomic
development. That includes efforts to facilitate trade
and increased connectivity, as well as to continue the
EU's long-standing support for border management in
Central Asia and Afghanistan.
The road to regional progress runs through a
peaceful and prosperous Afghanistan, something
which is in everyone's interest. However, many of the
challenges facing Afghanistan cannot be dealt with in
isolation. Therefore, a clear commitment from regional
actors and their constructive engagement is critical to
a peaceful Afghanistan. Greater economic and political
cooperation and integration are essential for the future
of both that country and the wider region. We urge all
stakeholders, especially Afghanistan's neighbours,
to assume responsibility and work together towards a
political settlement. Every country in the region stands
to gain if there is peace in Afghanistan.

The only viable option to reach such a settlement
is an inclusive Afghan-owned and Afghan-led peace
process, which was confirmed once again during our
visit last week. We welcome the Afghan Government's
peace efforts, and we call on the Taliban to engage in a
dialogue with the Government. We look forward to the
upcoming meeting of the Kabul Process. The Security
Council has an important responsibility to contribute
and be responsive to creating an environment conducive
to peace.

Respect for human rights is vital to achieving
that peace. It is also essential that all parties in
society be included. The economic empowerment
and meaningful participation of women and girls in
all political processes, including future peace efforts
and negotiations, is a precondition for sustainable
development. The Council's meeting with women's
representatives last week reinforced those points.

The holding of inclusive, credible and transparent
elections is a fundamental step in the consolidation of
democracy in Afghanistan and is essential for future
stability. It is imperative that the parliamentary and
presidential elections take place as planned. We call
on the electoral management bodies and on the Afghan
Government to accelerate efforts to ensure that elections
take place and that they be free and fair. We encourage
them to take all the necessary steps to ensure women's
participation, both as voters and as candidates.

As a steadfast partner to Afghanistan, we commit
to doing our part through long-term engagement on
State-building and peacebuilding in the country.
With a View to contributing to sustainable, peaceful
and economic development, our efforts include a
$1 billion development-assistance commitment from
2015 to 2024, which includes humanitarian assistance,
capacity-building, dialogue and mediation training for
local female activists. We also contribute to NATO'S
Resolute Support Mission.

The United Nations should play an active role
in supporting regional efforts in Central Asia and
Afghanistan. The United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA) provides important support
for efforts to achieve lasting peace, a role that would
be further enhanced by implementing the strategic
review. Increased cooperation and coordination among
the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia and UNAMA and
other relevant United Nations agencies and regional
organizations will further enhance the impact of United
Nations support.

We commend the important work by the Regional
Centre - represented in the Chamber today by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Natalia
Gherman - and by UNAMA in promoting regional
dialogue and conflict prevention. We would like to
highlight in particular the laudable work regarding
capacity-building in water diplomacy and modernizing
the legal framework for managing natural resources. As
pointed out by the Secretary-General, managing shared
water resources that are fundamental to economic
development can build trust and lead to greater
investments. In turn, that is an important contributor
to, and incentive for, sustaining peace in the region.

The Security-Council's visit to Afghanistan
allowed us to take stock of progress and hear at first
hand about the many challenges the country still faces.
However, we also heard of the aspirations of all Afghans
to build a better future. Becoming a connected and
integrated part of the Central Asian region was central
to that vision. All of the countries of the region, as well
as Afghanistan's partners beyond the region, have a
common interest in supporting these efforts.

I thank you very much for your leadership,
Mr. President.

