Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam President,
for convening this meeting to consider the draft annual
report of the Security Council, which will be issued
as document A/69/2 and which covers the period from
1 August 2013 to 31 July 2014. I also thank you for giving
Rwanda the floor as the delegation that coordinated the
documentation of the Council's business during the
reporting period.

The process towards consensus on the draft report
is representative of how productive the Council could
be if its members were willing to always work towards
a common interest That was the expectation of States
Members of the United Nations when they mandated
this organ to deal with the maintenance of international
peace and security - a united, hence effective, Council.

It is on that note that I would like to express our
gratitude to all Council members for their valuable
collaboration in the process of drawing up the draft
report. As confirmed by the Secretariat through the
Director of the Security Council Affairs Division, this
report goes down as one of the substantive reports of
the Council agreed on in the shortest period.

As stated in the introduction to the draft report,
during the reporting period the Council held 238
formal meeting, of which 218 were public. The Council
adopted 55 resolutions and 26 presidential statements,
while also issuing 113 statements to the press.

During the same period, the Security Council
conducted two missions to the field, one to Africa in
October 2013 - to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Rwanda, Uganda and Ethiopia - and another to
Mali in February 2014. On 8 October 2013 in Ethiopia,
the Security Council held one ofits annual consultative
meetings with the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union; the second meeting was held in New
York on 7 June 2014.

As was the case in years past, most of the Council's
activities and efforts were focused on Africa. The
continent registered some progress - in Sierra Leone,
where the mandate of the United Nations Integrated
Peacebuilding Office was successfully completed;
in Somalia, where the national army, supported by
the African Union Mission in Somalia, continued to
make substantive territorial gains against Al-Shabaab;
in Guinea-Bissau, where the constitutional order was
restored, albeit still fragile; and in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the Force Intervention
Brigade was deployed pursuant to resolution 2098
(2013) to neutralize all armed groups. The latter led to
the defeat of the Mouvement du 23 mars in November
23, which ended its rebellion through the Kampala
process and the Nairobi declarations. However, the
Security Council continued to follow closely the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where a number of other armed groups, including the
Forces de'mocratiques de liberation du Rwanda and the
Alliance Democratic Force, remain active in the eastern
part of the country.

Nonetheless, despite that progress in Africa,
during the reporting period the Security Council had
to deal with the outbreak of conflicts in the Central
African Republic, South Sudan and Libya, which
led to widespread human rights and humanitarian
consequences. It is in that context that the Council
reinforced the protection-of-civilians mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan by adopting
resolution 2155 (2014). The Council also decided
to establish the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic, which was created through resolution 2149
(2014) and deployed on 15 September 2014 to replace
the African-led International Support Mission to the
Central African Republic. On the Central African
Republic as well, the Council adopted resolution 2127
(2013), which established the Committee mandated to
oversee the arms embargo, travel ban and assests freeze
imposed pursuant to the same resolution.

The situation in the Middle East was also prominent
on the Council's agenda following the eruption of the
conflicts in Gaza and Iraq, as well as the worsening
security situation in the Syrian Arab Republic and in
Yemen. On Syria, the Council adopted resolution 2118
(2013), relating to the destruction of the Syrian chemical
weapons programme, as well as resolutions 2139 (2014)
and 2165 (2014), relating to the humanitarian situation
in the country. On Yemen, the Council adopted
resolution 2140 (2014), which established the Sanctions
Committee mandated to oversee the travel ban and an
assets freeze imposed on Yemen pursuant to the same
resolution.

In Europe, the Security Council continued to
follow the situations in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Cyprus, and Kosovo, which remained generally calm
and stable. However, in February 2014, the Council
was seized with the conflict in Ukraine, which further
escalated on 17 July with the downing of Malaysia
Airlines Flight MH-l7 in Donetsk oblast, resulting in
the loss of 298 lives. In that regard, the Council adopted
resolution 2166 (2014) to condemn, in the strongest
terms, that tragic incident, demand a full, thorough and
independent international investigation and to stress
that those responsible should be held accountable.

As for Asia and the Americas, the Council
continued to monitor the situations in Afghanistan and
Haiti. It also adopted relevant resolutions to extend
the mandate of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan and the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti.

Turning to thematic, general and cross-cutting
issues, the Council continued to hold regular open
debates and other public meetings on human rights-
related issues, such as the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, children and armed conflict and women
and peace and security; on security-related issues, such
as non-proliferation and peacekeeping; and on post-
conflict-related issues, such as peacebuilding, security-
sector reform and the rule of law; and on working
methods, including through the wrap-up sessions.

At the same time, the Council debated specific
issues such as the prevention of genocide on the ocassion
of the twentieth commemoration of the genocide of the
Tutsi in Rwanda; the Captain Mbaye Diagne Medal
of Honour, named for the United Nations Assistance
Mission For Rwanda peacekeeper who saved hundreds
of people during the genocide; small arms; and war, its
lessons and the search for permanent peace.

During the reporting period, accountability for the
most serious crimes was a permanent concern for the
Security Council - through various country-specific
debates and products, through meetings to discuss
the work of the International Criminal Tribunals for
the Former Yugoslavia and for Rwanda, and through
meetings to consider reports of the Prosecutor General
of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in accordance
with the relevant resolutions concerning the situation
in the Sudan and Libya. Unfortunately, during the
reporting period, Council members could not agree on
two draft resolutions on the work of the ICC in relation
to the situations in Kenya and Syria.

It is our hope that the important records of the
Council's business contained in this draft report will
continue to be a guide to Council members, the larger
United Nations membership, the Secretariat and to
all actors serving the international community in
the maintenance of international peace and security.
Nevertheless, I do hope that in future the Council will
consider how to improve its annual reports by assessing
its effectiveness in the reporting period with concrete
recommendations on how to act better and faster while
maintaining international peace and security.

In conclusion, allow me to express our satisfaction
for the opportunity for Rwanda to document the
Council's work. My particular thanks go to my Security
Council team at the Rwanda Mission, which worked
hard to put together the draft report - of course, with
the invaluable support and contributions of all Council
members, to whom we extend our appreciation. We
also express our gratitude to the Secretary-General and
senior officials of his administration for their usual
availablity to brief us, sometimes on very short notice.
I also recognize the valuable support of members of
the Security Council Affairs Divsion, mainly for the
advice they accorded to us throghout the drafting
process, including on Council statistics, as well as for
ably servicing the meetings, which are the basis of the
draft report.
