Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to sincerely and warmly congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. I do so especially
because China is a great friend of our mother
continent, Africa, and in particular of my country, the
Sudan, in the light of the historic and very sound
relations between our two peoples and countries.

It therefore comes as no great surprise to us that
during your presidency we will enjoy such constructive
and positive initiatives as that which the Council is
engaged in today regarding the situation in Somalia.
China has a long-standing tradition of strengthening
and maintaining international peace and security and
participates generously in support of peacekeeping
operations throughout the world.

I would also like to welcome Mr. Mohamed
Abdullahi Mohamed, Prime Minister of the
Transitional Federal Government of Somalia, and
thank him for his detailed briefing to the Council
today. The very praiseworthy efforts recently
undertaken by his Government were reflected in that
briefing.

It is high time for the international community to
take greater interest in Somalia and to address the
various developments in the situation there by adopting
a different approach from that of the United Nations
over the past two decades. It is essential to adopt a new
strategy that will enable us to achieve lasting peace and
security in that brotherly Arab-African country.

I take this opportunity to acknowledge the
commendable efforts of the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and, in
particular, the African Union Mission in Somalia. I also
wish to acknowledge recent efforts aimed at
strengthening the implementation of the road map
adopted by the Prime Minister, following the initiative
of the international Contact Group on Piracy off the
Coast of Somalia.

It is very important to affirm here that the Sudan,
as an influential and active member of the international
11-25878
Contact Group on Somali Piracy, played an essential
role in the adoption of the decisions taken by the
Contact Group during its meeting in Rome in June
2009. In that context, it is important to identify a
definite vision and a precise timeline for carrying out
the outstanding tasks during the transitional period. We
fully agree with the guiding principles outlined in the
document circulated by the presidency (S/20ll/114)
regarding the difficulty of completing all remaining
tasks during the transition period, which will come to
an end in only five months.

We share the general concern regarding increased
acts of piracy off the coast of Somalia. We support the
statements of the Prime Minister of Somalia, in
particular his comment that the issue of piracy will be
resolved not off the coast of Somalia but by
strengthening State authority on land and by promoting
the rule of law throughout Somalia. The phenomenon
of piracy will be effectively resolved only through a
lasting and comprehensive political solution to the
problem of Somalia.

According to the Secretary-General's report
(S/2010/556), the intensive international efforts
undertaken to eliminate piracy have been unsuccessful.
On the contrary, the pirates' activities have spread,
reaching the very edge of the Indian Ocean. Suffice it
to recall here that more than 20 vessels are currently
being held by the pirates. This situation calls for the
international community, and the Security Council in
particular, to take a new approach to tackling this
phenomenon in line with the Chinese initiative we are
discussing today.

The historic ancestral links between Somalia and
the Sudan impel us to spare no effort in seeking to
restore peace and stability in Somalia. Solid channels
of communication have long existed between our two
countries. Since the beginning of the civil war in
Somalia, the Sudan has been at the forefront of
countries acting effectively to restore peace and
stability throughout that country. We will limit
ourselves to citing only a few examples.

In 2006, the Sudan hosted three rounds of
negotiations between Somali factions. Furthermore,
efforts have continued and been stepped up in the
framework of the Arab Contact Group on Somalia in
order to bring together the various brotherly Somali
factions. The Sudan also played a leading role in the
Djibouti process in 2008, which resulted in the signing
11-25878
of the power-sharing agreement. The Sudan's efforts to
strengthen stability in Somalia continued in 2009 with
a number of ministerial and presidential visits from the
Transitional Federal Government to Khartoum to
strengthen cooperation between the two States and to
support peace and stability throughout Somalia.

Finally, we believe that the Chinese initiative to
seek a comprehensive approach is a good and positive
one that should be adopted and swiftly implemented.
We see our exchanges today as a platform for
launching this initiative, which addresses the real
underlying causes of the problematic situation in
Somalia.

We reaffirm that, given our geographic and
regional position and cultural, social and civilizational
links with the brotherly country of Somalia, the Sudan
is ready to provide all possible assistance to the United
Nations and its various bodies, including the Security
Council, in order to achieve security and stability in
brotherly Somalia.

