Judge Pocar: I consider it a great honour and
privilege to address the Security Council for the first
time in my capacity as the new President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY).

Mr. President, I am especially pleased to appear
before the Security Council during your tenure. Your
country has long demonstrated strong commitment to
the work of the Tribunal. Allow me to express our deep
gratitude for that ongoing support.

I stand before the Security Council today for the
specific purpose of presenting the fourth report of the
President of the Tribunal on our completion strategy,
pursuant to Council resolution 1534 (2004). The
written report is before the Council, as submitted on
30 November 2005. It explains the measures taken and
challenges faced by the Tribunal from June to
November of this year in its efforts to meet the goals of
the completion strategy. The report also provides an
updated prognosis with regard to implementation of the
completion strategy.

Given my recent election, on 16 November, this
report primarily reflects the achievements and progress
of the Tribunal under the leadership of my predecessor,
Judge Theodor Meron. In my statement today, I intend
to outline for the Council its key points, as well as new
developments since its submission.

As members of the Council are undoubtedly
aware, Ante Gotovina, one of the Tribunal's highest-
level accused and who has long been at large, was
recently arrested in Spain and was transferred to the
Tribunal on 10 December. We are one step closer to
reaching the goal of having all remaining high-ranking
accused brought before the Tribunal. I also wish to
inform the Council that since the submission of the
report, another sentencing judgement was rendered by
the Trial Chamber in the Bralo case, on 7 December.
As can be seen, the work of the Tribunal is ever
moving forward.

Mr. President, allow me now to briefly
summarize the judicial activity of the Tribunal since
the last report, submitted in May 2005. In the last six
months, the three Trial Chambers and the Appeals
Chamber have continued to operate at full capacity.
The Trial Chambers are hearing six trials
simultaneously and are currently managing 18 cases in
the pre-trial stage. At the same time, four new
contempt trials, involving six accused, have begun. In
the reporting period, the Trial Chambers have rendered
three judgements involving five accused. One
judgement involving two accused is due to be issued in
January 2006, and two more judgements are expected
to be rendered by mid-2006.

The Appeals Chamber has disposed of 30
appeals, from both this Tribunal and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) since the last
report. Of these, four have been judgements. In January
and February 2006, three more judgements are
expected to be issued.

I must convey to the Council that the Tribunal's
caseload only continues to grow. Since May 2005, four
more indictees have been apprehended, resulting in a
total of 21 accused who have been or are being
transferred to the Tribunal in the past year. This
number represents an increase of more than 50 per cent
in the number of persons awaiting trial, compared to
that reported in November 2004. At present, 45
accused, or 18 cases, await trial, and I am pleased to
report that only six of a total of 161 indictees remain at
large.

Let me now turn to my first topic - that is,
internal measures taken by the Tribunal towards
implementation of the completion strategy. As the
Council may recall, two working groups of judges were
formed to examine the procedures and practices of the
Trial and Appeals Chambers, with a view to improving
their working methods while maintaining the
Tribunal's commitment to due process.

The Working Group on Speeding up Trials,
chaired by Judge Bonomy, among other things came to
the conclusion that the three existing courtrooms
should be renovated to allow for the conduct of trials
involving multiple accused - an issue I will address in
detail later in this statement. Renovations began at the
end of November and will continue through the first
part of next year. They are being conducted in such a
way as to ensure that two courtrooms are always
available for the judges.

The Working Group also found that it is vital that
a fourth courtroom be constructed. The Registrar of the
Tribunal produced a cost/benefit analysis on this issue,
and the Tribunal is still assessing the viability of this
project before submitting it to the Security Council. In
any event, if the Tribunal were to decide to go ahead
with the construction of a fourth courtroom, interested
Governments would be approached to donate the
necessary funds.

As for the Working Group on Speeding up
Appeals, chaired by Judge Mumba, I am pleased to
report that it has completed its work. Its
recommendations were adopted unanimously by the
judges and were implemented in the Rules and Practice
Directions of the Tribunal in the autumn. I will not
describe the adopted amendments in detail but, instead,
refer you to the written report. However, I stress that
their impact on the efficiency of appeal proceedings
has already been felt. For example, a new procedure
has already cut in half the time required to dispose of
12 interlocutory appeals.

A further internal measure is worth noting. Since
the last report submitted to the Security Council, the e-
Court system has been introduced at the Tribunal. That
system, which integrates all case-related documents
into a central electronic database, eliminates the need
for unnecessary paper filings. It thus has the potential
to increase the accessibility of information while
expediting proceedings. The system's effectiveness has
yet to be fully assessed, However, already, one and a
half months of judgement-writing time were saved in
one case thus far.

The second topic that I wish to raise before the
Council today concerns the importance of the ad litem
judges to implementation of the completion strategy.
The Tribunal is extremely grateful to the Security
Council for the several resolutions on the Tribunal that
it has adopted in the past year, which have enhanced
the support provided by ad litem judges. The Tribunal
has greatly benefited from the possibility of re-electing
ad litem judges; the election of a new pool of ad-litem
judges to be called upon for new trials; the permission
granted for nine ad litem judges to continue beyond the
expiry of their terms; and the early appointment of one
ad litem judge as a permanent judge so that she could
be assigned to a new trial.

My third topic is the referral of cases of
intermediate- and lower-ranking accused from the
Tribunal to competent national jurisdictions pursuant to
rule 11 bis of the Tribunal's Rules. Those proceedings
have been a focal point for the Tribunal in the past six
months. To date, the Prosecutor has filed 12 referral
motions involving 20 accused. While most of those
motions are still pending final decision, one case has
already been referred to the Republic of Croatia, and
two have been referred to the War Crimes Chamber of
the State Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In order to ensure that due process is accorded in
the cases referred, the Tribunal continues to conduct
several training initiatives to build the local capacity of
national courts in the former Yugoslavia. My report
contains the specifics of those initiatives. The Tribunal
remains committed to doing its utmost to assist the
development of the rule of law in the region as a
crucial component of the completion strategy.

I shall now address my fourth topic, which is
paramount to the Tribunal's success in finishing its
work: cooperation by States in the region with the
Tribunal. Over the past six months, cooperation has
been improving in some areas. However, the failure to
arrest the remaining six indictees at large remains a
major concern.

Cooperation with Croatia is now satisfactory.
Bosnia and Herzegovina's level of cooperation remains
very good at both the Federation and State levels. With
respect to Republika Srpska within Bosnia and
Herzegovina, while there are encouraging signs of
cooperation, that cooperation remains insufficient
because of the failure to provide information that could
lead to the arrest of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko
Mladic. Serbia and Montenegro's cooperation has
improved, but the failure to turn over the remaining
fugitives is a serious concern. I urge the international
community to maintain its pressure on that matter as
Serbia and Montenegro's expressed goodwill must be
translated into actions and results.

As stated previously, during the reporting period,
the number of accused at large was reduced from 10 to
six with the arrest of four indictees. One of them,
Milan Lukic, is still in the custody of the Argentine
authorities, who wish first to dispose of an extradition
request by Serbia and Montenegro before transferring
him to the Tribunal. The other fugitive, Dragan
Zelenovic, has been detained by the Russian
authorities, and discussions on the modalities for his
transfer are in progress. The third fugitive, Sredoje
Lukic, was transferred to the Tribunal's custody in
September from Republika Srpska, after being at large
for nearly seven years. Finally, as I said earlier,
Gotovina was transferred to the Tribunal on
10 December, after evading arrest over the past four
years.

Those most recent arrests demonstrate that the
Tribunal remains dependent upon the cooperation of all
Member States, in addition to the cooperation of States
in the Balkans, for completion of its mandate. While
recognizing the important efforts made by Member
States so far, I urge them to provide full cooperation in
order to apprehend the remaining six fugitives. Among
them, Mladic and Karadzic remain the most notorious.
The Tribunal simply cannot close its doors until they
have been brought to justice.

The final topic that I raise before the Council is
the prognosis for the Tribunal's implementation of the
completion strategy. In May 2005, my predecessor
stated that it was definitely no longer feasible to
envisage an end of all trial activity at the Tribunal by
the end of 2008. That was due to the large number of
indictees and fugitives who had arrived at the Tribunal
since the previous report, as well as the filing and the
confirmation of seven new or amended indictments by
the Prosecution involving 13 accused. Judge Meron
predicted that trials would have to run into 2009.

Six months later, I can only confirm that
prediction. Whether the growing number of trials will
conclude by the end of 2009 depends upon the
following factors.

First, of primary importance is the trial of
Karadzic and Mladic. If those fugitives are arrested in
the near future, the completion of all trials at the close
of 2009 remains feasible. However, the longer their
arrival is delayed, the greater the likelihood that trials
will continue longer.

Secondly, the Tribunal has forged ahead with the
joinder of cases into single trials of multiple accused as
a measure for saving the time it would take to try each
case individually. At present, three trials of multiple
accused are in the pre-trial stage, involving a total of
20 accused and consolidating 14 cases. However, of the
three joinder motions filed by the Prosecution during
the reporting period, only two have been granted, and
the Prosecution has not appealed the rejected motion. I
must also emphasize that the impact that the joinder of
cases will have on the efficiency of trials at the
Tribunal remains untested. They may actually result in
some delay if, for example, the entire trial must be
stopped due to the illness of one or more of the
accused. I can assure the Council that all efforts are
being made by the pre-trial judges assigned to those
cases to avoid any delay by making proper pre-trial
preparations.

I must flag for the Council a very important issue
related to the trials of multiple accused that is not
found in my written report. I shall raise it now because
the first of those trials is to begin in February 2006.
While those trials of multiple accused should save
much time overall, it is obvious that they will run
longer than a regular trial due to their size and
complexity. Consequently, it is possible that, for any
number of reasons, judges originally assigned to a case
may be unable to complete the proceedings. The
Judges of the Tribunal have already made a
controversial amendment to the Rules to allow for the
replacement of one of the original three Judges, so that
the trial can continue. That rule was applied in the
Milosevic proceedings and in two other cases.
However, if a situation were to arise in which two of
the original Judges in a case would need to be replaced,
that would mean, under our Rules, that the trial would
have to restart.

The Judges of the Tribunal firmly agreed, in a
plenary held just 10 days ago, that the interests of
justice cannot be served by allowing a trial to be
completed by a bench of Judges the majority of whom
have not heard the entire proceedings. We have
explored all possible options for avoiding such a
retrial, and the alternative solution that we devised
would be to appoint a fourth, reserve or standby Judge
to new trials of multiple accused. That Judge would
hear the case from start to finish and would be able to
step in for the two original Judges who were no longer
able to sit. I bring this to the Council's attention
because such an appointment would require the
approval and support of the Security Council.

I now turn to a third factor that may affect the
completion strategy. Although the Tribunal has now
successfully referred three cases, involving four
accused, to the former Yugoslavia under Rule 11 bis,
not all Rule 11 bis motions have been granted. One
motion was denied by the referral bench, one motion
was withdrawn by the prosecution, and the Prosecutor
has indicated that he will soon withdraw yet another.
Consequently, five accused originally proffered by the
prosecution will not be referred.

If all of the remaining cases in which there are
pending 11 bis motions are successfully referred, a
total of 11 accused - or 10 additional cases - will be
removed from the Tribunal's docket, and that will
certainly accelerate the Tribunal's work. However, as I
outlined in my report, upon referral of a case, the
Tribunal may still be called upon to take back those
cases in which an accused has not been afforded a fair
trial in the State to which he or she has been referred.

In conclusion, I can predict that if the remaining
fugitives are apprehended soon, if the cases of multiple
accused run smoothly and if all of the remaining Rule
11 bis motions are referred without any cases being
referred back to the Tribunal, there is still a possibility
that trials will be completed in 2009. That assessment
may, however, be affected by other variables. For
example, unforeseen issues causing delay may arise,
including ill health on the part of the accused, a change
of counsel during the proceedings, the loss of
experienced and talented staff and an increase in the
number of contempt cases. On the other hand, some
factors may help to accelerate the proceedings, such as
the entry of new guilty pleas and the possible
construction of a fourth courtroom.

In any event, I can assure the members of the
Security Council that the Tribunal remains fully
committed to its completion strategy and that it will
continue to do everything in its power to discharge its
mandate as efficiently as possible. I trust that the
achievements and progress of the Tribunal summarized
in the written report are evidence of our absolute
commitment to search for every possible way in which
to maximize the efficiency and efficacy of the Tribunal
without, of course, sacrificing due process norms.
Again, I thank the members of the Council for the
ready support provided to the Tribunal for this
endeavour.

In establishing the Tribunal, the Council took an
historic decision to restore international peace and
security through the vehicle of international justice.
Because of the existence of the Tribunal, victims of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
have been vindicated as the perpetrators have been
brought to justice. Simultaneously, it has been
demonstrated to the world that it is possible to have
international criminal justice that respects fundamental
norms of due process.
In conclusion, allow me to emphasize once again
that it is crucial that the Tribunal not close its doors
until all remaining fugitives are tried. The Tribunal
must complete its mandate in order to preserve its
fundamental message and legacy: that the international
community will not tolerate genocide, war crimes and
crimes against humanity and will not allow them to go
unpunished. I thank the members of the Council for the
attention and time they have given me today.

