Mr. Al-Sallal (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to express our congratulations to the
delegation of the Republic of Lithuania on its accession
of the presidency of the Security Council for this
month and wish it every success. Let me also thank the
delegation of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for an
excellent presidency of the Council last month.

Allow me to take this opportunity to express our
sincere congratulations to the delegations of Chad,
Chile and Nigeria on their accession to non-permanent
membership in the Security Council for the period 2014-
2015. They will surely make important contributions to
the Council's work.

I am honoured to convey to the Council the greetings
of His Excellency Mr. Hadi Mansour, President of the
Republic of Yemen.

Despite the difficulties facing my country in the
past three years, which was initially at risk of falling
into a civil war, all elements and political parties made
concessions and put the interests of the nation and
the Yemeni people above all to avoid such threats to
the country. Furthermore, international and regional
support also had a major role in avoiding a slide into
chaos in Yemen.

Allow me to reaffirm the appreciation of President
Hadi Mansour and the Yemeni people and Government
for the role undertaken by the States members of the
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), the United Nations
and the Security Council in bolstering the transitional
political process in Yemen, and in particular for the
holding of the comprehensive National Dialogue
Conference. As expressed by the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Yemen in this very Chamber on 27 September
2013 (see S/PV.7037), that was a historic step on the
path to a new Yemen - a Yemen based on democracy,
good governance and equal citizenship for all its sons.
That path has been chosen by the Yemeni people of
their own feel will to bring about change. The Yemeni
people decided to initiate dialogue among all parties,
as reflected in the signing of the Gulf initiative and its
implementation mechanism.

Despite the serious challenges facing my country
in the political, security, economic and humanitarian
fields, the governance and wisdom of President Hadi
Mansour and the major efforts that he has made and
continues to make have prevented those threats from
overcoming the country. He has been determined
to achieve success during the transitional period,
in accordance with the GCC initiative and Security
Council resolutions in that regard. No effort has been
spared in overcoming all obstacles to its implementation,
including the implementation of the outcomes of the
National Dialogue Conference in a way that meets the
aspirations of the Yemeni people.

Yemen would like to be a unique and successful
model, not only in the region but indeed in the entire
world. We do not wish to return to square one - to
confrontations, violence and a slide towards civil war,
God forbid. The scope and threat of international
terrorism and instability is not unique to Yemen; rather,
it is spread throughout the region and the world. It is
therefore very important for the Council to stand with
Yemen and support President Hadi Mansour's efforts to
move forward at this sensitive stage.

Allow me to quote from the statement that President
Hadi Mansour made on the second anniversary of the
signing of the Gulf initiative.

"We all remember our brothers' response in the Gulf
in helping Yemen to find its way out of the crisis in
the framework of the Gulf initiative. That initiative
was a clear road map for a transfer of power and we
remain committed to its full implementation."

Furthermore, at the end of the National Dialogue
Conference, he stated

"With your support, we shall continue sincerely to
implement the outcomes of the National Dialogue
Conference in a way that will allow us to build a
new Yemen that our people can be proud of and that
will contribute to the international community's
security and the world's stability."

Today, with the end of the National Dialogue
Conference, Yemen has come a long way towards
realizing the aspirations of the Yemeni people for
change. The Conference was an outstanding model
wherby all parties sat at the table for dialogue in a
civilized manner. All opinions were expressed, even
though they conflicted from time to time. They were
accepted and the views of others were heard. The
nation's interests were placed above those of any
individual party or tribe in reaching a consensus.

I would like to underscore that the outcome of the
National Dialogue Conference, which is a consensus
of outputs and recommendations, is the result of a
dialogue between all Yemeni parties and elements on
the political scene under the direct leadership of the
President of the Republic of Yemen. The international
community had a major role in closing gaps between
points of view in Yemen and in providing the expertise
necessary for progress in the Dialogue.

The Yemeni dialogue was a clear example of
constructive cooperation between the United Nations
and a regional organization, namely, the GCC, in which
the Security Council approved the GCC initiative and
its time-bound implementation mechanism and adopted
resolutions 2014 (2011) and 2051 (2012).

I am duty-bound to express my sincere thanks to
His Excellency Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and
his Special Adviser Jamal Benomar. They made major
efforts to provide expertise and recommendations to
bridge differences between the various parties in the
Dialogue. I would also like to thank His Excellency
Mr. Abdul Latif bin Rashid Al Zayani, Secretary-
General of the GCC, as well as the Ambassadors of
the 10 States that coordinated the GCC initiative, the
permanent members of the Security Council and the
States members of the GCC and the European Union,
and all those who worked with us.

The Government of Yemen has worked hard
to overcome the injustice and failings of the past by
addressing the root causes ofthe conflict within Yemeni
society, which are associated with decision-making
mechanisms and the fair distribution of resources under
the rule of law and good governance. Many decisions
were recently taken at the national level with regard
to employees separated from their positions in the
civilian, military and security sectors. That included
the adoption of decree No.63/2013, concerning the issue
of land in the southern provinces, a strategy for the
implementation of the 20-point solution for the south
and decision No.19l/2013, concerning compensation
for victims of human rights violations.

The Government of Yemen attaches great
importance to economic issues and sustainable
development. In spite of the fact that the outcomes
and recommendations from the National Conference
gave sufficient attention to the economic situation,
regrettably Yemeni citizens continue to experience a
difficult economic reality. Many international meetings
and conferences have been held in that regard. I urge
our friends who have made pledges to honour them, so
as to lessen the economic burden on our citizens and
ensure the success of the Government's efforts in that
regard.

Allow me now to highlight some of the major
challenges currently facing Yemen.

First, there is the issue of the worsening
humanitarian situation. This is a potential impending
calamity, given the growing number of internally
displaced persons, immigrants and returning refugees
from the Horn of Africa. It also places an additional
burden on the State budget owing to rising levels of
poverty and unemployment among young people.
That requires additional support for the emergency
humanitarian appeal made by the Yemeni Government
and the United Nations.

Secondly, we face ongoing attempts by Al-Qaida
in the Arabian Peninsula to move further into several
provinces. That group has exploited the exceptional
circumstances in the country and the dire economic
situation in order to carry out terrorist acts intended
to undermine the State by targeting various military
and security installations and foreign and Government
facilities. I would like to stress that Yemen needs
a stronger stance on the part of the international
community as well as support to the Government
and the Yemeni people in order to confront terrorism,
including the provision ofmoral, material and logistical
support to build up our capacity to combat terrorism.

The Security Council has emphasized that both
Yemen and the international community have called
for a united Yemen. That is necessary in order to
preserve the country's security and stability, as well as
international peace and security. We are confident that
the Council will continue to support Yemen as it always
has. We are also certain that, in addition to its concern
for the political track, the Council will now also focus
on economic, security and humanitarian issues, which
offer a genuine guarantee for the implementation of
the outcomes and recommendations of the National
Dialogue Conference. That will contribute to achieving
the aspirations of the Yemeni people, especially its
young people, for a democratic society.

I thank the Security Council for all its contributions
and support to Yemen.

