Mr. Nduhungirehe (Rwanda): At the outset, Sir,
let me thank you for acting on the letter (S/2014/872)
signed by 10 Council members from all five groups of
the United Nations, which includes Rwanda, requesting
that the situation in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea be formally placed on the agenda of the Security
Council. I also wish to thank Assistant Secretary-
Generals Taye-Brook Zerihoun and Ivan Simonovie for
their respective briefings.

Rwanda, as a country that suffered the worst
violations of human rights in 1994, which were planned
and perpetrated by the then ruling regime, values
meetings like this, which are meant to attentively
examine situations of gross violations of human rights.
In the early 19905, the Secretariat and the Council did not
pay much attention to all signals that were announcing
the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda.
Therefore, 20 years later, Rwanda, as a member of the
Council, must stand with the victims on the assurance
that the international community, which we are part of,
is determined to act upon its responsibility to protect
and is committed to hold perpetrators to account.

The three pillars of the responsibility to protect, as
stipulated in paragraphs 138 and 139 of the outcome
document of 2005 World Summit (General Assembly resolution 60/1), provides that the State carries the
primary responsibility for protecting populations
from genocide, war crimes, crimes against humanity
and ethnic cleansing. The international community
has a responsibility to encourage and assist States in
fulfilling that responsibility, as well as a responsibility
to use appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian and other
means to protect populations from such crimes. If a
State is manifestly failing to protect its population,
the international community must be prepared to take
collective action to protect the population, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations. We believe that
the Security Council should engage the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea on the basis of those pillars.

Rwanda takes note with great concern of the report
of the commission of inquiry (S/2014/276, annex),
which was established by the Human Rights Council
on 21 March 2013, with the mandate to investigate and
report on the human-rights violations in the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea. We were alarmed by the
findings of the commission, which documented several
crimes, including extermination, murder, enslavement,
torture, imprisonment, rape, forced abortions and other
sexual violence; persecution on political, religious,
racial and general grounds; the forcible transfer of
populations; the forced disappearance of persons;
the inhumane act of knowingly causing prolonged
starvation; not to mention the abduction of Japanese
citizens, including children, over the past decades.
The commission concluded that such crimes amount
to crimes against humanity and "reveal a State that
does not have any parallel in the contemporary world"
(S/2014/276, para. 80).

In the meantime, we deplore the fact that the
commission was denied access to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea and that the competent
authorities in that country have not commented on
the report of the commission of inquiry. However, we
are encouraged to hear that recently the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea has indicated willingness to
allow the Special Rapporteur access to its territory and
to accept the technical assistance of the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights. We hope that
that opportunity will be pursued.

Given the situation, Rwanda, which on 18 December
voted in favour of General Assembly resolution
69/188, concerning the human rights situation in the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, believes that it
was important that the Council be seized of the matter
and receive further information from the Secretariat
on the situation as well as on the implications of the
situation on international peace and security. During our
meetings, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
should be invited to express its views in order to engage
in a genuine dialogue with the Council and the wider
international community, which could lead to a better
understanding and towards significant improvement of
the human-rights situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea.

Rwanda supports the commission of inquiry's
recommendations aimed at fostering inter-Korean
dialogue. We believe that the maintenance of peace and
stability on the Korean peninsula and the resolution of
disputes through dialogue and consultation are in the
common interests of all parties. We urge all actors on the
Korean peninsula, particularly the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, to engage in good faith in efforts
to create favourable conditions for resuming the stalled
political talks and for achieving the de-nuclearization
of the Korean peninsula.

To conclude, we hope that the Security Council will
remain seized ofthe situation in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, and we would like to encourage
the United Nations Secretariat and concerned United
Nations agencies to positively engage the competent
authorities in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea in order to address the issues of great concern
contained in the report of the commission of inquiry.

