Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, Mr. President, I would like to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for this month and I wish you every success. I would also like to highlight the excellent way in which the Belgian delegation conducted the work of the Council in February. We thank Ms. Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert for her briefing and for the hard work she is doing with her team in these complex circumstances. We welcome her to New York. First, with regard to the political situation, we support the efforts of the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) to find a solution to the political impasse by promoting dialogue among the parties on Iraq's political and social spectrum, boosting institutional strengthening and providing assistance for electoral processes. We welcome the adoption of the new law on the Independent High Electoral Commission for the appointment of nine electoral commissioners, including the election of a woman to the executive board. On the other hand, we note with concern that a consensus has not yet been reached on the election of the prime minister and the formation of a Government. We therefore call on political actors to reflect on their decisions and to place the well-being of the population, not partisan or personal interests, at the centre of their objectives. We also urge them to take into consideration social demands for a Government restructuring that guarantees functional institutions, the provision of quality basic services, employment opportunities and growth in an inclusive society free from corruption and impunity. We reiterate our call on the authorities to respect the right to free expression, protest and peaceful assembly and to refrain from all acts of violence and repression against demonstrators, within the framework of respect for their fundamental human rights. Furthermore, we hope that investigations will continue with a view to identifying and prosecuting the perpetrators of acts of violence during the demonstrations. Withregard to security, we regret the events that took place at the beginning of the year as a result of clashes between two nations allied with Iraq. The high levels of tension at the national, regional and international levels generated by this situation led in turn to the decision by parliament to call on the Government to cancel support for the international coalition to counter the Islamic State. We hope that this decision will not reverse the successes achieved so far in the fight against terrorism, opening the door for the remnants of the Islamic State to regain their strength anew. We urge the parties to show maximum restraint, avoid any destabilizing actions or inflammatory rhetoric that could deteriorate the already fragile situation of this nation, and respect the territory and sovereignty of Iraq. With regard to the humanitarian situation, we commend the rehabilitation and aid-delivery efforts made by United Nations agencies and non-governmental organizations, despite the operational and security challenges they face. We stress the importance of continuing to address the needs of internally displaced persons and refugees and to provide durable solutions that facilitate their return in a safe, voluntary and dignified manner. In conclusion, we hope that UNAMI's efforts will facilitate national reconciliation through dialogue among political actors and other sectors of society, allowing for comprehensive reform that addresses the population's demands and opens the door to the development, peace and security desired in Iraq.
