Mr. Bertoux (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for the very
thorough briefing he has just made on the activities of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1540 (2004) over the past quarter, as well
as for his observations.

The proliferation of radiological, biological,
chemical and nuclear weapons and the risk that they
may fall into the hands of terrorists are very real
dangers, as the Ambassador has very aptly reminded
us. The crimes committed by Daesh in Syria and Iraq,
which seem to know no bounds, means that we cannot
rule out such a possibility.
The adoption of resolution 1540 (2004), 11 years
ago, marked a decisive step in preventing those dangers
by requiring, via a resolution under Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations, that States take specific
measures to prevent such weapons from falling into
the hands of terrorists. The setting up of the 1540
Committee has since ensured the ongoing monitoring
of the implementation of the resolution, and encouraged
cooperation among Member States in that fight. We
have seen undeniable progress in implementing the
resolution over the course of the past 11 years.

First, the vast majority of Member States have
adopted measures to translate the provisions of the
resolution into their national legislation, including
informing the Committee of such measures via
implementation reports. I commend the Group of
Experts for analyses and outreach efforts, which are
essential to the Committee's work.

Secondly, today we see that an increasing number
of international, regional and subregional organizations
have adopted strategies to implement and promote the
provisions of the resolution. The European Union,
for example, has promoted the implementation of
the resolution since 2004; and that commitment was
renewed in July 2013 by the Foreign Affairs Council,
which adopted a decision on resolution 1540 (2004)
allocating €1.5 million towards regional efforts to
implement its provisions.

Despite the undeniable success of the past 11
years, much work remains. Given the emerging
technologies that terrorists may be able to exploit, all
Member States must further strengthen their export
and border controls, prevent and suppress the financing
and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
ensure that sensitive goods and materials are as secure
as possible within their territory. The comprehensive
review of the implementation of the resolution, which
the 1540 Committee has just launched in accordance
with resolution 1977 (2011), must meet those challenges.

As I already mentioned, the preliminary analysis by
the Group of Experts on the measures taken by States
Members pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004) shows
improved implementation of the resolution, which is
very positive. However, the implementation is uneven,
depending on the region and the type of action. We
hope that the review will help identify priority areas
where the Committee can focus its efforts.

On the issue of assistance, I want to assure the
Council of the commitment of my delegation, which
coordinates the working group on the subject, with
the aim of improving the efficiency of the assistance
mechanism.

I cannot conclude my statement without saying
that the fight against the proliferation of weapons of
mass destruction and against the risk that they will
fall into the hands of terrorists is also being conducted
in other forums. The Nuclear Security Summit to be
held in Washington, DC, in the spring of 2016 should
enable us to consolidate the achievements of the
process launched in 2010. We are firmly committed to
that, particularly in terms of securing high-intensity
radioactive sources, as any theft could have extremely
serious consequences.

The second International Conference on Nuclear
Security of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), scheduled for December 2016, will help to
define the IAEA's upcoming nuclear security plan of
action for the period 2018-2021. It will also strengthen
the security of radioactive sources. We must emphasize
the broadest possible participation at the ministerial
level to ensure the success of that important conference.

Again, the risk is real. Mobilizing all of energy of
the international community is necessary to combat
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and
prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists.

Lastly, my delegation joins you in advance, Madam
President, in echoing the words you will express later
to the outgoing members. It has been a pleasure and
privilege for us to work with Chile, Jordan, Lithuania,
Nigeria and Chad - which I list in French alphabetical
order. We have had two particularly intense years,
during which the contribution of all five members has
truly enriched the history of this venerable institution.
We have been very active, and even hyper-active at
times. We would like to thank them all very sincerely.

