Mr. Maquieira (Chile) (spoke in Spanish): At the
outset, my delegation wishes to express thanks for the
useful and detailed briefing of Mr. Javier Solana, High
Representative of the European Union (EU), as well as
for the information provided by the Under-Secretary-
General of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, and the
additional information provided by Mr. Ngongi.

I wish also to thank the European Union,
particularly France, for its generous contribution to the
Multinational Force deployed in Bunia and to highlight
the dedication and performance of the Uruguayan
contingent in very difficult circumstances.

During the past year, with the exception of the
north-eastern part of the country, we have seen
significant progress, particularly the withdrawal of
foreign troops from the territory of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the political agreement
achieved between the various conflicting factions,
which made it possible to develop the All-Inclusive
Agreement on the Transition in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.

We are pleased to note the promulgation of the
Transitional Constitution of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the recent formation of the
Government of National Unity, which brings together
representatives of all sectors and factions that until
recently were in open conflict. That is a remarkable
development.

The first steps, which are always the most
difficult, have been taken. But we should not
underestimate the enormous difficulties still before the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

It is now incumbent on the Government to pursue
its goals of re-establishing security and sovereignty
throughout the country and to reform the armed forces,
the police and the judiciary. In this difficult process,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo must be able to
rely on the support of the international community, and
particularly the support of the countries of the region,
especially the neighbouring ones.

Notwithstanding those advances, the situation in
the Kivu and Ituri districts is still marked by suffering
and grave human rights violations committed by
various rebel factions. My country categorically
condemns the acts of violence, assassinations and other
such crimes being perpetrated in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly against the civilian
police. Those acts must not go unpunished, and their
perpetrators must ultimately answer for them. I support
what the representative of the Russian Federation and
Ambassador Greenstock of the United Kingdom have
said recently in that regard. This is a challenge for the
entire international community, but especially for the
Congolese people and particularly the Transitional
Government.

At the same time, we would like to reiterate our
concern at the humanitarian situation in Bunia and the
surrounding areas. We call on the parties involved to
provide full and free access to all humanitarian
agencies and personnel, particularly in Bunia and Ituri.
I cannot miss the opportunity to make a personal
comment although I know it is inappropriate. When we
were in Bunia with the Security Council's mission to
Central Africa, we were very struck by what we saw.
When we speak of Bunia we always think of child
soldiers, of the terrorized population, of the atrocities
that have been committed, but less is said of the
courage of certain people in Bunia.

I think it is right for us to pay tribute to Petronille
Vaweka, mother of five and President of the Special
Interim Assembly. We should pay tribute to her
courage and dedication in very difficult circumstances.

Let me conclude by saying that it is vital for the
draft resolution authorizing a new mandate for the
United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC) to be
finished expeditiously, to give it a robust mandate
under Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter,
which is essential to protect civilian populations and
military personnel that are subject to danger and threat.

The Security Council must, in the most affected
areas, ensure that it acts as a bridge with the
multinational force now in Bunia. My delegation will
join in supporting that resolution. We would support
the idea of including an arms embargo and we stress
the need for a regional conference that would make it
possible to bring together not only what is being done
in the Congo, but all the work that is taking place in the
region, and to develop a strategy for the economic and
social development of this part of Africa.

I cannot conclude without paying particular
tribute to the former Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Mr. Namanga Ngongi, for his valuable and
devoted contribution to the peace process. Perhaps, for
a delegation which only recently joined the Council, I
might thank him for his kindness and patience towards
some of us, on some occasions. I hope he will have
every future success in his personal and professional
life.

Lastly, I would like to welcome the appointment
of Mr. Swing as his replacement and we wish him
every success.

