Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I thank Special Envoy De
Mistura, Mr. O'Brien ofthe Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs and Mr. Cappelaere of
UNICEF for their respective briefings.

Today's briefings once again highlighted the
horrifying situation in eastern Aleppo, as the war in
the Syria continues to become even more brutal and
deadly. Just last week, we listened to Mr. O'Brien urge
the Security Council to take action to stop the carnage
in eastern Aleppo (see S/PV.7817). Regrettably, our
continued failure to converge on efforts to end the
suffering of Syrians has led to more intense aerial
bombardment and a ferocious ground assault on the
besieged area of eastern Aleppo. We remain gravely
concerned that the incessant and indiscriminate
military offensive against civilians in eastern Aleppo
has now forced some 25,000 people to flee their already
destroyed homes. It is alarming that, in their attempt to
flee for safety, their fate remains uncertain. We are also
appalled that the military escalation has killed scores
of innocent civilians, many of whom are women and
children, and injured thousands more.

The chilling operation in eastern Aleppo in
recent days makes a mockery of the Security Council-
mandated ceasefire in Aleppo. We echo the sentiment
that it is never premature to save lives, and we call on
all members of the Council to work towards mandating
a ceasefire, even if for a brief period, to allow for a safe
and unfettered humanitarian operation. We also urge
all parties to the conflict to immediately sign on and
agree to the United Nations humanitarian four-point
plan for Aleppo.

We have collectively called for a political solution
to the Syrian conflict at each and every deliberation
by the Council on this issue. It seems that it is one
perspective that is shared by all Council members.
Yet the military offensive and escalation of violence
continues unabated.

The advance of Syrian forces into eastern Aleppo
signifies that the fighting in the coming days will only
intensify. The carpet bombing of the city only reflects
that the pretext of fighting terrorism is no longer valid
and the aim now clearly is to gain a military advantage
and capture the strategic importance ofAleppo. Even as
the fighting in eastern Aleppo is likely to intensify, the
deliberate and indiscriminate attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure, including hospitals and
schools, must not be tolerated. We require no reminder
that attacks against schools and hospitals are among the
grave violations against children.

We strongly condemn the use of barrel bombs,
which the Government previously committed not to
use. There can be no justification for the use of barrel
bombs in civilian populated areas - an act that reflects
blatant disregard for human life.

Powerless children, who account for more than
one third of the population of eastern Aleppo, bear
the biggest brunt of the violence in the besieged city.
Starvation, bombs, burns, the absence of medical care
and sieges are among the many ways that the children
of Aleppo are dying. In each report received by the
Council, more than half of the casualties are children,
thereby raising the question of what we are we going to
do about it.

We call upon those countries in and outside of the
Council with influence over the Syrian Government to
leverage their influence to stop the carnage and resolve
this protracted conflict. We have the chance to right the
wrong and to stop further suffering. In fact, we have the
obligation to ensure that the Council responds to this
depressing development. The coming days are crucial,
and it is our sincere hope that the long-held silence
on the part of the Council on the Syrian conflict will
be broken.

