Mr. Cabral (Portugal): We thank you, Madam
President, for having convened this briefing on a topic
to which my country attaches great importance. I
would also like to thank the briefers, Ms. Judy Cheng-
Hopkins and Ambassador Sylvie Lucas, for the very
useful views they have shared with the Council on this
matter.

It is now commonly assumed that peacekeeping
and peacebuilding should be seen as an integrated
effort, no longer as a sequence of activities, and that
peacebuilding activities should begin as soon the
situation on the ground so permits, well within the span
of the foreseeable duration of a peacekeeping operation
and throughout its cycle. We believe that we have come
a long way in identifying gaps and mechanisms for
more efficient post-conflict peacebuilding, mainly in
terms of civilian capacity.

The creation of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) brought much-needed consistency to the way
the United Nations links immediate post-conflict
stabilization to the creation and consolidation of State
institutions that can ensure long-term security. The
Security Council must be able to take full advantage of
the work and insights of the PBC and its configurations
when it discusses the establishment, renewal and
conclusion of mission mandates. In this area of our
interaction with the PBC, there is certainly much room
for improvement.

Allow me to underline a number of aspects that
we believe to be particularly important in the context
of post-conflict peacebuilding. The first is the
importance of fostering national ownership in State-
building initiatives. Strengthening national capacities
for fulfilling the core functions of the State should be
the first priority in post-conflict assistance. Choices
always have to be made. International efforts should
therefore be directed to ensure that decisions on policy
objectives and priorities are taken by national actors,
and that international efforts are intended mainly to
assist, and not to replace, State authorities.

Secondly, economic and social development in
countries emerging from conflict is also important.
International economic aid should be concentrated on
projects that take into account the economic, social and
even cultural realities of a country, as well as its
specific capacities and their foreign investment
potential. The issue of unemployment, especially youth
unemployment, must be addressed with concrete and
focused initiatives.

Thirdly, we should pay attention to peacebuilding
tasks from the early stages of the post-conflict period
and reconstruction. Mandates should clearly identify
the role and functions of peacekeepers as early
peacebuilders in such multidimensional areas as the
rule of law and security sector reform. The United
Nations must better articulate the link between civilian
and political tasks and those traditionally performed by
peacekeepers. In many situations, that linkage is
crucial to prevent a relapse into conflict.

As complex as peacebuilding may be, the United
Nations already has its fair share of success stories in
ensuring a successful transition to sustainable peace
and security. For example, Timor-Leste managed to
develop into a solid democracy with stable institutions
in less than a decade. That success was due, first and
foremost, to the Timorese people and their leaders, but
also to the decisive involvement of the United Nations
and its peacebuilding efforts, in which it worked side
by side with the national Government and other
international partners. I am certain that we can learn
from this and other similar cases as we strive to
improve our capacity to carry out peacebuilding tasks.
