Costa Rica expresses its appreciation to the German presidency of the Security Council for having convened a debate of such global relevance and to Secretary- General Antenio Guterres and the panellists - Colonel Mahamadou Magagi, Director of the Centre National d'Etudes Strategiques et de Securite of the Niger, and Ms. Coral Pasisi, Director of the Sustainable Pacific Consultancy Niue - for their enriching contributions to our discussion. The climate emergency affecting our planet, which will be exacerbated by the socioeconomic impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, will undoubtedly have an effect on the status of current conflicts and will give rise to future ones, creating security problems where none existed. It is a global crisis that, contrary to what we expect to happen with the coronavirus disease, will instead worsen, since we are already approaching the brink and if we go too far, the consequences will be irreparable. If we do not act in time, we will witness the terrible reality that we have reached the point of no return and that we have not done enough. Acting now is a joint responsibility that requires multilateral solutions and international cooperation, involving the entire United Nations system, including the Security Council. Costa Rica believes that the issue of climate and security falls within the purview of the Council, not to extend its mandate to combating and preventing climate change, which is already adequately addressed within the United Nations, but to prevent and act in conflict situations. In that regard, it is important to have a system of periodic reports, which will enable the Council to be kept informed and updated on security risks. Similarly, we must establish a mechanism to alert United Nations institutions operating at the national level, including peace missions and special political missions, to security risks that could worsen existing conflicts. Climate change is a threat multiplier that compounds and exacerbates existing threats. If we do not achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, climate disasters will trigger the breakdown of social contracts from the local to the community level, undermining international agreements in the struggle for resources, and its impact on the planet will be more destructive than the bombs and the world wars. Just as we have called for a ceasefire and a halt to the financing of conflicts in the context of the pandemic and forever, not a single dollar of the recovery efforts should go to the fossil fuel industry. It is time to invest in sustainable practices rather than high-emission ones that destroy nature. We also call for the implementation of Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations and for the Security Council to ensure that the world's already scarce resources are not diverted to armaments. In conclusion, the current climate emergency threatens people's livelihoods and their very lives, leading to social unrest and conflict beyond national borders. If no joint action is taken, we will see the emergence of humanitarian crises, new conflicts and more threats to the maintenance of lasting peace.
