Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We had not intended to go into technical
details, but because our American colleagues and their
partners brought up specific issues, I am compelled to
take the floor once again. I will be brief.

Since the 9M729 missile was mentioned, I would
like to give an explanation. Over many years of
discussions, the United States has steadfastly refused to
communicate with us not only about the tests that have
been carried out, which, as we understand, gave rise to
questions in Washington, but also about any identifying
information concerning that device.

Last year, after it finally became clear what
Washington was so concerned about, we offered to the
United States side the opportunity to take a look, behind
closed doors, at the 9M729 missile they were interested
in, so that it could obtain exhaustive information about
it and thus be assured that that weapon did not violate
the Treaty. That response was once again met with
a refusal.

We then made another attempt. As an unprecedented
transparency measure that goes far beyond the
requirements of the Treaty, we publicly displayed the
missile in the presence of foreign delegations, but
United States representatives did not participate in
the event and recommended that their NATO partners
follow suit, which, of course, they did. We therefore
fail to understand my American colleague's arguments.
We offered to provide the Americans with all the
information they needed to save the Treaty. And now
that they have already caused the Treaty to collapse,
the American side is making attempts to demand
that information.

With regard to the new Russian weapons systems
that were mentioned earlier, my American colleague
must know that they all share a common feature, namely,
the ability to overcome missile-defence systems. It
is precisely because of the withdrawal of the United
States of America from the Treaty between the United
States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems, to which I referred earlier in my statement,
and the deployment of such systems near our borders
that we were forced to develop this type of device.

That is another problem that Washington has
artificially created, which, as I already said, we have
been trying unsuccessfully to prevent for a long time.
I should like to stress, so that no one has any illusions,
that the NATO countries are involved in this situation.

In conclusion, I would like to say that, unfortunately,
today's meeting has proved to be so predictable that it
verges on the boring. As we expected, despite the facts
and common sense, the United States and its client
countries parroting along with it were shifting the
blame from the guilty to the innocent, blaming Russia
for all mortal sins. There is nothing new or surprising
about that. In the parallel reality created by our Western
partners, where no evidence is required and allegations
in the spirit of "highly likely" are accepted as proof,
such behaviour is considered normal. The fact is that
we live in the real world, not a virtual one. And as
long as there are countries and experts who continue
to question all these seamless but empty Western tales,
our world still has a chance.

I would like to believe that our initiative with China
will increase the number of those who are not afraid to
call things by their real names or to demand actions and
practical steps from those who violate agreements of
importance to the whole world and flout the norms of
international law to serve their own interests.

The meeting rose at 4. 35 pm.
