Mr. Silajdzic': Let me thank the representatives
of the countries now members of the Security Council
for their valuable contributions, comments and views,
which my country will certainly take into
consideration, especially since, as I have said, I came
here today because I believe that the basic law of

Bosnia and Herzegovina - the Dayton Peace
Agreement and especially its pillars such as the
Constitution and its article I - is being questioned

right now, in particular on the issue of State property.

This is not about the property, per se, in Bosnia
and Herzegovina; it is about the character of the State
and the character of our Agreement. The Agreement,
signed by all the countries present at Dayton, is that
Bosnia and Herzegovina continues as a State under
international law. So, we believe that maintaining the
Dayton Agreement, as it is, is vital to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Of course, the Dayton Agreement came at a great
price for citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
especially Bosniaks and Croats. Tens of thousands
were killed and hundreds of thousands remain to this
day in the diaspora, ethnically cleansed. So that is why
we will not allow anyone to question that to which all
of us agreed in Dayton. It may appear to some that
Bosnia and Herzegovina managed to prevail in Dayton
by remaining a unified country. But I assure the
Council that What I have described is a fact of life. And
I am very sorry and regretful to have heard here that
the representative of the Russian Federation viewed my
speech as not constructive.

The Russian Government participated in the
Dayton Agreement procedures, and they are a part of
the process. The Russian Government agreed to and
signed the Dayton Peace Agreement as a guarantor. I

regret that the Russian Government continues
uncritically to support only one ethnic group in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. That is not a very good contribution
to peace and stability and to maintaining the Dayton
Agreement as the basic law for Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The Agreement ended genocide in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and brought peace to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and it must be maintained.

Let me end on a personal note here, because High
Representative Inzko reminded me of our beginnings.
When Bosnia and Herzegovina was attacked, it is true
that I, as the Foreign Minister, did not have a telephone
here - not even a chair to sit on. At that time, Foreign
Minister Mock and the Austrian Ambassador to the
United Nations extended their help to Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to our efforts to defend our country.
For that I am grateful. And of course I am grateful also
to all those who helped us during those difficult
moments for our people and our State.

