Mr. Osorio (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): My
delegation would first like to express its thanks for the
update report (see S/2011/283) on the events in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. We underscore our support for the
work of the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, in overseeing the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Agreement and
coordinating the activities of the civilian organizations
assisting the parties in that endeavour.

We also support his decisions in the context of
annex 10 of the General Framework Agreement for
Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which have been

endorsed by the Security Council in a number of
resolutions adopted pursuant to Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations. I also recognize the
valuable contribution of the Permanent Mission of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the work of the Security
Council.

My delegation reiterates its support for the
Dayton-Paris Peace Agreement on the establishment of
the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We call on
the parties to strictly fulfil their obligations thereunder.
Similarly, we share and confirm the commitment of the
Security Council to remaining vigilant to situations
that could threaten international peace and security in
the case of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

We are convinced that Bosnia and Herzegovina is
a nation that has overcome difficult periods in its
history and is attempting to consolidate its political,
judicial and administrative institutions. That is why, on
21 January, we duly supported the presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/2) on the theme "Post-conflict
peacebuilding: institution-building", given our
understanding that its guidelines can be applied to
nations seeking to resolve their problems peacefully
and to ensure the well-being of their peoples in the
wake of conflict. We recall that, in that presidential
statement, the Council stresses

"the importance of institution-building as a
critical component of peacebuilding and
emphasizes the importance of a more effective
and coherent national and international response
to it, so that countries emerging from conflict can
deliver core Government functions, including
managing political disputes peacefully, providing
security and maintaining stability, protecting their
population, ensuring respect for the rule of law,
revitalizing the economy and providing basic
services, which are essential to achieving durable
peace."

Additionally, the Security Council emphasized
that, in countries emerging from conflict, the principal
responsibility for successful peace falls on the national
Governments and entities, including civil society, and
that the United Nations can play a fundamental role in
supporting the development of national institutions. It
therefore stated:

"The Council acknowledges the need for
continued improvement in the delivery of support
in the immediate aftermath of conflict in order to
help stabilize the situation, whilst at the same
time starting the longer-term process of
institution-building, including those institutions
that promote democratic processes and foster
economic and social development, with a view to
sustainable peace."

We therefore emphasize that the primary
responsibility for the due implementation of the peace
agreement falls to the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In this respect, we call on all the parties
involved to support a political solution to the conflicts
emerging from the former Yugoslavia, and to preserve
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of all States in
the area within their internationally recognized
borders.

Colombia calls on the parties to overcome their
differences and to consolidate a central Government
and a Government of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to strengthen its institutions, in
accordance with the "5+2" agenda. We also believe it
important that there be a frank dialogue between the
High Representative and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to resolve their differences.

Lastly, our delegation expresses its gratitude for
the commitment of the European Union as a
stakeholder in the region and for the work carried out
by the European Union Force in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.

