Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): I would like to start by
thanking the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Meron,
and its Prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, for their
comprehensive progress report and briefing on the
work of the Mechanism.

We welcome the measures taken by the Mechanism,
including the Office of the Prosecutor, to further
enhance its efficiency as well as to streamline its
internal working methods and processes within the
chambers, despite its small staff and tight resources.
We note with appreciation the work done by the
Mechanism in assuming the responsibility for all
functions remaining from both the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia after their closure,
particularly their residual judicial mandates. The
measures taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to assist
and build capacity in national criminal justice sectors
with a view to supporting the prosecution of war crimes
cases arising out of the conflicts in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia are also commendable.

We have noted some of the challenges raised in the
report (see S/2018/471), in particular in relation to the
decision of the General Assembly not to approve the
Mechanism's budget for 2018-2019 and its implications
for the long-term planning and operations of the
Mechanism. While welcoming the measures taken by
the Mechanism to reduce the impact of the decision,
the concerns raised in relation to its implications for the
completion of the functions of the Mechanism in a timely
and effective manner require further consideration.

We continue to note with concern that eight
fugitives indicted by the ICTR and five fugitives
who are currently expected to be brought to trial in
Rwanda remain at large. In that regard, we appreciate
the measures taken by the Office of the Prosecutor to
track and arrest remaining fugitives. It is important
that States continue to provide the necessary assistance
to the Office of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism,
including in the tracking of those fugitives.

We have also noted in the report the humanitarian
challenges faced by the Mechanism with regard to the
relocation of acquitted and released persons. In our
view, such issues require proper consideration in the
upcoming review of the Mechanism for International
Criminal Tribunals.

Some of the issues that continue to be raised by
Rwanda in relation to the early release of persons
convicted by the ICTR or the Residual Mechanism
cannot be overlooked. We have noted the briefing
note on the practice of the Residual Mechanism with
regard to the early release of persons convicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
the Mechanism itself.

In the process leading towards the early release
of a person convicted by the ICTR, in accordance
with rule 150 of the Amended Rules of Procedure and
Evidence of the Mechanism, consultation with any
judges of the sentencing Chamber who are judges ofthe
Mechanism or at least two other judges, where none of
the judges who imposed the sentence are judges of the
Mechanism, is of the utmost importance. In addition,
consultation between the President of the Mechanism
and the country concerned, Rwanda, on early release,
in particular on the implication of such early release
for the victims and the community at large, is vital. In
that regard, lessons could be drawn from the Residual
Special Court for Sierra Leone.

I would like to conclude by reiterating the need for
continued support from the Council to the Mechanism
in the fulfilment ofits mandated residual functions. The
support of Member States to the Residual Mechanism
also remains critical, including in relation to the
tracking of fugitives and the relocation of acquitted
or released persons, as well as in addressing budget-
related issues.

