Mrs. Kawar (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): Iwould like
to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this very
important meeting. I also thank Mr. Anthony Banbury,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Mission for Emergency
Ebola Response (UNMEER); Mr. David Nabarro,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General on Ebola; and
Mr. Thomas Mauget, Head of the French Red Cross in
Guinea, for their briefings.

The Ebola epidemic, which has recently spread
in a number of West African States, has become
more than a general public health crisis and is now
a multidimensional crisis at the political, social,
economic, humanitarian and security levels. It has
expanded beyond West Africa to become a global threat
to international peace and security. In fact, the three
States most affected by the epidemic - Liberia, Guinea
and Sierra Leone - are currently on the agenda of the
Peacebuilding Commission. Well before the epidemic,
those States were already at a highly vulnerable post-
crisis stage. The epidemic has gravely damaged their
economies, which are expected to suffer $32.6 billion
in losses by 2015 if it is not contained. That comes in
addition to the epidemic's long-term humanitarian and
social ramifications.

This dangerous virus not only kills its victims,
but also leaves a deep impact on the societies where it
spreads. Despite the fact that the rates of contagion in
Guinea and Liberia have recently stabilized, according to
the most recent report of the World Health Organization,

we must continue to work to contain and eliminate it
before it spreads to neighbouring States, especially
in the light of the appearance of individual cases in
Mali, which have affected a number of personnnel
in the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali. The threat of further
spread is exacerbated by geographical proximity, free
movement across borders and the connections among
the economies of the regional States.

UNMEER has begun to coordinate activities with
various United Nations agencies and programmes in
order to guarantee the implementation of its mandate
while observing the best possible and effective use of
resources and avoiding duplication of functions.

We therefore call upon all national, regional and
international parties, especially UNMEER, to identify
response gaps with a view to halting the spread of the
virus and treating those affected. Basic services must
be effectively and efficiently provided, as monitoring
and dealing with the spread of the epidemic will require
strengthened coordinated action above and beyond the
parameters of a general debate on the topic. All of the
efforts of the various entities, including the Mano River
Union, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States, the European Union, the World
Bank, the United Nations system and international
partners must be harmonized in order to achieve that
goal.

According to General Assembly resolution 69/1,
which was sponsored by 154 States, including Jordan,
and which calls for action to halt the frightening
spread of the virus in Africa and for the expansion
of an international response to assist in eliminating
the epidemic in West Africa, we wish to reaffirm the
need to ensure priority for preventive measures to halt
the spread of the epidemic. In that regard, we must
continue with a high-level determination to deal with
the developing and well-thought-out work plans and
mechanisms to strengthen response at all levels. We
also emphasize the important role of national leadership
in the affected countries.

In that context, Jordan has established a national
commission to prepare an executive plan to deal
with the Ebola virus, which includes providing all
of the measures recommended by the World Health
Organization, as well as all requirements for the
prevention, diagnosis and treatment of the epidemic, in
addition to communication with all the relevant parties.

In conclusion, we urge the international community
to continue providing this level of support to affected
countries by providing the necessary resources and
assistance, including field hospitals, clinical services,
mobile laboratories and specialized trained personnel
and methods of diagnosis aimed at women and children,
and ensuring increased scientific research and readiness
to combat the epidemic.

