Mr. Straw (United Kingdom): I am grateful to all
my colleagues here for their unanimous vote in favour
of resolution 1636 (2005). By its unanimity and by the
firm language of the resolution, we are, I believe,
sending out a very strong message to the Government
of Syria and to elements in Lebanon about the need for
them to cooperate fully with the investigation
conducted by Prosecutor Mehlis.

Lebanon has seen all too much violence in its
history - too much bloodshed. Even so, the
assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri on
14 February was profoundly shocking to the people of
Lebanon and to the whole of the international
community. It seemed to suggest that there were
people - and maybe countries - who were ready to
resolve political difficulties by resort to the mediaeval
practice of political assassination. The United Nations
would be seriously and significantly undermined if we
were to turn a blind eye to such activities, which is
why the unanimous decision taken today is so
important.

I would like to congratulate Commissioner
Mehlis and his team for their detailed, thorough and
courageous work to investigate this horrendous crime.
Let it be remembered that not only did former Prime
Minister Rafik Hariri perish when the huge explosion
took place, but at least 20 other people were killed and
many, many more were injured.

The evidence accumulated in the Mehlis report
(S/2005/662) is both serious and disturbing. The
International Independent Investigation Commission
rightly recognizes, in paragraph 21 of the report, that
until we know the complete story of what happened in
Beirut in February the presumption of innocence
should stand. Having studied the report carefully,
however, it is difficult not to endorse its conclusion
that there is converging evidence pointing at both
Lebanese and Syrian official involvement in this
terrorist act. Indeed, in paragraph 124, Commissioner
Mehlis says:

"There is probable cause to believe that the
decision to assassinate former Prime Minister
Rafik Hariri could not have been taken without
the approval of top-ranked Syrian security
officials and could not have been further
organized without the collusion of their
counterparts in the Lebanese security services."

Let us be clear. The Security Council has only
one interest here - the same interest as the Lebanese
Government and people - to see justice done. The
report takes us part of the way towards that objective,
but the Commission itself acknowledges that it has yet
to get to the bottom of who was responsible for the
murder. That is despite the exemplary cooperation from
the Lebanese authorities, who in their own way have
acted resolutely and bravely in arresting a number of
suspects identified by the Commission. But for the
Commission to stand any chance of completing its task
satisfactorily, it needs two things: first, more time to
finalize its investigation; and, secondly, the full and
unconditional cooperation of Syria. In adopting this
resolution today, we have been united in committing
ourselves, under Chapter VII of the Charter, to
ensuring that both of those requirements are met. The
resolution gives the Commission more time and it
allows a further extension, beyond 15 December, if the
Commission or the Lebanese Government judge it to
be necessary.

The resolution also requires full Syrian
cooperation. It is clear from the Commission's report
that this has not been forthcoming so far. Indeed, if
anything - again, as is very clear from the report -
the Syrian Government appears to have attempted to
mislead Prosecutor Mehlis and his team. That grudging
and evasive attitude has to change. I hope and believe
that in adopting this resolution we are today sending a
strong and unequivocal message to that effect.

We are also, correctly, putting the Government of
Syria on notice that our patience has limits. Failure to
cooperate fully and now will oblige us to consider
further actions to ensure that the Security Council,
through the Commission, can play its part in the
Lebanese Government's determination to see justice
done. We must not let the Lebanese people down. As
Prosecutor Mehlis points out, many still live in fear of
a return of Syrian interference and control. Turning our
backs on the crime, because it appears politically
difficult to solve, will not only lead the Lebanese
people to lose faith in this body, it will undermine the
Council's credibility and authority and damage our
enforcement of the international rule of law.

The people of Lebanon have become all too well
acquainted with grief. We owe them a better future,
and this resolution is one way of providing them with
that better future.

