Mr. Negroponte (United States of America):
Thank you, Mr. President, for taking the initiative to
organize this Council meeting on the situation in Africa
and also for inviting Organization of African Unity
(OAU) Secretary General Essy to join us for this
discussion. Through you, we express our thanks to him
for his thoughtful remarks that provide the framework
for today's meeting.

We also welcome the contributions of the
ministers who travelled to New York to join us today,
as well as those of the other representatives of the
interested States participating in today's debate,
including the President of the Economic and Social
Council, Ambassador Ivan Simonovie.

I agree with many of my Council colleagues that
we need such debates to keep the world's attention
focused on Africa's conflicts and challenges. And I am
here today to say, on behalf of my Government, that
Africa matters to the United States, both by history and
by choice. Let me share with you a few figures that
illustrate this relationship. We have almost 35 million
citizens of African descent. Last year, trade between
the United States and Africa amounted to nearly $30
billion, and America is Africa's largest single market.

The United States is the leading foreign investor
in Africa, and more than 30,000 Africans are studying
in the United States today.

My Government has demonstrated this
commitment in a number of ways. Secretary of State
Powell travelled to Africa last spring on one of the first
major trips of his tenure. Since his inauguration,
President Bush has held discussions with numerous
African heads of State. He appointed Senator John
Danforth to be a special envoy to the Sudan. The
President and the Administration are implementing the
African Growth and Opportunity Act, as a roadmap for
how the United States and Africa can tap the power of
markets to improve the lives of our citizens. This
confirms what Secretary of State Powell told a group of
university students during his trip to Africa, when he
promised "to enthusiastically engage with Africa on
behalf of the American people."

While the United States is currently mobilized,
together with its allies around the world, to defeat
global terrorism, my Government remains no less
committed to Africa. Just last week, as part of a global
response to the devastating volcano eruption in the
Goma region ofthe Democratic Republic of the Congo,
the United States dispatched two planeloads of relief
supplies, seismographic equipment and relief experts,
along with emergency food aid.

In fact, when addressing the African Growth and
Opportunity Forum this past October, President Bush
told members of that community that after 11
September, in an era of global trade and global terror,
"we share the same threats, and we share the same
goals - to forge a future of more openness, trade and
freedom."

Addressing these kinds of global threats and
achieving these goals requires global organization. The
United Nations and the Security Council are crucial to
achieving our common priorities and goals in Africa.
The United Nations allows the United States to join
with other Member countries to marshal the world's
contributions of resources and efforts to maximum
effect.

For that reason, the United States is an active
participant in all United Nations efforts to assist Africa.
We particularly support the work of the Council to
promote peace and stability where they are threatened
on the continent.

The United States assisted the United Nations and
the OAU in playing a mediating role in the December
2000 peace agreement between Ethiopia and Eritrea.
We see this as a model for future cooperation between
the Council and regional organizations.

We fully support the United Nations
peacekeeping missions in the Congo and in Sierra
Leone, and we are one of the largest donors to the
United Nations Trust Fund for the Special Court in
Sierra Leone. United States aid agencies closely
cooperate with the peace-building missions in Guinea-
Bissau, Angola and the Central African Republic.
Through "Operation Focus Relief", we are helping to
prepare seven West African battalions for peacekeeping
service in Sierra Leone.

Looking beyond these immediate conflicts, we
support Africa's own regional efforts through the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the Southern African Development
Community (SADC) to develop greater African
peacekeeping capability.

In addition to promoting peace, the United States
also supports an active United Nations role in the fight
against Africa's most pressing health crisis, HIV/AIDS.
We believe that this disease presents a real threat to
peace and security in Africa. Demonstrating the United
States' commitment to this issue, Secretary Powell led
the United States delegation to the United Nations
special session on HIV/AIDS, hosted here in New York
last June. In 2002, the United States will, through a
combination of bilateral assistance programmes and
support for the Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), contribute more than half a
billion dollars to the fight against that disease.

While the United Nations plays an important role
in addressing Africa's concerns, the United States
shares the view of other members here today that there
is no substitute for healthy nation-States and a dynamic
regional organization in promoting peace and security
on the continent.

We recognize, however, that, when it comes to
ending Africa's disastrous wars, there sometimes may
be limits to what regional organizations can
realistically achieve on their own. In those cases where
the Council can bolster regional and national efforts,
we think greater cooperation could be useful. We
encourage the United Nations liaison office to the
OAU, for example, to consult with the Council, when it
would be useful, on actions taken by the OAU's
Mechanism for Conflict Prevention, Management and
Resolution to address conflicts in Africa.

There are instances, we believe, in which the
Council, joined by African States and regional
organizations, must be willing to clearly state where
responsibility lies.

The Council must give all sides in African
conflicts the opportunity to accept negotiated
settlements, but, if one side conclusively proves its bad
faith, the Council must break out of impartiality. We
must have the support of African Governments and
regional organizations in doing so.

The lesson the United States draws from several
current African conflicts is that when the Council and
African Governments are clear about who bears
responsibility for war in Africa, it bolsters our efforts
to end that aggression.

In Sierra Leone, for example, when the
Revolutionary United Front (RUF) betrayed its
promises, the Council was clear in its condemnation of
who was responsible and in taking action against the
RUF's backer, Liberia.

That clear expression by the Council of who is at
fault for the breakdown of peace and our imposition of
sanctions on the responsible party produced the
progress we are now welcoming in Sierra Leone.

While the efforts of the Council, regional groups
and individual States have certainly not brought a
conclusive end to all of the continent's wars, for the
first time in many years there is cause for cautious
optimism regarding many of these conflicts. In every
case, however, progress in ending these conflicts
required first and foremost that African leaders and
Governments take bold steps for peace. Sustaining this
progress will require equally bold steps to strengthen
democracy, governance and the rule of law in Africa.

Building good governance and strengthening the
rule of law are pressing challenges and are crucial to
maintaining lasting peace in Africa. The OAU and the
African subregional organizations are making useful
contributions to this effort. The OAU took a historic
step when it decided to refuse to seat Governments that
come to power via unconstitutional means. This had a
positive impact in countries such as Cote d'Ivoire and
the Comoros islands.

Finally, let me say a few words about the new
challenge that faces this Council, Africa, and all the
nations of the world- our shared campaign against
terrorism.

The eleventh of September brought back to my
Government that terrible day in August 1998 when
Osama bin Laden and the Al-Qaeda network attacked
our embassies in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam. We are
grateful for the political support offered by the
Organization of African Unity and by many African
regional organizations. We appreciate the basing and
overflight rights offered by African countries and the
growing number of African nations that have
committed to cracking down on terrorist financing.

We must work together to prevent the
establishment of safe havens, training camps or bases
of operation for Al-Qaeda in Africa.

In conclusion, let me say that the United States
Government wants a responsive, relevant Security
Council that is ready to join with African leaders
prepared to take hold action in support of peace. But it
is important to underscore that we - this Council and
the United States in its bilateral efforts- can only
foster change in Africa. We cannot command it.
African Governments and leaders themselves
have to sustain the efforts needed to end the conflicts
on the continent. We look to African leaders to
demonstrate the political courage and statesmanship
necessary to end corruption, respect the rule of law and
seek peaceful ends to the continent's wars. Only by
doing so can African Governments, and the people of
Africa, benefit from the Security Council's actions in
support of peace and security in Africa.

