The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Ireland.

I thank Mr. David Stephen for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General. Ireland has long
viewed Somalia as an inadvertently lost member of the
international community. As the President of the
Security Council for the month of October, Ireland
therefore considered the inclusion of Somalia on the
agenda to be a priority. We are gratified to see the wide
interest in the discussion today. I believe that this
reflects the growing conviction of Member States as to
the need for the international community to re-engage,
and to be seen to be re-engaging, in helping Somalia.

The basis of any role for the United Nations and
the international community in Somalia is that we can
only help Somalia to help itself. Certainly to date there
has not been a great deal by way of indigenous political
initiatives that we can step in and support. We
recognize the excellent work that is being done by the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the other United Nations agencies that are operating in
Somalia. Their efforts, both humanitarian and
developmental, have been the focus of United Nations
involvement in Somalia in recent years. We strongly
commend their recovery and development activities,
which have contributed to creating an environment
more conducive to peace and reconciliation. However,
we believe that the time has now come for the wider
United Nations system to become more involved. For
its part, the Council should not settle into a syndrome
of limited ambition, even as our full determination is
daily evident elsewhere.

We agree with the Secretary-General that the
completion of the Arta process provides the most
viable route towards durable peace in Somalia. We
believe that the people of Somalia have begun to
commit themselves to the peaceful reconciliation of
their difficulties. We may expect that some spoilers
will continue their violent efforts to thwart peace
efforts. But we must show solidarity with the people of
Somalia as they seek to make their way back to rejoin
the family of nations.

The Secretary-General suggests that the National
Commission for Reconciliation and Property
Settlement, an integral element of the Transitional
National Charter, could be an option for promoting
national reconciliation. Ireland fully supports the
establishment of such an independent commission as a
means of bringing Somalis together to complete the
Arta process. In this regard, we call on the Transitional
National Government (TNG) and the Somalia
Reconciliation and Restoration Council to enter into
constructive dialogue in a spirit of compromise and
mutual respect to bring about national reconciliation.
We call on all countries with influence on the Somali
parties to encourage them to establish such a
commission and to cooperate fully with it.

I said earlier that we can only support the efforts
of the Somalis themselves. While the pace of the
political process has been slow, we must acknowledge
that there has been measurable progress. In very
difficult circumstances, the TNG has registered
achievement. We agree with the assessment of the
Secretary-General that any Government in Somalia
would face problems similar to those faced by the
TNG. We welcome the proposal of the Secretary-
General to establish a Committee of Friends of
Somalia. It is clear that Somalia has many friends. A
closely coordinated effort on the part of external actors,
including the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), would be to the advantage of the
process. We believe that the proposed Committee of
Friends would greatly enhance the regional capacity to
facilitate national reconciliation. In this regard, we
commend the efforts of IGAD and the Organization of
African Unity.

We have long recognized the positive role that the
regional actors can play, and have played, in supporting
peace in Somalia. However, my delegation is very
concerned about the potentially destabilizing role that
neighbouring States play in Somalia. On 11 January
last, the Council adopted presidential statement
S/PRST/2001/1, in which we insisted that all States
should refrain from any military intervention in the
internal situation in Somalia, and that the territory of
Somalia should not be used to undermine the stability
of the subregion. It is a matter of great concern to us
that not all States seem to have heeded that injunction.
Once again we call on all States to refrain from
interfering in the internal affairs of Somalia.
Furthermore, we call on all States to use their influence
over the various groups in Somalia to encourage them
strongly as to the need to complete the Arta process.

We are very concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation in Somalia. We fully support the
multisectoral strategy adopted by United Nations
agencies, focusing on rehabilitation, prevention,
preparedness and supporting peace and reconciliation,
as well as purely emergency humanitarian needs. We
encourage donors to respond generously to the
Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal. As the Secretary-
General's report makes clear, the international
community must respond much more urgently to the
humanitarian needs of Somalia. The United Nations
development agencies, especially UNDP, have a crucial
role to play.

We note the decision of the Secretary-General
that he will continue to monitor the security situation in
Somalia with a view to establishing a peace-building
mission. We owe it to the people of Somalia, who have
drifted away from the international community for 10
years, to assure them that our commitment is serious.
In this regard, we believe that the time is now right for
the United Nations to undertake an in-depth security
assessment directed from Headquarters in New York.
In this regard, I would like to ask the Representative of
the Secretary-General if there is anything the United
Nations could do to assist the TNG to provide the
security necessary for a peace-building mission in
Somalia.

For too long we have allowed the people of
Somalia to struggle alone on, or virtually over, the
horizon of Security Council attention. The negative
consequences have been too great. It must weigh on the
collective conscience of the international community.
Ireland believes that the time has come for the Security
Council to take a comprehensive approach to Somalia.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Djibouti. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.

