Mr. Ipo (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): Cote
d'Ivoire welcomes the holding of this open debate on the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question. We welcome the presence in the Council
today of Ms. Marsudi, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Indonesia, and we thank Mr. Nickolay Mladenov,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his briefing on the many complex challenges to

peace and stability in the region affected by the Israeli-
Palestinian crisis and the armed conflicts in Yemen
and Syria.

The Israeli-Palestinian question is undoubtedly the
most complex crisis that the international community has
dealt with for the past more than 70 years. Compounding
the political and security issues is the humanitarian
crisis in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, which is
in urgent need of coordinated solutions. With regard
to this situation, my country, which values equally the
security of the State of Israel and the inalienable right of
the Palestinian people to self-determination, reaffirms
its firm support for a two-State solution in which both
countries coexist peacefully within the 1967 borders.
In order to achieve that, it is essential that the Israeli
and Palestinian leadership show proof that they can rise
above their differences by resuming their dialogue and
building the foundations of a new understanding that
guarantees just and lasting peace on the achievements
of the past.

Numerous reports from the various United Nations
agencies call the Council's attention to the structural
vulnerabilities affecting the Palestinian territories,
including unemployment, which is at a record
27 per cent, and the lack of decent housing, health
infrastructure or basic social services such as access
to drinking water and electricity. In View of the serious
humanitarian situation, Cote d'Ivoire reiterates its
call to the Council to work together urgently with the
United Nations specialized agencies and all partners
to find ways to mobilize the assistance necessary for
meeting the basic needs of the affected populations. In
that regard, we urge international partners to continue
their financial support to the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East.
We firmly believe that will make it possible to gradually
make up the more than $200 million estimated budget
deficit of an agency that plays a key role in providing
international assistance to populations in distress.

On the political front, my country calls on Fatah

and Hamas to resume their dialogue in order to enable
the Palestinian Authority, which has the primary
responsibility for responding to the Palestinian people's
social needs, to carry out its sovereign duties in Gaza
and the West Bank. We also reiterate our support for
a resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute through
dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the international
consensus on the need for a resumption of the peace
process as the only viable framework for mutually
acceptable solutions on such crucial issues as the status
of Jerusalem and the lifting of the blockade on Gaza.
We encourage all parties to exercise restraint and urge
them to engage in constructive dialogue and refrain
from any unilateral action that could compromise the
international community's efforts to find a peaceful
solution to the Israeli-Palestinian crisis.

We continue to be concerned about the humanitarian
crisis in Yemen, which all observers describe as the
worst in the world. Millions of Yemenis are threatened
by food insecurity, which in turn exposes them to
famine and malnutrition. On top of that, civilians
have limited access to drinking water and primary
health care and are dealing with problems related to
waterborne diseases and the risk of epidemics. In
view of the alarming humanitarian situation, Cote
d'Ivoire calls on the parties to the conflict to respect
the ceasefire in order to ensure the safe and unhindered
delivery of humanitarian aid to people in distress, and
urges them to focus on dialogue with a view to arriving
at a political solution to the current crisis and to respect
their obligations under international humanitarian law.

Despite the continuing numerous challenges,
we believe that the Stockholm Agreement, signed on
13 December 2018, and the resulting arrangements
give hope for achieving lasting peace and stability in
Yemen. The Council, which has endorsed this long-
awaited peace agreement, should make every effort
to implement its relevant provisions, including the
cessation of hostilities in Al-Hudaydah governorate
and the withdrawal by both sides of their forces from
Al-Hudaydah city and the ports of Al-Hudaydah,
Saleef and Ras Issa, as well as prisoner exchanges and
arrangements for Taiz city.

With regard to the conflict in the Syrian Arab

Republic, Cote d'Ivoire would like to raise the issues
of the use of chemical weapons, the humanitarian
situation and the political process. Regarding the issue
of the use of chemical weapons, we appreciate Syria's
continued cooperation with the relevant entities of the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW), which has enabled progress to be made
on the programme for destroying Syria's chemical
weapons. However, we remain concerned about the
unresolved issues raised by the Syrian Arab Republic's
declaration on its chemical weapons, and we urge the
Syrian authorities to cooperate further with the OPCW
Technical Secretariat on the issue.

The humanitarian situation is still a major concern
for my delegation, owing to the military escalation and
its impact on civilians in north-western Syria, including
the demilitarized zone in Idlib governorate established
pursuant to the agreement signed on 17 September 2018
by the Russian Federation and Turkey. My delegation
is concerned about the capture of Idlib by the Hayat
Tahrir Al-Sham group, a former branch of Al-Qaida,
which also raises fears of a further deterioration in
the humanitarian organizations' working conditions.
In that regard, my country affirms the importance of
safe, prompt, unhindered and sustainable humanitarian
access to persons in distress both in Idlib and
throughout Syria. We therefore call on the parties to the
conflict to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and human rights.
With regard to the political process, we deplore the
fact that the resurgence of fighting in Idlib governorate
and other parts of Syria could jeopardize the meagre
achievements ofthe intra- Syrian peace process, which is
why we encourage stakeholders to commit to engaging
in the United Nations negotiations and the Astana and
Sochi processes. We therefore once again urges the
warring parties to agree on the effective establishment
of the constitutional committee that will be tasked with
drafting a new constitution.

Cote d'Ivoire would like to express its support
for Mr. Geir Pedersen, the new Special Envoy of the
United Nations Secretary-General, and to wish him
every success in carrying out his mission. We continue
to believe firmly that there can be no military solution
to the various crises in the Middle East. Only a bold
and inclusive dialogue, supported by the international
community, including the Council, can lead to lasting
peace and stability for shared prosperity in the region.

