Mr. Khan: I would like to start by congratulating
Peru on assuming the presidency of the Council
this month.

It is indeed an honour to present to the Council the
second report (see S/2019/407) of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (UNITAD).

From the outset of our work in Iraq, we have sought
to ensure that the experiences and voices of survivors,
witnesses and communities are placed at the centre of
our work. These survivors come from all communities
across Iraq. All communities have been impacted
in some way, shape or form by the crimes of Da'esh,
and their message has been clear and consistent. Their
demand is a simple one, but it goes to the heart of the
mandate. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) must be held responsible for the crimes that
were committed.

In Mosul to Tikrit, from Erbil to Dahuk and Sinjar,
and elsewhere in Iraq, victims have given harrowing
accounts to our Team of mass killings, of whole
families being wiped out and women and children
taken as slaves. The courage those individuals have
demonstrated in coming forward and giving their
accounts about Da'esh underlines, in very real terms,
their commitment to justice, their heroism and the
urgency with which we at UNITAD must work, together,
if we are to fulfil the hopes, aspirations and promises
that were made in September 2017 by the Council in
resolution 2379 (2017).

Perhaps most striking, to me at least, has been
the fact that when I have engaged with these victim
communities among the various components of Iraq,
their message is one of seeking not revenge or reprisals,
but justice. They seek justice, not as an abstract but
rather based on proper, solid evidence - without
hearsay or gossip - that can be presented in a court of
law and subjected to challenge so that independent and
impartial judges may make determinations that will
stand the test of time The resilience and the fortitude
of the people of Iraq from all communities need to be
applauded right at the outset. It is only through fair
trials that the corrupt and perverted ideology of Da'esh,
as well as its most un-Islamic practices, can be fully
and completely exposed in a manner that will brook no
answer at all.

Over the past six months, we have sought to harness
our resources and the unity of purpose that we have
seen in Iraq and the Council in the most effective way.
I am pleased to report that since my last briefing to the
Council (see S/PV.8412), very significant progress has
been made. We are now receiving evidence, information
and witness statements in all forms - digital, electronic,
documentary - in line with the investigative strategy
that I detailed in my previous report (see 8/2018/1031).

The Team is expanding rapidly. At the beginning
of the year, we had 10 staff members in UNITAD.
As of today, we have 79 staff members from all
geographical regions of the United Nations. In line with
the Secretary-General's policy on gender parity, I am
extremely pleased to announce that more than 55 per
cent of the Team is female and more than 50 per cent of
the senior leadership of UNITAD is also female.
In May, I was delighted, together with His
Excellency the Prime Minister of Iraq, to announce
my appointment of Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji.
She is sitting right behind me. I really want to take
this opportunity, in this Chamber, to publicly applaud
Ms. Salama Hasson Al-Khafaji for her extraordinary
commitment to the rule of law and to justice. Already,
her experience, wise counsel and sincere efforts
to deliver accountability have made a meaningful
contribution to the Team. Her appointment shows in
a very Vivid and obvious manner the support of the
Government of Iraq and how, by harnessing the quality,
ability and experience of the people of Iraq, we can
complement the investigative capacity within Iraq and
hopefully also feed evidence into the court systems of
other Member States.

In April, we were fortunate in leaving the hotel where
we were based and then the engineering compound on
the premises of the United Nations Assistance Mission
for Iraq (UNAMI). We have our own facilities where
we can safely store our material and the evidential work
product that we generate. Importantly also, we now
have videoconference facilities, so that we can use our
offices to transmit testimony not only into the courts
of Iraq, but also, more immediately, the courts of other
Member States.

I want to thank UNAMI and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq for
their constant support as we move from being a start-
up entity into the operational stage of our work. All
along, we have been endeavouring to move the mandate
from the paper of resolution 2379 (2017) into something
concrete, and we have done that initially by focusing
on three main areas: first, in the Sinjar area, attacks
against the Yazidi communities; secondly, in Mosul,
which is, as I have said repeatedly, a microcosm in many
respects of the crimes of Da'esh, we see crimes against
religious minorities and women and children, crimes
of sexual slavery and crimes of sexual and gender-
based violence; and thirdly, we have been focusing on
this awful massacre to create an academy in June 2014.
The team is preparing evidentiary files with respect
to a broad category of other crimes. This is important
because all communities, as I said at the outset, have
been targeted by Da'esh. There was no preference or
mercy shown whether one was Christian or Yazidi, Shia
or Sunni, Kaka'i or Turkmen or Shabak, for that matter.
All of those communities suffered horrendously at the
hands of that most un-Islamic State.

In conducting the work of UNITAD, we have sought
to draw on its independent and impartial status in order
to engage with all actors - whether international,
regional or local - so that we can get the greatest
body of material and collect it in line with international
standards. That inclusive and collaborative approach
is reflected in the evidence collection that we have
undertaken only in the past few weeks. In the past
10 days alone, we have had a team out that has been
in the village of Kojo, in Sinjar, collecting evidence
or supporting the Iraqi authorities in collecting
evidence and giving them guidelines regarding what
international standards require so that we have the
greatest opportunity to feed evidence into domestic
courts, in line with legal considerations.

In northern Iraq, we have been conducting
interviews with Yazidis, Turkmen Shia, Christians and
Sunni Arabs. It is very encouraging that we have already
found very important evidence from individuals and
witnesses who had not hitherto given a statement to any
investigative entity or non-governmental organization
(NGO). In addition, we have received 600,000 videos
in the past two weeks that are very relevant to our
investigations and more than 15,000 pages of insider
ISIL documents that they themselves produced,
which were collected from the battlefield by leading
investigative journalists.

I have repeatedly stated that the collection of
evidence in itself does not represent satisfactorily
the culmination of our work. It is not an end in itself,
and that needs to be underlined. It is not sufficient
for UNITAD simply to have an archive of interesting
material, important though that is. To fully deliver on
our mandate, we must ensure that our work contributes
tangibly to domestic accountability efforts. In
recognition of that imperative, the Investigative Team
has already held in-depth discussions in recent months
in order to create, identify and strengthen potential
channels for evidence collected by the Team to feed
into domestic proceedings in a manner consistent with
UNITAD's terms of reference.

I am also pleased to be able to inform the Council
that a number of other Member States have - at this
early stage, six or seven months after our deployment
to Iraq in terms of the new year - already approached
us in relation to ongoing domestic proceedings within
their jurisdictions. Based on our discussions with
relevant national authorities, it is my hope that within
the next two weeks we will be able to provide tangible
support with respect to at least one ongoing case before
a national court of a Member State, which would mark
an important milestone in the young life of UNITAD.

Our cooperation and collaboration with the
Government of Iraq and Iraqi national authorities have
remained crucial to the ability to deliver on our mandate.
I take this opportunity to express my thanks for the
support that has been given to me and to UNITAD by
the President of Iraq, the Prime Minister of Iraq, the
Foreign Minister of Iraq, the President of the Judicial
Council and, indeed, the Permanent Representative of
Iraq to the United Nations, who is at this meeting today.
In addition, the support of the Kurdistan Regional
Government has been unrelenting and extremely
significant, and I extend my thanks to the President,
Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister of the
that Government for the assistance they have provided
in the formative stages of UNITAD's work.

Our effective working-level engagement with Iraqi
and local authorities, in line with the terms of reference,
has, in my respectful submission, been one of the most
notable and greatest successes of UNITAD in these
initial stages. Tangible evidence of that cooperation
can be found in the collection of forensic material from
mass grave sites, in line with international standards,
and the transmission of evidence and case files from
national and local authorities to the Investigative Team
to ensure that our work is conducted in a manner that
is complementary to ongoing domestic proceedings.
They have also facilitated, in the past few days before I
came to this meeting, my visit to some of the detention
centres in Iraq. I am also extremely grateful for the
unfailing support provided by the relevant national
security agencies and the National Operations Centre,
which has facilitated our nimble, mobile investigative
work in the field of Iraq itself. In short, the cooperation
that the Government of Iraq has extended to UNITAD
thus far has been, in my considered view, exemplary.

While significant progress has been made in the
past six months, I wish to underline that the ability of
the Team to deliver on its mandate remains dependent
on the consistent and continued support of the Council
and the international community more broadly. In
that regard, we have been greatly assisted by the very
generous contributions to the trust fund that Member
States have provided to UNITAD. We have used the
funds for very good purposes. They have helped us
with exhumations in the field and to purchase the
leading technology for DNA analysis, drones and 3-D
scanners. They have been used to recruit psychological
and psychosocial support for the victims. I would like
once again to express my thanks to the Member States
that I highlighted in particular in the written report
presented to the Council. I am also pleased to announce
that last week we were given a commitment by the
United Arab Emirates of another generous contribution
and the Government of Qatar is planning on financing
and supporting an international conference in Doha at
the end of this year.

Apart from financial assistance to the trust fund,
gratis personnel are sorely needed. I would like to
applaud and thank Germany, Saudi Arabia, Sweden and
Turkey for their very generous contributions to UNITAD,
which have filled a need. The latter three - Saudi
Arabia, Sweden and Turkey - have promised and made
commitments to provide gratis personnel to forensics
and other areas. Those contributions are essential not
only in further strengthening our capacity to conduct
effective investigative activities but also in reinforcing
the message that the Council and the international
community remain ad idem and united and that the
imperative of justice is not simply an incantation but
that the Council and international community are
committed to ensuring that it is realized by way of not
only proper investigations but also fair trials that will
stand the test of time.

Through our work in Iraq to date, our engagement
with victims, our cooperation with national and regional
actors and our dialogue with religious bodies and
leaders, two fundamental truths have become apparent.

The first is that, despite the scale, depravity and
barbarity that were unleashed by Da'esh on innocent
civilians, they have not succeeded in dividing the
people of Iraq. Rather, the gaps that existed have been
narrowed and a great deal of unity has been created,
which, if properly harnessed, can be very important
not only to the future of Iraq but also to the continued
fulfilment of the UNITAD mandate. The call from all
Iraqis for justice is resolute and clear. The courage and
strength that we have seen among the religious divides
and across political divisions from all parts of the
political spectrum and of Iraq and, most notably, the
courage of survivors to come forward with unbelievable
bravery to recount what has befallen them, what they
have seen and what they have known have demonstrated
quite eloquently the abject failure of Da'esh to sow
lasting division in the territory of Iraq, nor has Da'esh
succeeded in intimidating the people of Iraq into
silence. Every time a witness comes to UNITAD and
gives their account, that is a very eloquent and powerful
riposte to Da'esh.

Secondly, we have understood that the ultimate
success of our work will depend on our ability to draw
on our independent and impartial status to harness this
unity of purpose and to make our work a product of
a collective endeavour between the Council and the
people of Iraq, between the national authorities and
local actors and between NGOs and universities. The
whole ofhumanity - all those groups - needs to come
together and be harnessed. Hopefully, we will then have
an opportunity to deliver on the mandate and ensure
justice, not in the abstract but by way of evidence
collected by UNITAD that can feed into independent
and impartial trials. Only if we succeed in both parts
will the full purpose of UNITAD be fulfilled.

I thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity
to present the second report of the United Nations
Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for
Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant.

