Nana Effah-Apenteng (Ghana): At the outset, let
me thank Mr. Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region, for
his briefing and commend him for the good work he
has been doing, which has contributed immensely to
peace, security and development in that region. On
behalf of my delegation, I would like to extend our best
wishes to him in his next assignment after the end of
this month, when the mandate of his current
assignment expires.

Barely three months ago, this Council had the
opportunity to congratulate the Governments and
07-26496
people of the Great Lakes region on their signing the
Pact on Security, Stability and Development in that
region and called upon the regional leaders to commit
themselves to the implementation of all aspects of that
agreement. It was the hope of the Council that the
signing of the Pact would turn the region from a state
of desolation engendered by a long period of
instability, violent conflict, insecurity, carnage,
widespread violation of fundamental human rights and
underdevelopment into a state of sustainable peace,
security and socio-economic development.

In this connection, we are encouraged that a
regional parliamentary meeting of the Great Lakes
region, which took place in Kinshasa, supported the
Pact, which was signed at the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in December 2006 in
Nairobi. We are also delighted to note that the
parliamentarians acknowledged their role in
contributing to the early ratification and
implementation of the Great Lakes regional peace pact.
This entire process will also require the sensitization of
the people, as well as strengthening relations between
civil society, Governments and parliaments.

The parliamentarians of the Great Lakes region
also committed themselves to establishing a regional
parliamentary forum in order to encourage dialogue
and to contribute to the mobilization of internal and
external resources for the implementation of the
programme. It is important to heed the call for States to
honour their financial contributions to the budget of the
secretariat of the Great Lakes if the Pact is to succeed.

While commending the efforts of the legislators
in moving the process of ratification and
implementation of the Pact a step forward, it is
worthwhile to mention that all of these good intentions
require the commitment and political will of the
regional leaders to succeed. The leaders should rise
above their national and sectional interests and put the
interests of the Great Lakes region first. The
parliamentarians must see themselves as uniquely
placed to encourage their respective member States to
harmonize their national legislation for the
implementation of the various protocols.

Regional ownership of the process is essential for
peace and sustainable development of the region. A key
element of full ownership of this endeavour will
require joint and coordinated efforts of neighbouring
countries and regional institutions. The regional leaders
07-26496
should also endeavour to convert the Conference into a
regional peacebuilding forum for the prevention,
management and peaceful settlement of conflicts.

In View of the current unstable situation in
eastern Congo and northern Uganda, there is an urgent
need for leaders of the Great Lakes region to cooperate
on cross-border security and trade, with the aim of
spurring development after decades of civil conflict.
Dialogue should become the only medium for
resolving conflicts.

For its part, the international community should
continue to monitor closely the peace talks between the
Government and rebel groups in Uganda and support
the implementation of the outcome of the International
Conference on the Great Lakes Region, especially as
demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants are
seen as crucial in the efforts toward the region's
progress in the areas of good governance and economic
recovery.

In this regard, we commend the rebel groups in
eastern Congo for agreeing to disarm, and we urge the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to intensify its efforts at retraining ex-combatants and
reintegrating them into the national armed forces. The
international community should complement these
efforts by supporting regional peacebuilding projects
that address the plight of returnees, stem the flow of
small arms and light weapons, check the activities of
mercenaries in the region, promote demining
techniques and curb the illegal exploitation and illicit
trading of natural resources.

Finally, we commend the international
community, including the joint United Nations-African
Union (AU) secretariat and its team of experts, led by
the Secretary-General's Special Representative and the
Group of Friends of the Great Lakes Region, for their
contribution to the successful completion of the two
conferences in December 2006 and February 2007. We
also support the recommendation of the regional
parliamentary meeting for the Great Lakes region that
the international community, notably the United
Nations and the AU, continue their support for peace
and reconstruction of the Great Lakes region.

