Mr. Gomersall (United Kingdom): We agree with
the representative of Israel that the origin of the current
setback to the situation in the West Bank and Gaza lies in
the murderous attacks carried out by Hamas terrorists in
Jerusalem a few weeks ago.

The United Kingdom condemns terrorism
unreservedly. We have always recognized and supported
Israel's right to and the need for security. This is very
clear, and is recognized by this Council, whose resolution
242 (1967) declared the right of all countries in the region
to live in peace within secure and recognized boundaries,
free from threats and acts of force. Israel has the right to
protect itself against Harnas bombers. The defence of its
citizens is any Government's first priority. But security
and economic stability in Gaza and the West Bank are
two sides of the same coin.

The United Kingdom has worked hard with others in
the international community to support Palestinian
economic development. Serious and sudden
unemployment and loss of revenue to the Palestinian
Authority have raised levels of poverty to alarming levels

 

and pose political challenges for the authorities by
increasing the credibility of extremists.

We regret the fact that more access could not be given
to Palestinians to the Holy Places over Easter, and on
Fridays to the Al-Aqsa mosque. We support the right of
access to the Holy Places for members of all religions.

The United Kingdom view remains that the status of
Jerusalem remains to be determined and that nothing should
be done to prejudice the outcome of the forthcoming
negotiations.

We believe it is also important that members of the
Palestinian Council should be allowed freely to attend
meetings of that Council. We believe stability rests on the
proper functioning of Palestinian democracy. And we are
concerned at the continuing restrictions on Palestinians
seeking medical care.

We welcome the measures which the Government of
Israel has so far taken to ease the closure, and hope that
these can be further amplified, in respect particularly of
permitting workers to enter Israel and of easing the export
and transit of goods. Facilities for Palestinian exports to
Jordan and Egypt should be expedited and increased. We
trust that ways will be found to do this without risking
Israel's security. Measures without a clear security function
or where humanitarian concerns outweigh security needs
should be avoided.

Above all, as every speaker has stressed today, my
Government believes that the peace process must continue.
In the end peace will bring great benefits to Palestinians
and Israelis alike. We expect all parties to fulfil the
commitments they have made under, for example, the
Interim Agreement and the tripartite action plan. The
Palestinian Covenant should be amended as required under
the Interim Agreement. Israel's right to exist must be
asserted by all parties to the peace agreement. But also,
Israeli redeployment should continue as specified in the
Interim Agreement. Final status talks should begin, as
intended under the agreements, by the end of May.

At this difficult time, the United Kingdom will
continue to extend its encouragement and full support to the
Israel Government and the Palestinian Authority in order to
keep the peace process alive and to defeat its enemies. We
are determined that these events should not deflect either
Party from the efforts necessary to secure a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace.

