Mr. Diouf (spoke in French): First of all, I should
like once again to transmit to you, Mr. President, the
warm wishes of the Executive Secretary of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), who has been following our work very
closely and is very pleased at the debate we had the
day before yesterday on child soldiers. The Executive
Secretary also asked me to convey his congratulations
to the Security Council and to say how pleased he is by
the special importance that the members of the Council
have given to questions of peace and security in Africa,
particularly in West Africa.

With regard to today's debate, this is something
that the Executive Secretary holds dear because, as the
Council knows, at its beginning, ECOWAS did not
include peace and security on its agenda. The main
purpose of ECOWAS is to foster economic regional
integration through policy harmonization by adopting a
community-based approach to development and socio-
economic problems. However, the emergence of crises
in West Africa forced ECOWAS to review its agenda
and revise its work in order to include questions of
peace, security and stability. That means that when we
looked through the interim report of the Secretary-
General, we were particularly struck by his exhaustive
coverage of those problems and the relevant solutions
that he has proposed throughout the report, which we
completely support.

As the Council knows, the cross-border problems
that we face in West Africa - including human
trafficking, small arms and light weapons exportation
and proliferation, money-laundering and illicit drug
trafficking - are all threats to peace, security and
stability. Those threats stem from the fact that today
there are organized gangs with networks in several
countries of the subregion and even outside the region
who control the entire process linked to those
activities.

In recent years, the region has experienced a
number of political, ethnic and religious crises, which
have jeopardized the economic progress made in some
of the Community's member States. Non-State armed
gangs very often prolong armed conflicts, thus leading
to massive destruction of infrastructure and to
economic collapse. Most of those gangs survive by
means of arms and drugs trafficking, money-laundering
and human trafficking, and very often they control the
richest areas of the countries in crisis.

Within the ECOWAS area, such armed gangs are
often both numerous and complex. They have political
roots and, depending on the situation, may mutate into
criminal gangs. Their composition is diverse, even
where, as in most cases, one ethnic group constitutes
the group's core. And even if they have roots in a
political party, they very often escape the control of the
party, particularly when attempts are made to end a
crisis. There are also foreign citizens in those gangs
who have been recruited or who have freely joined the
movement.

It is that modus operandi which encourages, inter
alia, the participation of children in armed conflicts
and their use as soldiers. The porousness of our
borders, the spread of poverty, underemployment, the
weakness of security forces and the proliferation of
small arms and light weapons that I have mentioned
are all factors that lead to the entrenchment and
expansion of those armed gangs, who may be based in
a country neighbouring their theatre of operations.

In West Africa, as we have noted, the modus
operandi of those armed gangs is based on violence
and terror directed against civilians. In light of the
situation, ECOWAS, which is very concerned about the
well-being of our population and the impossibility of
development without peace and security, has
established a number of instruments in order to prevent
and combat those negative activities. Those
instruments include, for example, the Convention on
Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, the Convention
on Extradition, the Plan of Action to Combat
Trafficking in Persons, the Protocol to Combat Illicit
Trafficking in Drugs, a protocol against money-
laundering and the Intergovernmental Action Group
Against Money Laundering, the Moratorium on the
Importation, Exportation and Manufacture of Small
Arms and Light Weapons in West Africa and, finally,
the Protocol for the Establishment of a Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management and Resolution,
Peace and Security.

ECOWAS has identified three main strategic
approaches to implement those instruments.

First, there is the political dimension, which is
intended to restore dialogue among belligerents while
insisting on the need to respect the basic laws of the
country concerned. ECOWAS has continued to
emphasize that political approach in order to avoid
rewarding rebellion.

Second is the legal approach, which seeks to
facilitate the deployment of a rather strong security
force within the context of a comprehensive peace
agreement. In this regard, cooperation with institutions
having jurisdiction over war crimes has been helpful.

Thirdly, aspects related to development are taken
into account through the process of building,
rebuilding and restoring infrastructure with the
participation of our development partners.

We would stress here that ECOWAS also attaches
special importance to prevention as a major way to
combat cross-border problems. This is why ECOWAS
adopted the Additional Protocol on Democracy and
Good Governance and the Protocol for the
Establishment of a Mechanism for Conflict Prevention,
Management and Resolution, Peace and Security, as
well as a protocol relating to the free movement of
goods and people.

Those protocols tackle the main causes of
conflicts in the region and provide clear indications
with regard to the process to be implemented and
respected in establishing a favourable context for
sustainable peace. We could also refer to the separation
of powers, independence of the legislative branch, the
right to free association, participation of women and
young people in the development and reconstruction
process and in the peace process, the role of the army
in a democratic society and, finally, combating the
proliferation of weapons.

Those are a set of guidelines that should be
followed in order to bring about an environment
conducive to good economic and social development in
the subregion, and those are the points I wanted to
share with you.

