Mr. Takasu (Japan): I thank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this afternoon's meeting. We are also
grateful to the representative of the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) for the
update on humanitarian situation in the Sudan, and in
Darfur in particular.

We note with deep concern the grave
humanitarian situation in Darfur, particularly after the
decision of the Government of the Sudan to revoke the
registration and licences of major humanitarian
non-governmental organizations (NGOs). We have
already witnessed serious consequences since the
previous briefing, on 6 March, including the closing of
some medical facilities and a shortage of water in some
camps. It is clear that the damage will only increase.
We are also concerned about what the food situation
will be after the current stockpile is exhausted.

OCHA's briefing has made it abundantly clear
that United Nations humanitarian programmes
themselves largely rely on those NGOs for the delivery
of assistance, and that the United Nations and the
remaining NGOs cannot replace the significant loss
caused by this decision. NGOs are the implementing
partners of the United Nations. It is impossible for the
United Nations to compensate for their absence and
replace the work that was done by the expelled NGOs.
We understand that it is the intention of the
Government of the Sudan to increase the presence of
national NGOs to replace their work, but that will take
a long time to implement, and the most vulnerable
affected persons need urgent assistance.

Japan is one of the major donors to the Sudan. On
8 March, just 12 days ago, Japan decided to extend
additional assistance, including a contribution of about
$34 million, to support the 2009 workplan for the
Sudan of the United Nations and its partners. To
implement this assistance, we need international and
national NGOs as partners. We strongly urge the
Government of the Sudan to reconsider its decision.

We are also concerned about the remark by the
Government of the Sudan about the so-called
Sudanizing of relief operations. Although we are not
clear yet about what it means, we cannot envisage
implementation of assistance at such a substantial scale
without the involvement and monitoring of the United
Nations.

The activities of humanitarian NGOs in the
Sudan are covered by the Joint Communique between
the Government and the United Nations on the
facilitation of humanitarian activities. The Security
Council, in its resolution 1828 (2008), demanded the
full implementation of the Joint Communique and also
that the Government and all armed groups ensure the
full, safe and unhindered access of humanitarian
organizations and relief personnel. I believe that it is
our common responsibility as members of the Security
Council to ensure the full implementation of its earlier
decisions. If we fail in fulfilling this function, we must
be accountable to the international community as to
why it is so and who is responsible for inaction.

There is no justification at all for the Government
of the Sudan to drastically curtail critical life-saving
food, water and medical support to millions of its own
people. Such behaviour would make the least
convincing argument for supporting the position of the
Government. We appeal to the Government of the
Sudan to honour its commitment and act in a
responsible manner. We join the Secretary-General in
his call to the Government of the Sudan to immediately
take necessary actions to alleviate the situation.

The decision of the International Criminal Court
will not justify any change in the obligation of the
Government of the Sudan to comply with Security
Council resolutions, to avoid impeding humanitarian
assistance, as referred to in resolution 1828 (2008), and
to ensure the safety and security of civilians and
United Nations personnel. It is important that the
Government of the Sudan and all rebel movements
refrain from any action that would aggravate the
humanitarian and security situation on the ground.

The Security Council should continue to monitor
carefully future developments, including the peace
process, the deployment of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the humanitarian
and security situation and the question of impunity.
The most important thing for us is that the Council
members make the utmost effort to address the issue
responsibly and to act in unison as much as possible.

We are carefully following the joint assessments
by the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan of humanitarian needs in Darfur. We very much
look forward to receiving a briefing on the outcome of
the assessment next week.

