Mr. Jibril (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me
first of all to warmly thank the Security Council on
behalf of my country's delegation and of the National
Transitional Council (NTC), the sole legitimate
representative of the Libyan people. We are very
grateful for the Council's adoption of two historic
resolutions, which have clearly contributed to the
protection of the lives of thousands of innocent
civilians. Thanks to those two resolutions, we - with
God's grace - have been able to protect and save
those civilians.

Resolution 1973 (2011) in particular has helped
us in that endeavour. Although many would consider it
to be in implementation of the United Nations Charter,
from a strictly juridical point of View, the resolution
was - for us certainly - in implementation of an
ethical law rather than of the Charter itself. The
consensus that was reached by the international
community under that resolution and the ensuing
international campaign to protect civilians in my
country represent, in our view, an overwhelming
victory for the rule of international ethics. It is a
precedent that we hope will be followed by others and
by initiatives to protect innocent civilians, wherever
they are and every time they are the target of crimes of
genocide or crimes against humanity, perpetrated by
dictators wherever they are.

Although some people think that the Al-Qadhafi
regime fell with the fall of the capital and other cities,
it is still true that the mission is far from accomplished.
Al-Qadhafl's battalions continue to kill innocent
civilians in three distinct regions of our country - in
Sirte, in Bani Walid and yesterday in Ghadamis - and
therefore the very foundations of resolution 1973
(2011) remain valid. In that regard, we would like to
thank NATO for its decision to extend its mission for
an additional 90 days.

Secondly, Al-Qadhafi is still at large and
possesses huge amounts of money and gold. The
simple fact that he is still free and that he has such
wealth at his disposal means that he is still capable of
destabilizing the situation, not only within my country
but also in the Sahel region and the African desert. It is
no exaggeration to say that even beyond the African
continent, Al-Qadhafi, with the means and assets has
available to him, could resume his terrorist practices by
distributing arms across the continent in order to
justify his prediction that his absence from the political
stage would be synonymous with the expansion of
Al-Qaida and extremism throughout Africa.

I want to draw the Council's attention to that real
threat, because his active existence is a force to be
dealt with. He and his sons are able to move freely, and
that could lead to greater destabilization in the region
until they and their acolytes are apprehended. For that
reason, his arrest is imperative to re-establishing
stability throughout the region, not only within Libya.

The third factor for instability that I would like to
mention - known to everyone here - is the spread of
weapons not only in my country, but in neighbouring
countries too. One of the main tasks of the NTC and
the provisional Government will be to collect those
arms and prevent their further distribution. That will be
a first step towards stabilizing the situation, not only in
the capital but also in all Libyan towns and cities.
Rumours and recently published reports of the
presence of certain chemical substances and stockpiles
of chemical weapons purportedly discovered in the
south of the country are a concern not only to the
international community but also, first and foremost, to
us and to innocent civilians living in areas within
Libya where such substances are stockpiled.

There are numerous factors fuelling instability,
but I assert with certainty that one principal factor is
the ongoing freeze of Libyan monies and assets 4
assets that belong to the Libyan people - pursuant to
United Nations resolutions. Although we highly
appreciate the work and measures undertaken recently
by the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) to unfreeze
$16 billion and remove some Libyan companies from
the embargo list, the road ahead remains very long.

For the first six months of our blessed revolution,
the National Transitional Council existed to fight a
dictatorial regime. The current and future legitimacy of
the NTC will depend entirely not only on its fight
against a despotic regime, but also on its capacity to
meet the basic needs of citizens. The inability of the
NTC or the provisional Government to provide those
basic services because of a lack of funding could affect
its very foundations and legitimacy, which the Security
Council recognized in the historic resolution 2009
(2011), re-establishing its seat at the United Nations as
the sole legitimate representative of the Libyan people.

Continuing the assets freeze could be very risky
because it could inhibit the efforts of the National

Transitional Council to perform its functions. I ask the
Security Council to totally lift the assets freeze as soon
as possible, because the circumstances that applied
when resolution 1970 (2011) was adopted no longer
exist. That resolution sought to deprive the Al-Qadhafi
regime of the funds, assets and authority that enabled it
to buy weapons, which it turned on innocent people.
Al-Qadhafi is no longer part of the regime. It is true
that he still has vast wealth. However, that said, the
ones who are being deprived of those assets and wealth
are the Libyan people, on whose behalf the resolution
was adopted in order to enable them to receive
protection and save lives.

Let me recall that the circumstances that
prevailed before the resolution was adopted no longer
exist. It is therefore imperative to adopt a resolution
that seeks to lift the freeze fully on those assets and
funds so that the Libyan people can begin their
reconstruction process. There are a number of injured
people who have to be treated. There are many
wounded people who are awaiting artificial limbs.
Many houses have been destroyed, with many people
displaced. Also, many schools have been destroyed and
need to be rebuilt. Many power plants are down. Much
infrastructure, including bridges and roads, has been
demolished. Social, economic, material and human
infrastructure have completely collapsed or been
incapacitated. All of this will require money to rebuild.

With regard to the formation of the provisional
Government, we cannot really talk about that unless it
has the necessary funds to fulfil its functions. We
cannot talk about Government structures if they turn
out to be ineffective and unable to provide citizens
with the basic necessities of life, to collect weapons
from the streets, to form a national army incorporating
all existing military forces and to put in place robust
security and police forces that are able to carry out
their duties and establish security in all cities and
towns. All that will be in vain if the financial resources
are not available, since the lack of such resources
would be a major obstacle to the effectiveness of any
Government, transitional or otherwise.

Moreover, today, a number of Governments
throughout the world - poor Governments that do not
have many resources available - are not able to do
anything. Poverty, need and want therefore remain
destabilizing factors in those countries, even in they
are not experiencing conflict.

With regard to human rights violations and the
ill-treatment of migrant workers in my country, I am
obliged now to now give a clear picture of the
situation. From the very beginning, the National
Transitional Council expressed its commitment to the
relevant human rights instruments and principles. We
have reaffirmed our intention to avoid mistreatment of
any foreigners in my country. However, the incidents
that have occurred in no way translate into a systematic
policy of the NTC, which rejects such a policy.
However, we must be allowed to establish security
services, a strong national army and a robust police
force because those will help us to put an end to such
violations and wherever and whenever they occur.

Such vengeful acts do not reflect the policy of the
National Transitional Council. They are horrendous
acts that we vehemently condemn and reject, as we
have done in the past and intend to do in the future.
Investigations to resolve them will continue, but we
still need substantial means to carry out such
investigations. That brings me back to the need to
provide us with the appropriate financial and economic
resources so that we can act, and do so effectively.

In reiterating my thanks, I would also like to
recall that the assistance provided to the National
Transitional Council is one issue and that the means for
us to meet deadlines is another matter. We have
invested in many tasks, but, once again, we need the
necessary financial resources to accomplish all of
them. The Libyan people must have their resources and
other monies due them restored so that they can march
together towards the future.

