Mr. Ceylan (Turkey): I would like to thank
the French presidency of the Security Council for
organizing this debate. I also express our appreciation
to His Excellency the President of the Central African
Republic and the other briefers for their insightful
statements this morning.

The trends in global threats against humankind,
particularly the growing scale of violence and persistent
Violations of the international humanitarian law, compel
us in the first place to consider the protection of civilians
as one of the biggest challenges to international peace.
It should be our major concern that, today, civilians
account for the vast majority of casualties resulting
from armed conflict. The indiscriminate targeting of
hospitals, schools, market places, holy shrines and even
camps for internally displaced persons, as well as such
heinous terrorist tactics as suicide-bombings, have
devastating effects that neither international law nor
any other moral value can tolerate. The perpetrators of
such acts should be held accountable.

Forced displacement, starvation, sexual abuse
and slavery are systematically used as warfare tactics
affecting the fate of the most vulnerable, namely,
children, women and the elderly. This dark picture
makes the protection of civilians a legal and moral duty
for the international community.
Turkey acknowledges that the primary responsibility
lies with States to protect their citizens. Turkey is fully
committed to the principles and purposes of the Charter
of the United Nations, and lives up to its commitments
under international law, international humanitarian
law and refugee law, where applicable. Turkey has long
played a unique role in its region in alleviating human
suffering. In that regard, Turkey is currently hosting
millions of displaced people on its soil and spares no
effort to meet their shelter, food and education needs.

The number of people in need of international
humanitarian assistance has tripled over the past decade.
The international community cannot overcome this
challenge without effective cooperation and collective
action. The first World Humanitarian Summit, held
in Istanbul few weeks ago, was a ground-breaking
development in that regard. To address the root causes
of crises and end human suffering, Turkey - in line
with its commitments - will continue to work together
with the United Nations, Member States and relevant
stakeholders.

In the context of peace operations, the United
Nations must assume its responsibilities where States
fail to protect their own citizens, in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter. Turkey adheres
to the peacekeeping principles of impartiality, the
consent of host State and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate. The protection
of civilians in armed conflict is consistent with these
principles. Moreover, as the report of the High-level
Independent Panel on Peace Operations states, "those
principles should never be an excuse for failure to
protect civilians" (see S/2015/446, p. 12).

In conflict-affected societies, Governments may
lack the necessary capacity to secure the lives and dignity
of their citizens. As a matter of fact, that is the case in
most of the places where United Nations peacekeeping
missions are deployed. Political determination and
institutional strength are fundamental for the effective
protection of civilians effectively. Today, 10 out of
the 16 peacekeeping missions operate under specific
mandates to protect civilians.

In those missions, United Nations peacekeepers
courageously assume their duties, under the most
challenging conditions, although they themselves are
increasingly targeted by armed groups. The problem
is growing worse, and United Nations peacekeeping
operations should therefore pursue comprehensive
strategies to help nations increase their resilience in
crisis situations.
The role of United Nations police is critical
in building capacities for protecting civilians and
upholding the rule of law. As the 2016 report of the
Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations (see A/70/19) stresses, providing peacekeeping operations
with clearly defined mandates, objectives and command
structures, adequate resources and training based on a
realistic assessment of the situation are key factors in
the effective implementation of protection duties in the
context of peacekeeping operations.

More broadly speaking, the United Nations has a
role to play in preventing the ongoing attacks against
civilians, not only in specific peacekeeping settings but
also in crisis-prone situations where special political
missions are deployed. To that end, the United Nations
should make effective use of early-warning mechanisms,
preventive diplomacy and mediation as necessary tools
for preventing conflict and thus human suffering.

Turkey believes that the worsening circumstances
and the inclusion of protection mandates may require a
change in the posture of peace operations. In that regard,
we appreciate United Nations efforts to develop strong
guidelines for ensuring the protection of civilians. The
report of the Secretary-General on the protection of
civilians contains important recommendations in that
regard (S/2016/447).

In times of turmoil peacekeepers are seen as the
sole hope of defenceless peoples. Without undermining
that noble calling, the United Nations must, however,
ensure that the peacekeepers tasked to protect civilians
do not become a threat to them. The United Nations
must, therefore, rigorously implement the zero-tolerance
policy for sexual exploitation and abuse cases in which
its personnel are involved. It is Turkey's expectation
that those utterly disgraceful acts will cease and that
the perpetrators will be prosecuted.

