The President (spoke in French): In accordance with rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure, I invite the representative of Somalia to participate in this meeting. The Security Council will now begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. I will now brief the Security Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia. In accordance with paragraph 11 (g) of resolution 1844 (2008), I have the honour to brief the Council in my capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolution 751 (1992), concerning Somalia, covering the period from 26 October 2019 to 27 February 2020. This is my first briefing since the adoption, on 15 November 2019, of resolution 2498 (2019), in which the Council consolidated and streamlined the provisions related to the arms embargo, imposed a ban on the components of improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and renewed the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Somalia until 15 December 2020. Following the adoption of the resolution, the Secretary-General appointed five members of the Panel of Experts on 16 December 2019, and a sixth expert was appointed on 13 January 2020. At its first consultations this year, on 17 January, the Committee met with the members of the Panel of Experts on Somalia to discuss their priorities for 2020. In that connection, the new Coordinator of the Panel of Experts highlighted the increased focus on the revenue sources of Al-Shabaab, in line with the provisions of paragraph 1 of resolution 2498 (2019). She also mentioned the ban on IED components, the charcoal embargo and the management of weapons and ammunition as other priority areas for the Panel of Experts. The Coordinator pointed out that the recent attacks in Mogadishu and a series of incidents in Kenya had highlighted the constant threat posed by Al-Shabaab in Somalia and the region.The Coordinator stressed the importance of re-establishing a constructive working relationship with the Federal Government of Somalia, including by allowing all members of the Panel of Experts to visit Somalia. In that regard, she viewed her visit to Mogadishu in early January, at the invitation of the National Security Adviser to the President of Somalia, aS a promising step forward. The members of the Committee were encouraged by those initial exchanges. They agreed with the Coordinator that the priorities of the Federal Government of Somalia were well aligned with those set out in the mandate of the Panel of Experts. From 21 to 23 January, I travelled to Mogadishu in my capacity as Chair of the Committee, along with Committee members who joined me from New York or through their local and regional diplomatic representatives. The report on my visit, which contains details of my meetings with the President and Prime Minister of the Federal Government of Somalia and other interlocutors, was shared with the members of the Committee. I would like to briefly summarize my observations. The visit was an important opportunity to help raise awareness of the purpose and scope of the sanctions measures, which are aimed primarily at Al-Shabaab and other armed groups, and to gather first-hand information on their implementation. I hope that it will also contribute significantly to the re-establishment of relations between the Federal Government of Somalia and the Panel of Experts. The Coordinator of the Panel has already visited Mogadishu three times, which is an encouraging start, and I hope that other members of the Panel will soon be able to visit Somalia as well. I believe that the visit was also useful in helping the members of the Committee familiarize themselves with the political, security and humanitarian developments on the ground. I note that the Committee plays an ongoing role in raising awareness of the sanctions regime, correcting the misperception that the sanctions regime is targeting the Federal Government of Somalia and promoting a better understanding of the scope of the measures, particularly the new ban on IED components. We must also continue to stress that the sanctions regime is not static. It is regularly reviewed, has evolved over the years to reflect changing circumstances and will continue to evolve. The Committee and its Panel of Experts are partners of the Federal Government of Somalia, with the mutual aim of countering the threat of terrorism and tackling the flow of illegal arms to non-State armed groups in Somalia. During the reporting period, the Committee received three monthly updates from the Panel of Experts, one of which was submitted pursuant to resolution 2441 (2018) and the other two pursuant to resolution 2498 (2019). The Committee also received correspondence from two Member States. One letter raised concerns regarding the findings of the Monitoring Group on Somalia and Eritrea, the predecessor of the Panel of Experts, and two others raised confidentiality issues. To date, the Committee has responded to two of the three letters. I will conclude by summarizing statistics with regard to the arms embargo. Prior to the adoption of resolution 2498 (2019), the Committee approved an exemption request submitted by the Federal Government of Somalia pursuant to paragraph 7 of resolution 2111 (2013). The Committee also received a pre-delivery notification from a Member State, pursuant to paragraph 4 ofresolution 2142 (2014) and paragraph 14 of resolution 2444 (2018). Following the adoption of resolution 2498 (2019), the Committee received four pre-delivery notifications from the Federal Government of Somalia, pursuant to paragraphs 11 and 13 of resolution 2498 (2019), for one of which it also received a pre-delivery notification from the supplier Member State, pursuant to paragraph 14 of the same resolution. In addition, the Committee received three pre-delivery notifications from a supplier Member State and an international organization, pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 2498 (2019). Lastly, the Committee received a copy of the Federal Government of Somalia's biannual report to the Security Council, pursuant to paragraph 35 of resolution 2498 (2019), on the structure, composition, strength and deployment of its security forces and the status of regional and militia forces. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I shall now give the floor to those members of the Security Council who wish to make statements.
