I thank you, Sir, for this opportunity to address the Council about the activities of the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. My written report provides details about our activities and results during the reporting period in relation to our strategic priorities. Today, I would like to highlight a few important issues. The most significant development since my last report (see S/PV.8681) is that we have now accounted for two of the three major fugitives indicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). On 16 May, Felicien Kabuga, one of the most wanted fugitives, alleged to have been a leading figure in the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, was arrested in Paris by French authorities. That arrest was the culmination of my Office's revised tracking strategy and intensified efforts since 2016. As I previously reported to the Council, we shifted from reacting to leads from human sources that proved unreliable to a more proactive, analysis-driven investigation. We further developed specific strategies for each fugitive. For Kabuga, our efforts for the last several years focused on his family members living in Western Europe, who we concluded were very likely to be Kabuga's support network. By investigating and excluding unviable leads, we increasingly focused our attention on possible locations in Belgium and France. Earlier this year we had a major breakthrough. By collating and analysing a wealth of data obtained from national authorities, we were able to identify a pattern in the family members' movements centred on a specific residential area in Asnieres- sur-Seine, near Paris. We then approached French authorities, who confirmed our intelligence and were able to identify the specific location where Kabuga was believed to be hiding. Together, we planned a sophisticated, coordinated arrest operation, which was successfully executed on the morning of 16 May. I would like to extend our deepest appreciation and thanks to France and its authorities for their exceptional cooperation, particularly the Central Office for Combatting Crimes Against Humanity, Genocide and War Crimes and the Office of the Prosecutor General of the Paris Court of Appeal. Inarelated development, on 22 May I announced that my Office had confirmed the death of another major ICTR fugitive - Augustin Bizimana, former Minister of Defence in the interim Government, alleged to have been a senior leader of the 1994 genocide. The confirmation of Bizimana's death was similarly the result of our revised strategy and intensified efforts in the last few years. Having reviewed all available intelligence, we assessed that it was likely that Bizimana was deceased. We then actively worked to verify this hypothesis. With the assistance of the United States Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory and the Netherlands Forensic Institute, late last year we determined that human remains found in Pointe-Noire, the Republic of the Congo, matched reference samples obtained from Bizimana's mother. Subsequently, we conducted extensive investigations to exclude the possibility that the remains belonged to any of Bizimana's male maternal relations. Accordingly, we concluded that Bizimana is deceased, and in the near future will be filing a motion to officially terminate the proceedings against him. Those successes were the results of our collective efforts. Of course, our first thoughts must be with the victims and survivors of the genocide. Their demand for justice is our raison d'etre. Their trust and support make our work possible. The Security Council's role was decisive. It provided its full support to our renewed efforts over the past several years and repeatedly called upon all Member States to provide cooperation in the search for the fugitives. In turn, members of the Council and other States Members of the United Nations assisted us in obtaining the intelligence and information we needed to move our investigations forward. The list of Member States that provided particularly important assistance is long, but each deserves recognition. Therefore, on behalf of my Office, I would like to specifically thank the law enforcement and judicial authorities in Austria, Belgium, the Republic of the Congo, France, Germany, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Rwanda, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States for their contributions, as well as EUROPOL and INTERPOL. Together, we again demonstrated the impressive results that can be achieved through international cooperation. Finally, the results are a tribute to the skill and dedication of the staff of the Office of the Prosecutor, which continually demonstrates the highest standards of professional excellence. We must now redouble our efforts to locate and arrest the remaining fugitives. The last few weeks have created significant momentum. Together we can capitalize on that and send a clear message that all ICTR fugitives will be accounted for. My Office continues to actively pursue promising investigations. We have credible leads on the whereabouts of all six fugitives. As Kabuga's arrest clearly demonstrates, the element critical to our further success will be cooperation from Member States. Regrettably, it is now clear that if we had had timely and effective cooperation in August 2018, one more fugitive would have been arrested. We continue to engage with the South African authorities and trust that they will promptly and fully respond to our ongoing requests. My Office has reported the many other challenges we are facing in obtaining cooperation, but many of our requests have been ignored and unanswered. The African Union (AU) has encouraged all its member States to cooperate with my Office to arrest the remaining fugitives, echoing the Security Council's repeated calls. My Office trusts that, moving forward, all AU member States will make our requests for assistance a priority and ensure that we receive the support we need to complete our important mandate. The victims and survivors of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda deserve nothing less than our collective best efforts. With regard to our trials and appeals, my written report provides details on all our activities during the reporting period. I would like to reiterate our commitment to undertaking all steps under our control to expedite the completion of these proceedings. In the light of the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, the resumption of courtroom proceedings in the Prosecutor v. Maximilien Turinabo et al., Stanisie and Simatovic and Mladic cases will be determined by the respective Chambers. My Office has underscored our willingness to consider all possibilities in resuming hearings as soon as possible. The point I would like to emphasize now is that while proceedings in court have been suspended, my Office has continued to fully litigate all our cases outside the courtroom. We have continued to file and respond to a significant number of motions. We have taken the opportunity to move forward in other areas of responsibility, including the preparation of trial submissions in Turinabo and our final trial brief in Stanisic and Simatovic. And in Mladic, our team has continued its preparations so that it will be able to present oral submissions as soon as the appeal hearing is scheduled. My Office has also continued to respond to requests for assistance from national authorities. In the reporting period, we received a high volume of requests for assistance, and we fully expect that an even larger volume of requests will be received in future. The Office of the Prosecutor has therefore effectively ensured full business continuity despite the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and remote working arrangements. This achievement is in large part due to our staff, whose members have continued to fully perform their responsibilities despite significant challenges. With the arrest of Felicien Kabuga, it is also important to remind ourselves that the prosecution of alleged war criminals is not the end of the justice process. For the victims and survivors in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, it is vitally important that the crimes they suffered be recognized and acknowledged. Unfortunately, as I have repeatedly reported to the Council, the denial of crimes and glorification of convicted war criminals remain immense challenges. Among Rwandan diaspora communities in particular, there are still concerted efforts to deny the Rwandan genocide. Some promote revisionist accounts that minimize the scale of the genocide. Others continue to deny that the crimes were committed with the intent to destroy the Tutsi group in whole or in part. The denial of crimes and glorification of convicted war criminals are also pervasive throughout the former Yugoslavia. And regrettably, denial and glorification are often driven or supported by politicians and public officials throughout the region. I have previously reported on political interference in war-crimes justice in the former Yugoslavia. Just last week we witnessed an alarming example of such interference in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My Office has always fully supported the Prosecutor's Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina and its current Chief Prosecutor. It has been our consistent experience that she and her team carry out their responsibilities professionally and ethically, and we trust that they will continue to prosecute all those responsible for war crimes, without regard to ethnicity or official status. While this example is particularly pronounced, throughout the region the climate of denial, glorification and politicization has a chilling effect on prosecutors and judges and undermines the rule of law. This year will mark the twenty-fifth anniversaries of many notable crimes and events from the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, including the Srebrenica genocide. These anniversaries should be solemn moments to commemorate the victims and to condemn with one voice those responsible for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. My Office calls upon all officials and public figures in the region to act responsibly and put the victims and civilian suffering at the forefront of all activities marking these anniversaries. They should publicly condemn the denial of crimes and glorification of war criminals, rather than support them with public rhetoric and funds. Twenty-five years later, a break with the rhetoric of the past is long overdue, and leadership in favour of reconciliation and peacebuilding is urgently needed. In conclusion, with the arrest of Felicien Kabuga and the confirmation of the death of Augustin Bizimana, two of the three major Rwandan fugitives have been accounted for. My Office is now firmly focused on locating the remaining major fugitive, Protais Mpiranya, as well as the five other ICTR fugitives who remain at large. As recent events have proven once again, with timely and effective cooperation from Member States, these fugitives can be arrested. My Office is preparing several requests for assistance and will be contacting relevant Member States to seek support. It is as critical now as ever before that a clear message be sent that not only is cooperation with my Office a legal requirement, it is, even more so, a moral obligation to the victims and survivors. Furthermore, we remain committed to completing our other functions efficiently and effectively. We have ensured full business continuity in an effective manner, despite the COVID-19 pandemic, and we continue to actively litigate our ongoing cases and provide full support for war-crimes justice in national courts. In this regard, my Office welcomes the recognition by the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) of our commitment to the Security Council's vision of the Mechanism as "a small, temporary and efficient structure". OIOS has also favourably assessed our work and innovative methods, including our flexible deployment of staff to address the dynamic level of ad hoc judicial activity while maintaining lean staffing. We are grateful for the continued support of the Security Council in all our efforts.
