The President: The Security Council will now
continue its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, which is contained in
document S/2005/631 dated 6 October 2005.

Following consultations among the members of
the Security Council, I have been authorized to make
the following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council expresses its full
support for the work of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH) and
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Juan Gabriel Valdes.

"The Security Council stresses the primary
importance of ensuring that Haiti benefits from
transparent, inclusive, free and fair elections, in
accordance with international democratic
standards and open to all political candidates that
have renounced violence, thereby enabling
legitimate leadership at the national and local
levels. The Council conveys its concern regarding
the risk of delays in the electoral process, and
underlines international expectations that the first
round of national elections should take place in
2005, and all efforts should be undertaken so that
the democratically elected authorities take office
on 7 February 2006 in accordance with the
Haitian Constitution. The Council notes, with
appreciation, that, so far, more than three million
people have been registered. The Council praises
the Organization of American States (OAS) and
other relevant international stakeholders for their
contribution to that process. The Council
welcomes the representation of a broad range of

Haitian political opinion in the electoral process
and underlines the importance of a collaborative
approach by political leaders. National
reconciliation and political dialogue should
continue to be promoted as a means to ensure
long-term stability and good governance.

"The Security Council notes with concern
that important challenges to the preparations of
the elections remain yet to be overcome. While
welcoming the recent steps taken by the
Transitional Government and the 'Conseil
Electoral Provisoire' (CEP), the Council urges
them to perform the ten urgent tasks required to
ensure that elections will take place this year,
which were endorsed by the Transitional
Government on 17 September 2005 and reiterated
by the 'Core Group' on 18 October 2005. The
Council calls for effective and prompt decision-
making in key areas by the relevant Haitian
authorities, and urges the Haitian authorities to
make full use of MINUSTAH's advice and
assistance in the organization of elections. The
Council calls upon them to work with
MINUSTAH to develop a phased electoral plan as
a matter of priority, with a View to finalizing a
feasible electoral calendar. The Council also
urges the Haitian authorities to publish swiftly
the final list of candidates for the elections, and
to agree in consultation with MINUSTAH upon a
list of voting centres that ensures voter access and
takes into account budgetary, security and
logistical implications.

"The Security Council strongly supports the
mission's endeavours to ensure a secure and
stable environment in Haiti, which is crucial for
the country's progress, and to enable the electoral
process to take place. The Council recognizes
MINUSTAH's contribution to the restoration and
maintenance of the rule of law in the country, and
underlines the need for strong and coordinated
assistance to enable the reform and restructuring
of Haiti's rule of law institutions. To this end, the
Council urges the Transitional Government,
working with MINUSTAH, to put into effect the
initiatives called for in resolution 1608 (2005)
concerning the Haitian National Police (HNP)
reform and restructuring plan as well as the
reform of the judicial system, in order to end
impunity and ensure due process. The Council

welcomes the improvements in the security

situation, due to the resolve of MINUSTAH to act
in support of the Transitional Government. The
Council expresses concern regarding reports of
involvement of some officers of the HNP in
the

serious crimes and human rights Violations and
stresses the need to investigate fully any
allegations of serious crimes and human rights
violations. The Council welcomes the
deployment of MINUSTAH's additional military
and police personnel, in accordance with
resolution 1608 (2005), and expresses gratitude to
troop- and police-contributing countries.

"The Security Council reiterates the need
for the Transitional Government and MINUSTAH
to begin immediately effective implementation of
a DDR programme. The Council stresses the need
to implement high visibility quick-impact
projects that create jobs. The Council also
recognizes the need of maintaining stability in the
period immediately following the elections,
including through continued international
presence, and to ensure that key Haitian
institutions can function adequately, especially
those institutions addressing rule of law and
development. The Council recognizes the
importance of the upcoming Donor Conference to
be held in Brussels on 20 and 21 October, and
calls upon donors to continue to disburse the
pledged funds. The Council recognizes further
that this Conference constitutes an important
opportunity to further elaborate on short-,
medium- and long-term strategies, within a
unified framework, to ensure coordination and
continuity in a coherent and well prioritized
response to Haitian problems. Haiti is at a critical
juncture. While ultimately the responsibility for
Haiti's future lies with its Government and
people, the international community must
continue to provide support."

This statement will be issued as a document of
Security Council under the symbol

S/PRST/2005/50.

The Security Council has thus concluded the

present stage of its consideration of the item on the
agenda.

The meeting rose at 5.40 17.171.
