Mr. Vaultier Mathias (Portugal): Allow me
to congratulate the United Kingdom on convening
this timely debate. Portugal fully acknowledges the
importance of reconciliation in ensuring that peace
agreements take root, that conflict does not recur and
that the foundations are laid for sustainable peace. Our
contribution more directly to reconciliation processes
in East Timor and Angola provided valuable lessons.

Successful examples of reconciliation are present
on every continent. Some current Security Council
members have remarkable first-hand experience.
Yet, despite such successes, the forces of separation
and conflict continue to destroy families, tear apart
communities, destabilize States and spread insecurity.

Reconciliation rebuilds, or creates anew, the social,
economic and political projects that bind societies
together. As such, it cannot be an afterthought following
a peace agreement. It must be integrated into the policy
framework from the outset in any peace effort. The
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to
play through the development of integrated strategies
for post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery. Its
capacity to coordinate relevant actors, to ensure
catalytic funding through the Peacebuilding Fund and
to mobilize other appropriate financing must also be
seized and strengthened.

Reconciliation must rely on national appropriation,
with the involvement of the whole of society. Bringing
justice to individuals and communities affected by
conflict can play a central role in overcoming hatred
and in fostering recovery. Transitional justice tools,
such as truth commissions, independent fact-finding
missions and arbitration mechanisms, have proved to be
effective. We should learn from such best practices to
address the singularity of every post-conflict scenario.

The role of women in reconciliation merits
particular attention. Resolution 1325 (2000), on
women and peace and security, remains a milestone
in that regard. Portugal is now implementing its third
national action plan on implementing resolution 1325
(2000). We call on all Member States to develop their
own action plans, supporting the role of women in
peacebuilding, including reconciliation. To that same
end, we also participate in the Mediterranean Women
Mediators Network.

The role of young people, too, cannot be overstated.
Last June, Portugal organized in Lisbon the World
Conference of Ministers Responsible for Youth 2019
and Youth Forum Lisboa+21, which resulted in the
adoption of the Lisbon+21 Declaration on Youth
Policies and Programmes by both Governments and
youth representatives. That document acknowledges
young people's contribution to peace processes and
conflict prevention and resolution.

Allow me to end on this note of hope regarding
the imperative need to give voice to young people in
peace processes for, as much as reconciliation may be
a post-conflict necessity, through youth participation,
it also becomes a powerful tool for conflict prevention,
embodying our common goal of sustaining a future of
peace and security.

