Mr. Suescum (Panama) (spoke in Spanish): The
decision by the Belgian Government to introduce the
item of today's discussion to the international
community is an acknowledgment of the important
correlation that we frequently find between natural
resources and armed conflicts.

Abundance, while it is an important element for
peace and security, can also be a heavy burden if its
fruits are not invested in the future, or if States do not
ensure that its benefits belong to the people in general,
through the transparent regulation of political
counterweights and State institutions. The Council has
dealt with violent disputes where the exploitation of
resources has fuelled brutality and disregard for the

most basic human rights. But limiting oneself to
reaction alone does not fulfil the preventive
responsibility of the Council Vis-a-vis threats to
international peace and security. At an initial stage, it is
up to Governments to ensure participatory and
inclusive management of their natural wealth, for the
purpose of ensuring that ambition does not lead to
conflict. The Council must then cooperate with
Governments and promote their efforts to achieve
greater levels of transparency and responsibility and to
prevent situations in which families are uprooted from
their homes, millions of deaths occur and cruelty runs
rampant.

Through cooperation among non-governmental
organizations, the international community and private
enterprise, valuable initiatives have begun to reduce
the illegal trafficking of natural resources and to
normalize the actions of Governments and private
enterprise in the exploitation of mineral and natural
resources. For example, the Kimberley Process can
take pride in the fact that today 99 per cent of the
diamonds in circulation are conflict-free. That success
and others like it should encourage us to meet new
challenges.

Unfortunately, instruments such as the Kimberley
Process are voluntary commitments, and there is a real
danger that their implementation will not be made a
priority. But that should not prevent the international
community from using mechanisms such as the
Peacebuilding Commission to be more active in
promoting greater monitoring and transparency and to
monitor the actions of public and private actors. The
lessons drawn from recent initiatives to minimize the
transfer of resources in conflicts involve identifying
ways and means to reinforce those initiatives in a
context appropriate for the Council.

One controversial point involves the disregard of
sanctions imposed by the Council. Although progress
has been made in drafting so-called targeted sanctions,
we need to consider what actions might be devised for
those who violate those provisions. We could then, as
our countries declared in 1945 when signing the United
Nations Charter, promote "social progress and better
standards of life in larger freedom".

