Mrs. Rubiales de Chamorro (Nicaragua) (spoke in Spanish): Nicaragua commends the Russian presidency
for its leadership and excellent stewardship of the
Security Council this month. We also congratulate the
Russian team for the hard work it has carried out in the
Council, which is facing major challenges, such as the

subject we are addressing today - the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question.

Nicaragua acknowledges the tireless strength
and leadership shown by the Russian Federation in
solidarity with the people of the Middle East, and the
Russian initiative to convene a meeting in Moscow
between the Palestinian and Israeli authorities to
promote dialogue and seek a peaceful solution to the
conflict. We welcome the initiative, as we believe that
only dialogue and negotiation will allow us to find ajust
and lasting solution. We also welcome the Arab Peace
Initiative and other initiatives, such as those of France
and Egypt, aimed at putting an end to the suffering of
the Palestinian people and at restoring Palestine's right
to be a sovereign State, within the 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital, which would enable the
two States - Palestine and Israel 4 to coexist in peace,
harmony and prosperity.

Nicaragua aligns itself with the statement made
by the Permanent Representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries and with the statement to be
delivered by the representative of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. Allow me to quote the words of our President,
Commander Daniel Ortega, who spoke about peace
and dialogue after the passing of the Israeli leader
Mr. Shimon Peres. He said,

"From peaceful Nicaragua, we greet the
people of Israel at this time of the passing of their
leader Shimon Peres. We remember him from
various occasions and meetings of international
organizations, when we were able to appreciate his
gifts as a profound statesmen and a man of dialogue.
Shimon Peres made his whole life a dream, a
personal dream that was not always understood,
but a dream that lived on until the end of his days,
promoting ideas for a world that required dialogue."

We welcome the initiative of the Palestinian leaders
to declare 2017 as the year that will see an end of the
Israeli occupation of Palestine. For more than five
decades ,we have condemned Israel's illegal occupation
and its expansionist policies, which undermine efforts
to convene a dialogue aimed at achieving peace, a
peace that would greatly benefit the Palestinian people,
the Israeli people and the region as a whole. It is crucial
to put an end to the occupation immediately through
dialogue and negotiation.
In the light of all of Israel's actions, impunity
and the ongoing occupation are holding the Council
hostage, impeding a two-State solution through the use
and abuse of the veto, and perpetuating the suffering of
the Palestinian people in its occupied territories and of
the more than 5.5 million Palestinian refugees around
the world. The Council has been unable to take action
and demand that Israel put an end to the occupation
of the Palestinian territory and other occupied Arab
territories, that it immediately halt the construction of
settlements, that it put an end to the criminal blockade
of Gaza and its 2 million inhabitants, and that it release
all political prisoners.

At this time, when we must urgently implement
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, Palestine
must be able to exercise its right to development and to
achieve those Goals. Under occupation, Palestine is not
growing and it is not developing. On the contrary, Israel
is growing and developing and taking over the natural
resources and the export revenue of goods produced in
the Palestinian territory, as well as appropriating for
itself the customs duties and international assistance
and remittances directed to the Palestinian people,
adversely impacting the Palestinian economy and,
consequently, the well-being and the future of its young
people, women and children. We would like to highlight
the report of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development on the impact and economic cost of
the occupation, which we hope will be accounted for
and restored in its totality.

To conclude, we reiterate that peace in the Middle
East means resolving the Palestinian question and the
withdrawal of Israel from Lebanon, from the Syrian
Golan and from all of the occupied Arab territories.
It is also crucial to put an end to foreign interference
and intervention in the region, so that we can finally
achieve a Middle East of peace and security for both the
Arab and Israeli peoples.

