Mr. De Laiglesia (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
appreciate this opportunity for my delegation to
participate in this open debate on the activities
undertaken by the three Security Council Committees
involved in the fight against terrorism. In that regard, I
associate myself fully with the statement to be made
later by the representative of the delegation of the
European Union.

Terrorism is an aggressive, ever-changing
phenomenon that requires us to continue to promote
and strengthen cooperation at every level, with no
room for complacency. We must be able to face new
threats such as terrorism's growing links with
international organized crime and illegal trafficking,
the risk of nuclear terrorism and cyberterrorism.

Unilateral or improvised solutions are not a valid
alternative; a legitimate and systematic perspective
based on international cooperation is required. We can
congratulate ourselves for having contributed to the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the
relevant Security Council resolutions and the
international legal instruments in force.

The United Nations system has been carrying out
important work in the fight against terrorism and
should continue to play a significant role as the
guarantor of international law. We believe that the
Security Council's work should be carried out in
complementarity with the efforts of the General
Assembly, as the forum in which the responses of the
international community to the global problems of our
time should be addressed.

I should like to reiterate the firm commitment of
Spain to the fight against all forms of terrorism,
whatever its motivations or manifestations, and my
Government's wish that this undertaking have ongoing
priority in the context of the agenda of the United
Nations.

I should like also to reiterate our full support for
the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations, which
during its six years of existence has become an
instrument of preventive diplomacy with political,
social, judicial, economic, religious, media and
security dimensions, as well as in the area of
intercultural dialogue. Political and moral reasons
should influence us in providing assistance and support
to victims of terrorism. The convening by the
Secretary-General of a new symposium in support of
victims of terrorism, as a continuation of the one held
in 2008, would be greatly appreciated by Spain.

I would like to thank the Chairs of the Security
Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267
(1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) for the information provided and for the work
that they have carried out together with their respective
expert groups.

First, Spain would like to highlight the work of
the 1267 Committee. We value its efforts to increase
the transparency of the review and updating of the
names of persons and entities on the consolidated list
to the sanctions regime. The Council's adoption of
resolution 1989 (2011) led to an improvement of the
Committee's proceedings and the quality of the list. We
underscore the need to continue to ensure the
impartiality and transparency of those proceedings and
the important role of the Ombudsperson in improving
that impartiality and transparency. We also wish to
emphasize the important work of the Monitoring Team
of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), and we welcome
the extension of its mandate for another 18 months.

Spain also wishes to highlight the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive
Directorate (CTED) to monitor compliance with
resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005) and 1963 (2010)
and to facilitate technical assistance to countries that
request it. The work of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee and its Executive Directorate in the past
10 years has been of great importance in promoting
and monitoring compliance with resolutions 1373
(2001) and 1624 (2005). The efforts of CTED to meet
its mandate should be commended. Convinced of the
great value of its contributions, we consider it desirable
to reinforce its human and material capacities in order
to have a stronger direct presence and assistance on the
ground in recipient countries.

The adoption of resolution 1963 (2010), which
extended the mandate of the Executive Directorate,
will increase its participation in the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and
make it the great facilitator of technical assistance to
strengthen the capacities of States, thereby
strengthening the desired coordination in the fight
against terrorism.

The proliferation and possession of weapons of
mass destruction by non-State actors or by States on
the margins or in violation of international legality are
serious threats to international peace and security. We
therefore express our support for the efforts of the 1540
Committee to draw up mechanisms to monitor the
implementation of that resolution and to work to
extend its universal application. Spain welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 1977 (2011), which
extends and strengthens the mandate of that Committee
in the vital context of Member States' full and strict
compliance with their obligations and commitments in
relation to arms control, disarmament and the
non-proliferation in all its aspects of all weapons of
mass destruction and their delivery systems.

Allow me to underscore the importance of the
framework's entities that answer to the Security
Council and those under the Secretariat, and more
closely linked to the General Assembly, maintaining
sufficiently flexibility and coordination to enable a
consistent, complementary and integrated action in our
efforts to eradicate terrorism. We are ready to continue
the necessary consideration and discussions to further
improve the framework that we have established.

I conclude by expressing my appreciation for the
efforts of the three Committees to improve the
effectiveness of their work. The increasing awareness
of the need to respect the rights of individuals in all
measures is also encouraging. With that essential
respect for human rights, the international community
must demonstrate its strong determination to confront
the barbarity of terrorism.

