Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): Allow
me to begin by congratulating you, Sir, and your
delegation on the beginning of your mandate and the
assumption of your presidency of the Security Council.
I also warmly welcome the new Secretary-General
to this debate and thank him for sharing his visions
and thoughts.

I also associate my delegation with the statement
delivered by the representative of Venezuela on behalf
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

Despite its limited success in decreasing the
number of wars among nations, the United Nations
is yet to have any success in harnessing the violence
and extremism perpetrated by non-State actors within
nations and across international borders, especially
those that resort to the most barbaric forms of violence
and shamelessly glorify it. A cursory look at the list of
issues that the Council has dealt with in the past few
years shows that it is increasingly overwhelmed with
internal conflicts and the criminal acts of terrorist
and extremist non-State actors, including cross-border
terrorist activities, the recruitment of foreign terrorists
fighters planning terrorist acts in various countries and
transnational organized crime, among others.

What we need to do now is to focus increasingly
on preventing and suppressing this new scourge that
the United Nations was not originally established and
designed to deal with. A deeper analysis of the political
environment reveals that aggression is still one of the
major causes that lie at the root of the violent extremism
that we are currently facing. The occupation of
Palestinian territory by the Israeli regime, which is the
result ofIsraeli aggression, lies at the core ofthe ongoing
tension and anger in the Middle East. The United States
aggression against Iraq in 2003 is one of the major
causes that radicalized groups and individuals across
and beyond the region. The same applies to Syria and
Yemen, where foreign intervention and aggression have
damaged the prospects for international cooperation
aimed at fighting terrorist and extremist groups, while
putting an end to the prospects for peace. Although we
have acquired some historical distance from the age of
nations fighting among themselves, the United Nations
should remain adamant in preventing aggression,
which is one of the root causes of the new emerging
threats. That mission is enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. There is still an obvious linkage
between aggression in the classic sense of the word and
the eruption of violence and other threats on the part of
non-State actors.

Apart from aggression, extremist, takfiri and
xenophobic ideologies, which are simultaneously on
the rise in the East and West, constitute another root
cause of the violence that is currently engulfing some
parts of the world. The ideologues and preachers
who spread hatred towards others are at the heart of
all of the resulting atrocities. It is imperative that the
United Nations encourage all Member States to cut
off access to groups and those who preach hate from
public platforms, and take a proactive role in ensuring
that civilization and intercultural and interfaith
dialogue and understanding are encouraged, promoted
and protected.

Undoubtedly, there are a number of other important
factors that create fertile ground for the spread of
violence - factors that we have to deal with seriously
if we wish to prevent more conflicts and make peace
sustainable. They include, but are by no means limited
to, injustice, discrimination, poverty, underdevelopment
and corruption, as well as economic factors,
environmental degradation, water- and land-related
issues and cultural deprivation and marginalization.

