Mr. Esono Mbengono (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Special Coordinator Nickolay
Mladenov for his excellent briefing. We would also like
to pay tribute to the major efforts that he and his team
are carrying out in the region.

We are quickly approaching the end of 2018, a year
in which we have had several occasions to address this
important issue, which we believe is still of enormous
importance to all of us, considering that it is a focus of
the media, an issue of concern to the entire international
community and a decisive factor in the stability of the
region.

The Republic of Equatorial Guinea is extremely
concerned about the incidents in recent weeks in the
Palestinian enclave of Gaza involving hostile exchanges
between the Israeli army and Hamas militants, which
have led to the loss of human lives and caused many
injuries and extensive material damage. In that regard,
we call on the parties to refrain from unilateral actions
and provocations and emphasize that any incitement to
violence must be condemned.

Since it began, this conflict has caused enormous
damage to the parties, many measures have been taken
to prevent it and find a solution, and massive amounts of
money have been spent. But the reality is that the results
achieved so far have shown us that while much has been
done, it has not been enough to find a solution to the sad
coexistence of Israelis and Palestinians. Palestinians'
lives are becoming increasingly miserable, unstable and
insecure, while for its part Israel cannot easily ensure its
people's security, owing to the border activity between
Palestine and its settlers - and all those factors and
more have created an atmosphere of detachment and
insecurity in the countries of the region.
Despite the Council's efforts over the seven decades
it has spent considering this issue, the pain and sorrow
ofthe conflicting parties have continued to grow. In that
regard, we regret that the moments in the history of the
situation that gave hope to the whole world have been
nothing but a waste of paper. However, we still believe
that it is vital and urgent to continue coordinating our
efforts aimed to find a diplomatic way to encourage the
parties to return to the negotiating table. We believe
that ensuring that all Council members are united on the
issue is crucial in that regard, considering the influence
and strategic importance of some of its members in the
world generally and the Middle East in particular.

For its part, Equatorial Guinea would like to
reaffirm its position, based on the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and the General Assembly, the
Arab Peace Initiative, the Madrid peace principles,
the Quartet road map and other instruments, that the
Palestinian claims are just and that Israel has the right
to live in peace and security. We therefore reiterate
our support for a two-State solution based on the
1967 borders, with Jerusalem as its capital, based on
negotiations between the parties that ensure the two
States' safe and peaceful coexistence and harmony
with the other States of the region.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our call
concerning the importance of continuing to work for
intra-Palestinian reconciliation, bearing in mind that
the exchange of accusations of non-compliance with the
commitments in the reconciliation agreement signed in
October last year between Hamas and Fatah has called
into question its consideration and implementation.
However, we hope that the efforts initiated by Egypt
and other international partners will achieve the desired
results. Lastly, we are grateful for the statements
that various countries have made in recent months in
support of the United Nations Relief and Works Agency
for Palestine Refugees in the Near East urging other
States to join in that gesture of solidarity.

