Mr. Pankin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We thank Mr. De Mistura for his analysis of
the situation in Afghanistan and welcome the statement
of the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Afghanistan,
Mr. Zalmai Rassoul. Allow me through him, to express
our deep condolences to the Government and the
people of Afghanistan for the killing on 20 September
of the Chairman of the High Peace Council and former
President Burhanuddin Rabbani. His death reaffirms
the need to further enhance international efforts to
counter terrorism, which remains the primary
impediment to restoring peace and stability in
Afghanistan.

I should like to say a few words on the security
situation in the country. As we see it, the situation in
many provinces continues to worsen. Extremists are
expanding their activities. The number of killings and
abductions of Afghan Government workers and simple
citizens continues to grow, as eloquently expressed in
the data provided in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2011/590). The elimination of Osama Bin Laden has
not led to the anticipated breakthrough, as we see have
in particular in the latest spate of terrible terrorist
attacks and killings of senior Afghan officials, in the
ongoing tensions in Pakistan, and in the increase in
losses of coalition and Afghan troops.

The situation is alarming in areas where
responsibilities for security have been handed over to
Afghans themselves, despite the fact that troops of
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), as we
understand it, are still there and supporting them and
their combat readiness.

There is particular concern about spillover of
terrorist activities from Afghanistan into the Central
Asian States as a consequence of the inefficacy of
NATO's anti-terrorist activities in Afghanistan, which
are not eliminating the fighters but pushing them
primarily from the southern to the northern regions and
neighbouring States.

We share the concerns of the Secretary-General
with respect to the death of peaceful citizens as a result
of indiscriminate or disproportionate use of force by
those involved in hostilities. Responsibility for strict
compliance with the standards of international
humanitarian law is borne by all parties, including
ISAF.

Obviously, Afghan problems cannot be resolved
by military means alone. In this regard, we support the
efforts of the Government of Afghanistan to establish a
dialogue with the armed opposition. That process must
be steered by the Afghans, and the insurgents will need
to meet three well-known conditions: recognition of
the Constitution, breaking with Al-Qaida and other
terrorist and extremist organizations, and disarmament.
Meeting these criteria is a necessary condition for de-
listing from the Taliban sanctions list, but no one can
deny the need for the effective maintenance of the
Council's sanctions as a crucial instrument in counter-
terrorism.

Terrorism is closely intertwined with drug crime.
Drugs are destroying Afghanistan and posing a serious
threat to countries of the region and to international
peace and stability. We have said repeatedly that the
drug threat needs to be comprehensively countered
with respect to all of its components, from destroying
drug crops and reducing consumption to denying
druglords access to precursors and putting them on
sanctions lists.

In this context, we attach particular importance to
the Paris Pact's Third Ministerial Conference on Drug
Trafficking Routes to be held in Vienna in 8 December.
We hope that the countries represented here will take
part in that conference at the level of heads of foreign
policy institutions.

We welcome the beginning of transfer of security
responsibility to the Afghans. It is too early to draw
any conclusions, but the very fact that this
responsibility is being transferred is critical. We need
to focus on making the process irreversible.

The declared reduction of the number of United
States troops and the gradual transfer to Afghan
security forces of full responsibility for ensuring
security must go hand in hand with appropriate
strengthening of the capabilities of these national
structures. As we see it, candidates for the army and
the police must be closely vetted for loyalty; the
quality of training for security forces must be enhanced
and they must be provided with modern weapons.

The international military presence must be
temporary. A clear timetable must be defined for
drawdown and reports sent to the Security Council on
the implementation of the mandate, which authorized
the deployment of ISAF. The departure of NATO
contingents and their allies should not be accompanied
by the maintenance of any foreign military presence
under any other umbrella, which would further
contribute to tensions in the military and political
situation in Afghanistan and the region in general.

After the withdrawal of foreign troops, it would
behoove Afghanistan, as a founder of the Non-Aligned
Movement, to consider restoring the status as a neutral
State which it had for many decades. That idea has
already been supported in the statements of a number
of key players in the Afghan arena, and in the Astana
Declaration issued on the occasion of the tenth
anniversary of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization
on 15 June. Clearly, the initiative is up to the Afghan
people themselves. It is not a matter for the near future,
but for a time when the stabilization efforts in
Afghanistan will have been successfully completed.
But if Kabul already begins to identify the restoration
of neutrality as a task for the long term, it could ease
dialogue on reconciliation with the armed opposition.
Many have noted and we support the idea that
there is a need to promptly relaunch the Afghan
economy. That cannot be done without neighbouring
States, as clearly attested to by the recent spate of
regional initiatives that have been referred to here and
which will be discussed at the forthcoming
Conferences in Istanbul and Bonn.

An architecture of multilateral engagement in
place in Central and South Asia, including the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization, the group of four comprised
of the Russian Federation, Afghanistan, Pakistan and
Tajikistan. It would make sense to focus partners'
efforts on developing and enhancing these well-proven
structures of regional cooperation. Our view is that the
players external to the region, in their actions in this
area, should in fact respect the decisions taken by the
countries of the region in the framework of these
organizations.

In the context of regional economic development,
we give priority to the CASA-IOOO project, which
established a new system of providing electricity from
Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to Afghanistan and Pakistan,
and to building the TAPI gas pipeline through
Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan and India. We
reaffirm our readiness to engage Russian companies in
its implementation. At the recent summit of the four at
Dushanbe in early September, President Medvedev of
the Russian Federation stated our readiness to invest
$500 million in the CASA-lOOO project.

In short, this entire range of problems
demonstrates the magnitude of the challenges facing
the international community, specifically the United
Nations Mission, in assisting and normalizing the
situation in Afghanistan. We hope that the close
cooperation of the United Nations with the
Government of Afghanistan will continue to move
forward and that the assiduous efforts of the
international community and the Government of
Afghanistan will be successful.

