Mr. Castaneda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): Let me begin by thanking you, Madam
President, and the delegation of the Kingdom of the
Netherlands for convening this open debate. We are
also grateful for the concept note (S/2018/184, annex)
that serves as the basis for our deliberations.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries and the statement
to be delivered by the representative of Italy on behalf
ofthe Group of Friends of the Responsibility to Protect.

We believe in the importance of creating spaces
to discuss ways to improve the participation of all
actors in support of the Organization's peacekeeping
operations with the understanding that this is a shared
responsibility and a strategic multilateral partnership,
especially with regard to the host States, with the
support of the Secretariat, regional organizations, the
Security Council and Member States. The latter include,
of course, troop- and police-contributing countries.

Furthermore, this open debate is quite timely,
as we are witnessing an increase in attacks on staff
of peacekeeping operations in various missions. In
following up, my delegation takes note of the report
of Lieutenant General Santos Cruz as a response
to the five most lethal years for the Organization's
peacekeeping soldiers and police officers. The report's
recommendations include, inter alia, instituting a
much more robust military response to armed threats,
including an eventual willingness to attack first and
confront the attackers where they lurk, rather than
waiting behind the walls of peacekeeping bases.

With regard to robust responses, Guatemala
reaffirms its position that the use of force must always
be the last resort, especially when acting on behalf ofthe
United Nations. While we fully understand the reasons
why mandates calling for more robust operations have
been developed, especially when the protection of
civilians is at stake, it is our view that such action under
the aegis of the United Nations should be carefully
considered by the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations in order to analyse its scope.

It is essential for the Security Council to be clear
that one of its main responsibilities is to provide
peacekeeping operations with realistic mandates.
Given the reality on the ground, some mandates are not
always adapted to the specific context of the mission in
question and, in some cases, are not entirely obtainable.
To achieve the desired impact, the Security Council
could carry out a better analysis of the situation on the
ground and set objectives that can be met.

With regard to host countries, the Council has a key
role to play. Regrettably, the international community
has witnessed situations where host countries go back
on their agreements or violate international law and
international humanitarian law. That is unacceptable
by any standards.

In conclusion, we should recall that one of the
most powerful preventive tools is early involvement
on the part of the Security Council. In that regard, in
addition to the information provided by the Secretariat,
the reports of the Peacebuilding Commission could be
a useful tool. We have seen that when the Council is
decisive and united, it not only sends an unambiguous
political message, it can also make use of the resources
at its disposal to prevent specific situations on the
ground from deteriorating further.

