Mr. Gunnarsson (Iceland): Allow me first to
thank the presidency of Peru for having convened
this quarterly meeting on the Middle East, including
the Palestinian question. I would also like to thank
Mr. Mladenov for his comprehensive and thoughtful
briefing this morning.

Allow me also to join other speakers in expressing
my condolences to the people and the Government of
Cote d'Ivoire for the untimely passing of our colleague,
Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue.

Syria and Yemen cast a dark shadow over the Middle
East region and over the United Nations, particularly
the Security Council. Speaking about the eight years
of war in Syria, the Secretary-General referred to the
systematic violations of international humanitarian
law and international human rights law and the utter
disregard for the letter and spirit of the Charter of the
United Nations.

The use of chemical weapons by the Syrian
Government is well documented and constitutes one
of the most serious violations of international law. The
latest shocking reports from Douma have yet to be fully
investigated. However, the Syrian Government has
already demonstrated the will and the ability to use such
cruel and illegal weapons against civilian populations.
We urge the Security Council to find unity on the issue,
not only for the sake of the Syrians but also in order to
preserve the international non-proliferation regime.

The General Assembly again finds itself in a
position where it needs to look for alternatives to action
by the Security Council. The Council is not fulfilling
its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security.

Iceland applauds the commitments made in
Brussels earlier this week to alleviate the dire
humanitarian situation in Syria and in its neighbours.
Iceland has increased its funding through a multi-year
contribution. It will have contributed nearly $9 million
over the period from 2017 to 2020.

The parties to the conflict, in particular the
Syrian Government and its backers, must show a
real commitment to negotiating an inclusive political
settlement. The Secretary-General has said that peace
is a moral and political imperative for the Syrian people
and for the world.

What the Secretary-General has called a stupid war
continues to devastate the lives of millions of Yemenis.
We welcome the appointment of Mr. Martin Griffiths as
the Secretary-General's Special Envoy on Yemen. His
clear analysis offers some hope for progress on finding
a political solution. However, the search for a political
settlement must be inclusive, including of women, and
outside actors must not sabotage talks in the mistaken
hope of achieving a military advantage.

On the Israel-Palestine question, there is a clear
objective - the two-State solution, under which both
Israel and Palestine will live side by side in peace. Yet
there are actions and inaction on both sides that make
the two-State solution increasingly fragile.

The Israeli settlement policy continues to
undermine the possibility of the two-State solution and
Gaza remains a powder keg. If that situation is to be
defused, Israel must end the isolation of Gaza and adopt

proportionate measures in the face of civil unrest. There
must also be an end to provocative acts by Palestinians
in Gaza.

Finally, a peace process needs to be put on track.
There needs to be a viable peace track.

