Mrs. Haley (United States of America): I have
been the proud representative of the United States at
the United Nations for nearly a year now. This is the
first time I have exercised the American right to veto
a draft resolution in the Security Council. The exercise
of the veto is not something that the United States
does often. We have not done it in more than six years.
We do it with no joy, but we do it with no reluctance.
The fact that this veto has been exercised in defence
of American sovereignty and in defence of America's
role in the Middle East peace process is not a source of
embarrassment for us. It should be an embarrassment to
the remainder of the Security Council.

As I did when we discussed this topic 10 days ago
(see S/PV.8128), I will once again note the features
of the President's announcement on Jerusalem that
are most relevant here. The President took great care
not to prejudge final-status negotiations in any way,
including the specific boundaries of Israeli sovereignty
in Jerusalem, which remains a subject to be negotiated
only by the parties. The position is fully in line with
previous Security Council resolutions on this item. The
President was also careful to state that we support the
status quo regarding Jerusalem's holy sites and that we
support a two-State solution if that is what the parties
agree to. Again, those positions are fully consistent
with previous Security Council resolutions. It is highly
regrettable that some are trying to distort the President's
position to serve their own agendas.

What is troubling to some people is not that the
United States has harmed the peace process. We have,
in fact, done no such thing. Rather, what is troubling to
some people is that the United States had the courage
and honesty to recognize a fundamental reality.
Jerusalem has been the political, cultural and spiritual
homeland of the Jewish people for thousands of years.
They have had no other capital city, but the United States
recognition of the obvious * that Jerusalem is the
capital and seat of the modern Israeli Government - is
too much for some.

First, some have threatened violence on the street,
as if violence would somehow improve the prospects
for peace. Now today, buried in diplomatic jargon, some
presume to tell America where to put our embassy. The
United States has a sovereign right to determine where
and whether we establish an embassy. I suspect that very
few Member States would welcome Security Council
pronouncements about their sovereign decisions, and I
can think of some that should fear it.

It is worth noting that this is not a new American
position. Back in 1980, when Jimmy Carter was the
American President, the Security Council voted on
resolution 478 (1980), which called upon diplomatic
missions to relocate from Jerusalem. The United States
did not support resolution 478 (1980). In his remarks, the
then Secretary of State Ed Muskie said the following:
"The draft resolution before us today is
illustrative of a preoccupation which has produced
this series of unbalanced and unrealistic texts on
Middle East issues" (S/PV2245, para. 106).

Specifically regarding the provision on diplomatic
missions in Jerusalem, Secretary Muskie said

"In our judgement this provision is not binding. It
is without force. And we reject it as a disruptive
attempt to dictate to other nations. It does nothing
to promote a resolution of the difficult problems
facing Israel and its neighbours. It does nothing to
advance the cause of peace." (ibid., para. 111)

That was true in 1980, and it is equally true today. The
United States will not be told by any country where we
can put our embassy.

Buried even deeper in the jargon of the draft
resolution is the accusation that the United States
is setting back the prospects of peace in the Middle
East. That is a scandalous charge. Those who are
making it should consider that it only harms the very
Palestinian people they claim to speak for. What does
it gain the Palestinian people for their leaders to throw
up roadblocks to negotiations? A peace process that
is damaged by the simple recognition that Jerusalem
is the capital of Israel is not a peace process; it is a
justification for an endless stalemate. What does it
gain the Palestinian people for some of their leaders to
accuse the United States of being hostile to the cause of
peace? It gains them nothing, but it risks costing them
a great deal.

The United States has done more by far than any
other country to assist the Palestinian people. Since
1994, we have given over $5 billion to the Palestinians
in bilateral economic assistance, security assistance
and humanitarian assistance. The United Nations Relief
and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near
East (UNRWA) operates schools and medical facilities
throughout the region. It is funded almost entirely by
voluntary contributions. Last year, the United States
voluntarily funded almost 30 per cent of the UNRWA
budget; that is more than the next two largest donors
combined. It is vastly more than some ofthe members of
the Council that have considerable financial resources
of their own.

I will be blunt. When the American people see
a group of countries whose total contributions to the
Palestinian people is less than 1 per cent ofthe UNRWA
budget, and when they see those countries accuse the
United States of being insufficiently committed to
peace, the American people lose their patience. I have
been to the Palestinian refugee camps that the United
States supports with its contributions. I have met with
men, women and children there; I have advocated
on their behalf. I can say that their leaders do them
no favours by being more open to abandoning peace
negotiations than to doing the hard work of seeing
them to completion. The United States has never been
more committed to peace in the Middle East. We were
committed to it before the President announced our
recognition of Jerusalem as the capital ofIsrael, and we
are committed to it today.

What we witnessed today in the Security Council is
an insult. It will not be forgotten. It is one more example
of the United Nations doing more harm than good in
addressing the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Today, for
the simple act of deciding where to put its embassy, the
United States was forced to defend its sovereignty. The
record will reflect that we did so proudly. Today, for
acknowledging a basic truth about the capital city of
Israel, we are accused of harming peace. The record
will reflect that we reject that outrageous claim.

For these reasons, and with the best interest of both
the Israeli and the Palestinian people firmly in mind,
the United States voted no on this draft resolution.

