Mr. Messone (Gabon) (spoke in French): My
delegation has listened attentively to the briefing on
the Secretary-General's report (S/2011/514) on the
issue under discussion, We would like to thank the
Secretary-General for the report, as well as Mr. Farid
Zarif, his Acting Special Representative in Kosovo. We
also wish to take this opportunity to thank and
congratulate Mr. Lamberto Zannier for his excellent
work during his tenure.

Like other delegations, we welcome the presence
at his meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremic', Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and of Mr. Enver Hoxhaj.

In examining the situation in Kosovo, we note
some positive developments in the political dialogue
between Belgrade and Pristina during the period
covered by the report, and a security situation that is
relatively calm but fragile, with an increase in tension
towards the end of the period.

Before going into details, my delegation would
like to recall the following points. Gabon underscores
the need to respect international law and believes in the
importance of dialogue and negotiations between the
parties to reach a lasting solution. We hope that the
parties will abstain from unilateral actions outside the
framework of negotiations to which they have
committed, which action could create tensions. In this
regard, we naturally condemn all unilateral acts of
Violence committed by either party.

It is because of these factors that my country
continues to support the efforts of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
to implement the mandates of resolution 1244 (1999)
and welcomes its cooperation on the ground, especially
with the European Union Rule of Law Mission, the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and KFOR, aimed at building on efforts to maintain
peace and stability in the region.

We therefore welcome the first political steps
forward in Kosovo, in reaching agreements on freedom
of movement, civil registry and university diplomas.
We encourage both parties to wholeheartedly set about
putting them into practice.

We are also pleased that the Working Group on
Missing Persons has resumed meetings after a year's
hiatus because of internal political events in Kosovo.
That humanitarian issue is crucial to reconciliation in
Kosovo and in the region. Like other delegations, we
of course welcome the establishment of the task force
on missing persons and trafficking in organs, and we
hope that task force will carry out its investigation in a
transparent and independent manner.

Direct negotiations between Belgrade and
Pristina on living standards in Kosovo and on technical
peace and stability issues in the Balkans - which had
resumed last March in Brussels under the auspices of
the European Union - have sadly come to another halt
because of resurgent tensions in northern Kosovo.
Those negotiations must resume, and the issue of
northern Kosovo will obviously be a high priority.

In our last intervention in the Council on this
topic, my delegation, like others, expressed its regret at
renewed tensions. Today we once again call on all
parties to refrain from provocative acts that could
aggravate tensions and to adopt a constructive and
moderate attitude to create an atmosphere conducive to
dialogue. The distorting effect of a commercial
embargo on the products of each neighbouring region
in conflict is counterproductive and even sets the
negotiations back.

To conclude, in the interest of a peaceful
resolution of the question of Kosovo, Gabon calls on
all parties to be calm and to engage in a good faith in
direct dialogue, without which issues of common
interest will remain unresolved. My delegation hopes
to see the negotiations renewed under the auspices of
the European Union and the United Nations, and
success in the next round of talks due in September.

