Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like, at the outset, to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I would also like to extend
our thanks to Ambassador Ismael Gaspar Martins,
Permanent Representative of Angola, for his prudent
presidency of the Council last month.

Egypt welcomes the resolution just adopted by the
Council today on the situation in Burundi (resolution 2279 (2016)), which comes as a result of constructive
consultations that reflect the great importance accorded
by all members ofthe Council to the situation in Burundi
and their desire to find the best ways to help Burundi
overcome the humanitarian and security difficulties it
faces. The resolution is based on the constructive efforts
undertaken by the Government of Burundi to improve
the conditions on the ground as well as those undertaken
by many international and regional partners over the
past few months. Those efforts were reflected in the
important visits undertaken by the Secretary-General,
the high-level delegation of the African Union and the
Burundi country configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, as well as the prior visit undertaken by
members of the Security Council in January.

Egypt welcomes the resolution as an important
step that will bolster the efforts of the United Nations
and regional partners to reach a political solution to
the crisis. The mediation role played by the African
Union and the East African Community with a view to
launching a serious and inclusive dialogue in Burundi
has strengthened the foundational work of the United
Nations and regional partners together with that of
the Burundian authorities and national stakeholders
designed to foster a national dialogue that would
address the challenges facing Burundi in the areas of
security and the rule of law.

In conclusion, Egypt would like to express its wish
to continue working with other members of the Council
to enforce resolution 2279 (2016) and build on it through
further efforts by the United Nations with a view to
overcoming the current challenges and difficulties
and returning to the pursuit of development and the
promotion of peace in cooperation with Burundi's
bilateral, regional and international partners.

