Mr. Salam (Lebanon): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of August and to
express my deep appreciation to your predecessor, the
Permanent Representative of China and his delegation,
for their stewardship and wisdom while conducting last
month's work. I also wish to thank Mr. Michael
Williams for his comprehensive briefing and express
our regrets for his departure. My delegation wishes
Mr. Williams all the best in his future endeavours and
sincerely hope that he will continue his efforts to help
resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict, which remains at the
core of the increasingly complex Middle East crisis.

Once again, we meet with this distinguished
Council to revisit the situation in my part of the world,
where legitimate hopes for a just and durable peace are
being crushed and shattered. Aware that this requires
bold steps and painful sacrifices, the Arab leaders who
met in 2002 in Beirut adopted, as you know, Sir, a
peace initiative based on Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and on the principle of land
for peace. In exchange for full Israeli withdrawal from
all Arab territories occupied in June 1967 and for
Israel's acceptance of an independent and sovereign
Palestinian State to be established in the West Bank
and Gaza, along with the achievement of a just solution
to the Palestinian refugee problem to be agreed upon
pursuant to relevant United Nations resolutions, the
Arab heads of State offered in this historic initiative: to
consider the Arab-Israeli conflict as having ended; to
enter into a peace agreement with Israel; to establish -
in the context of such a comprehensive peace -
normal relations with Israel; and, to ensure that
security is provided for all the States in the region.

The 2007 Arab Summit recently held in Riyadh
not only renewed the Arab commitment to this peace
strategy, but also chose to reinvigorate it through the
formation of a follow-up committee entrusted with the
task of engaging all concerned parties. Regrettably,
however, this offer has still not been met on the Israeli
side by a partner capable of truly rising to the
challenge of peace. This has increased the
responsibility of the international community not to let
this opportunity for peace be missed.
In this regard, while welcoming the 17 July
proposal of United States President George Bush to
hold an international meeting in the coming fall to
address the Middle East conflict, we would like to
emphasize that any unwarranted conditionality may
jeopardize the desired outcome of such a laudable
effort.

On 24 August, the Council adopted unanimously
resolution 1773 (2007) to extend the mandate of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) for
another year. Although the renewal was meant to
remain technical, the political message was no less
clear: the Security Council reaffirmed

in

its strong commitment to the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and the political independence
of Lebanon within its internationally recognized
borders and under the sole and exclusive
authority of its Government." (resolution 1733 (2007), fourth preambular paragraph)

The Council also reaffirmed its "attachment to the full
implementation of all provisions of resolution 1701 of
August 2006."

Similarly, my Government remains entirely
committed to the full implementation of resolution
1701 (2006), one year after its adoption. In relation to
this issue, allow me to draw your attention to the
following highly alarming facts:

While my Government welcomed the
appointment by the Secretary-General of a facilitator in
the matter of the abducted Israeli soldiers, Israel
continues to refuse to solve the longstanding issue of
the Lebanese detainees who have been aging in Israeli
prisons for decades now. We call for and expect their
immediate release.

Israel continues its violation of Lebanese airspace
in blatant and flagrant violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and of Lebanese sovereignty. The Secretary-
General, in his latest interim report on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), observed
that

"These violations occur on an almost daily basis
frequently numbering between 15 and 20 and
have even reached 32 overflights in a single day."
(8/2007/392, para. 16)

These overflights, in the words of the Secretary-
General, "not only constitute repeated violations" of
resolution 1701 (2006) and of other relevant Security
Council resolutions, but

"also undermine the credibility of both UNIFIL
and the Lebanese Armed Forces in the eyes of the
local population, and negatively affect efforts to
stabilize the situation on the ground." (ibid.)
After such clear words by the Secretary-General, I feel
no need at this time to add a single letter in rebuttal of
any contrary fallacious arguments on the matter. Allow
me, however, to call for an immediate halt to these
violations and for the full respect of Lebanese
sovereignty.

The continued Israeli occupation of the Sheb'a
farms constitutes a violation of Security Council
resolution 425 (1978), which had in 1978 called upon
Israel to "withdraw forthwith its forces from all
Lebanese territory". While we praise the progress
achieved by the senior cartographer appointed to
determine the territorial definition of the farms, we
believe that a political process must also start, based on
my Government's proposal in its seven-point plan to
put this area under the interim jurisdiction of the
United Nations.

During the Israeli aggression on Lebanon last
summer, the Israeli army deliberately pounded
southern Lebanon with millions of cluster bombs. The
2006 annual report of the United Nations Mine Action
Service clearly specifies that over one million have not
exploded and have thus become tantamount to anti-
personnel land mines, easily capable of claiming more
lives and victims. By the end of last June, more than
233 Lebanese civilians had fallen victims to Israeli
cluster bombs, many of whom were children.

Israel's decision to drop those cluster bombs in
the first place constitutes a blatant violation of
international humanitarian law, since such munitions
are by nature non-discriminatory and may cause
unnecessary suffering to the civilian population.
Moreover, Israel's persistent refusal to give the United
Nations the maps that indicate where it dropped the
cluster bombs is an additional flagrant violation of
international humanitarian law, since the remaining
unexploded bomblets represent a continuous threat to
the safety and security of the Lebanese civilian
population.

My Government is determined to clean Lebanon
of Israel's cluster bombs and put an end to the
sufferings they cause to my countrymen in southern
Lebanon. Moreover, on behalf of every Lebanese man
and woman who was killed, maimed, disfigured or
injured by a cluster bomb, on behalf of every Lebanese
child who was playing outside his home and never
came back and on behalf of every Lebanese child who
is threatened by the possibility of not coming back
home, my Government pledges before you that it shall
not spare any effort to reach an international ban on
cluster bombs, so that those most ugly weapons
become things of the past.

This pledge is not the only good news from
Lebanon I wish to put before you today. I would also
like to assure you of the unwavering determination of
my Government and its army to put an end to the
terrorist group Fatah al-Islam in the Nahr al-Bared
camp and not allow it to continue threatening the
stability of my country. May I ask you as well to note
that in the midst of this fight, my Government took the
initiative to address the humanitarian situation of the
Palestinian refugees who had to leave the camp and
that it hopes that, with the aid of the international
community, the reconstruction of the camp and the
return of its inhabitants will not take long to
materialize.

Let me also mention that in my country on
5 August by-elections in Beirut and the Matn district
were held to replace two assassinated members of
parliament. The good news here lies in the fact that
despite the fierce political campaign that accompanied
those by-elections and the tight race between the
contending candidates, the process went smoothly and
without one single serious act of violence being
reported. Moreover, these by-elections represented the
democratic answer to the terrorist killings, and the fact
that the opposition candidate won one of the two
contested seats is the latest proof of the vitality of
Lebanon's democracy in our part of the world and a
source of pride to my Government. We also hope that
the upcoming presidential election will bear additional
witness to my country's entrenched democracy.

