Mr. Dahlgren (Sweden): Let me first state that
Sweden fully associates itself with the statement made
earlier today by the representative of the United Kingdom
on behalf of the European Union.

The Government of Sweden deplores the recent
decision by the Israeli Government to extend the
jurisdiction of the Jerusalem municipal authority. That
decision constitutes yet another in a succession of
measures by Israel to change the demographics of
Jerusalem and to strengthen the position of the occupying
Power, such as the demolition of houses in the Old City
of Jerusalem and the decision to construct new housing in
the Jabal Abu Ghneim area.

It is the long-standing position of my Government
that all Israeli settlements in the occupied territory are
illegal under article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention.
This includes settlements in East Jerusalem. We believe
that the Israeli settlement policy endangers the Middle
East peace process in its entirety and that it violates the
letter and spirit of the Declaration of Principles.

In our View, settlement activities establish facts on
the ground which prejudge the final status negotiations.
Actions which change the status of Jerusalem ahead of
such negotiations cannot be tolerated. Our firm opinion is
that the Israeli Government must rescind all such
decisions, including the latest action, which is the reason
for today's debate.

The Government of Sweden urges Israel to accept -
as the Palestinians have already done - the American
proposals on a further withdrawal from areas on the West
Bank. We believe that this is at present the only way to
regain the dynamics of the peace process and to resume
final status negotiations. Back in 1993, the Government
of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
embarked on a historic negotiating process that should
lead to a permanent settlement by 4 May 1999, based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Israel and the PLO then agreed that true and lasting
security for the two peoples can be achieved only through
a political process, at the negotiating table.

Only such a negotiating process can pave the way

for a comprehensive and just settlement that can lead to
lasting peace in the Middle East.

 

