Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Assistant Secretary-General Bintou Keita
for her very informative briefing on the situation in
South Sudan, the work of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) and the importance of the
Security Council's role and support.

The initiative undertaken in July to hold a
revitalization forum represents a significant step in
the efforts to relaunch the 2015 Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan and advance its implementation. The Agreement
is still the cornerstone of the political process and,
if fully implemented with the support of all relevant
stakeholders, could help to bring the stabilization that
South Sudan so badly needs. France therefore reiterates
its full support for the forum and for the efforts of the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the African Union High
Representative, the Special Envoy of the United Nations
Secretary-General and his Special Representative for
South Sudan to get the process moving. In that regard,
we welcome the consultations that have been held in the
past few weeks with the various parties with the aim
of putting an inclusive process in place. It is vital that
substantial progress be made quickly and before the
end of the year, at the latest. We hope that the special
regional envoys will be able to update the Council on
the status of the efforts at a future meeting.

As the Council, IGAD and the African Union
have stated repeatedly, the parties must engage in the
process in good faith. We therefore call on them to
fully participate and quickly identify the modalities for
implementing the peace agreement, or we will have to
consider imposing sanctions on the individuals trying
to impede the process.

The international community must continue its
efforts to provide the necessary support to the people
of South Sudan and make ending the suffering of
women and children a priority. The people of South
Sudan continues to endure insecurity, violence, threats
of violence, the spectre of famine and malnutrition and
horrendous humanitarian conditions. In that regard, we
condemn anyone obstructing the efforts of UNMISS
and the humanitarian workers supporting them.
Ms. Keita has rightly asked for the Council's support
in this. Blocking UNMISS patrols and arresting and
intimidating its officers and humanitarian personnel
cannot be permitted. UNMISS must be able to fulfil
the mandate entrusted to it by the Council. We call on
the Government of South Sudan to fully comply with
its commitments under the status of forces agreement,
as well as its own commitments on the deployment
of the Regional Protection Force. The international
community must be prepared to take every possible
measure that could help to reduce the violence. An
arms embargo would contribute to that.

Lasting peace also implies ensuring that crimes
and human rights violations do not go unpunished.
Establishing the Hybrid Court provided for in the peace
agreement, in which the African Union would play a
leading role, would help. UNMISS also contributes to
that through the investigations it conducts into such
acts in accordance with its mandate. We are particularly
concerned about the information gathered by the Panel of
Experts of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan on abuses allegedly committed in Wau and parts
of Upper Nile, which should be fully clarified.

