Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Like others, I thank
today's briefers for providing extensive information
on the activities of their respective Committee's and
beyond. We highly commend the dedicated efforts of
the three Committee Chairs, as well as the work of the
expert groups aimed at ensuring the comprehensive
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions and at promoting effective international
cooperation among all stakeholders to achieve the
objectives set by these instruments.

We welcome the close collaboration of the
Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999),1989
(2011) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da'esh),
Al-Qaida, and associated individuals, groups,
undertakings and entities and the Counter-Terrorism
Committee in overseeing the implementation of
specific counter-terrorism measures established by the
Security Council, promoting international cooperation
in this field, detecting possible gaps in the existing
regulations, and introducing sanctions measures
with regard to individuals and entities engaged in
terrorist activities. Good examples of such teamwork
is the cooperation of the 1267 Committee's Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
in identifying the emergence of new threats posed by
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and
its affiliates worldwide, sharing thematic reports and
holding joint Committees meetings on the topic of
depriving terrorists of their sources of funding.

Notwithstanding the recent achievements in the
suppression of international terrorist threats posed
by ISIL, especially of its financing, there are still
problems that require cohesive actions to be taken
both by the two Committees and by the United Nations
membership at large. Among our present tasks are the
prevention of terrorism spreading to other regions by
staunching the flow of foreign terrorist fighters; the
introduction of comprehensive strategies for dealing
with returnees, who may endanger the internal security
of their States of origin; countering the propaganda of
terrorism and violent extremism; and combating abuse
of information and communications technologies for
terrorist purposes, to name but a few. We are pleased
to note that these topics are duly reflected in the
Committees' programmes of work. We also commend
the pace kept by the expert groups in conducting their
country visits and producing credible reports and
recommendations aimed at strengthening national
counter-terrorism mechanisms.

Apart from the activities of the international
community in combating terrorism outbreaks at
the global level, we also should not forget about the
available tools to exert pressure on terrorists within the
existing sanctions framework, reinforced by the recent
resolution 2253 (2015). In that regard, Ukraine supports
the call for introducing a broad range of targeted
counter-terrorism sanctions to disrupt terrorists'
financing and their travelling to conflict regions.

Since 2004, resolution 1540 (2004) has played
a crucial role in strengthening regional and global
non-proliferation efforts. Ukraine, as a State with a
nuclear-weapon past and as a full-fledged party to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological
Weapons Convention, is strongly committed to the
implementation resolution 1540 (2004) and makes
every effort to prevent non-State actors from acquiring
materials and technologies that could be used as
weapons of mass destruction (WMDs).

At the same time, despite the measures taken by
Member States to prevent proliferation risks, we are
witnessing growing and even more complicated threats
in this area. On the one hand, risks may arise not only
from poor national legislation being in place but also
from the rapid development of science and technology
coupled with a lack of threat awareness among the
members of academia, industry and civil society. On
the other hand, international legal prohibitions have
little relevance to terrorists and criminals who might be
tempted to engage in attacks using chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear materials.

Unlike States, non-State actors pursue their
hostile intentions and are prone to unconventional and
highly unpredictable actions. Moreover, the erosion
of the existing world order, continuous breaches and
unaddressed violations of international law and the
ongoing conflicts in different parts ofthe globe continue
to weaken as a whole the security architecture on
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear materials.

With a view to tackling the growing threat of
WMD proliferation globally, we support initiatives
aimed at further strengthening the role and potential
of resolution 1540 (2004) for a long-term perspective,
such as the recent establishment of the 1540 Group
of Friends, which we fully support. Ukraine
welcomes the constructive and results-oriented
approach of the Spanish chairmanship in the process
of the comprehensive review of the resolution's
implementation, to be concluded by December. It is
important that the process also focus on ways to ensure
that the relevant international legal norms are fully
respected and implemented by all Member States.

Ukraine stands ready to engage constructively with
all like-minded partners on those crucial matters.

To conclude my intervention, I would like to
reiterate that, while terrorism and the risk of WMD
proliferation by non-State actors continue to pose
a serious threat to international peace and security,
there is a persistent need to ensure close and effective
cooperation and coordination between the relevant
subsidiary bodies of the Security Council, in particular
in the outreach activities and country visits conducted
within their respective mandates, as well as in the
exchange of information.

The meeting rose at 11.55 am.
