Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): The Security Council mission to Myanmar
and Bangladesh was very timely and useful. Council
members were able to personally assess the situation
in Rakhine state and its surroundings, as well as the
efforts that have been made to stabilize the situation.
We would like to thank the authorities of Bangladesh
and Myanmar for their efforts. We are also grateful to
both the Polish and Peruvian presidencies, as well as
Kuwait, without whose logistical support we could not
have fully carried out our programme. It was extremely
important that as a result ofthe mission, the Council was
able to agree on a consensus press statement (SC/13331),
which outlines the Security Council's position with
regard to the crisis and the priority measures that the
parties involved should take to overcome it.

We note that while the situation in the region
remains difficult, in general it is under control. However,
I would like to note the constructive attitude that
Naypyidaw and Dhaka have shown in addressing this
difficult situation, as well as their openness to dialogue
and cooperation with the international community.
All of us, without exception, have expressed our
wholehearted solidarity with the Government and the
people of Bangladesh, who have been dealing with
unprecedented humanitarian crises and challenges, and
yet who have opened their doors and hearts to hundreds
of thousands of people in dire straits.

Iwould also like to note that the Myanmar authorities
did not try to conceal anything or avoid uncomfortable
discussions. On the contrary, they demonstrated
exceptional transparency. The Council was able to visit
the most problematic areas and to talk openly with all
parties, as I hope all my Security Council colleagues
will confirm. The repeatedly expressed commitment
of Myanmar officials to fully implementing the
recommendations of the Rakhine Advisory Commission
led by Kofi Annan and the provisions of the bilateral
agreement with Bangladesh on the return of refugees is
also grounds for some optimism.

Separately, we should also to underscore the
readiness of Naypyidaw to cooperate with United
Nations humanitarian agencies and its partners, and
the signing of a memorandum of understanding with
the United Nations Development Programme testifies
to that. Another positive fact is the expansion of access
to Rakhine state to foreign observers. We would also
like to commend the Myanmar authorities' systematic
efforts to deal with the area's socioeconomic problems.
As I have already said, we greatly appreciate the efforts
of the Government of Bangladesh in taking on a very
heavy burden and hosting hundreds of thousands
of refugees from Myanmar in an extremely timely
demonstration of solidarity. In that connection, the
international community must provide appropriate
support to the Dhaka authorities so that they can contain
the acute humanitarian consequences of the crisis. Nor
should we forget that Myanmar will also require similar
support as refugees return. For its part, in 2018 and
2019 the Russian Federation will allocate resources to
both countries through the World Food Programme. We
believe that humanitarian assistance to forced refugees
should not be provided by imposing political conditions
but rather should in strict accordance with United
Nations principles, as defined by General Assembly
resolution 46/182.

First and foremost, we believe that this crisis must
be resolved through bilateral negotiations between
Myanmar and Bangladesh. Considering its scale, a rapid
solution is unlikely. There are many sides to the complex
and deep-seated problems in Rakhine state, which can
be resolved only through exclusively peaceful political
and diplomatic means, by establishing a dialogue
between the Naypyidaw and Dhaka authorities and
involving representatives of every faith and nationality.

The international community should focus on
helping the Governments of Myanmar and Bangladesh
to find practical solutions. It will be very important
to ensure that Myanmar and Bangladesh consider
accusations of sexual violence and abuses of human
rights in the legal arena, based not on statements in
the media or on social media but on evidence that both
countries must come up with. More than once during
the Security Council's visit, the Myanmar authorities
stated that they had no intention of ignoring such
issues or protecting the guilty. In order to expedite the
related legal proceedings, Naypyidaw has proposed
that refugees submit their claims to the courts in
Myanmar, and they are ready to closely coordinate
efforts with Dhaka to do that. We believe that is a step
in the right direction and would be a concrete, practical
measure towards combating impunity that will need the
international community's support.

Politicizing the refugee crisis should be avoided.
Any attempts by external actors to exploit it in order
to achieve unrelated political aims are unacceptable.
It is important to help Naypyidaw and Dhaka to reach
a settlement that takes their concerns into account,
including with regard to fighting extremism and
terrorism, and that was our mission's main task. It will
be crucial to create conditions that will enable the safe
and dignified repatriation of refugees to their homes,
and we believe that will be possible only through the
constructive involvement of the authorities of both
States in the process. In our View, it is essential to
offer assistance to the Governments of Myanmar and
Bangladesh in dealing with the Rakhine state crisis in
a spirit of equality and mutual respect. We hope that all
concerned will act responsibly and prudently in order
to ensure that the crisis does not escalate once again.

We are all well aware that the situation in the region
is extremely precarious and that monsoon season is
right around the corner, which could complicate things
even further. However, we believe firmly that the
ground has been prepared for a successful solution to
the crisis. We have Ms. Christine Schraner Burgener,
recently appointed as Special Envoy by Secretary-
General Guterres, who must be given time to get things
done. We have the understanding that Naypyidaw and
Dhaka have expressed of the importance ofjoint efforts.
Lastly, we have a unified Council, as expressed in our
press statement. Bearing all of that in mind, I believe
that in the course of the visit we were able to lay a pretty
good foundation for the Bangladesh and Myanmar
authorities to start actively resolving their problems
with the concerned and constructive cooperation of the
international community as a whole and the Security
Council in particular.

I would like to underscore that to do that it will
be important to cherish and strengthen the unity of
the Security Council, which enabled us to agree on a
press statement fairly quickly. I hope that all Council
members understand that and will not be tempted to
use the situation to pursue their own domestic political
aims. That would definitely not help to resolve the
refugee crisis.

