Mr. Gouider (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to extend my sincere thanks to
Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs, for his comprehensive briefing on the
Secretary-General's report on enhancing mediation and
its support activities (S/2009/189). I would also like to
extend a warm welcome to all participants in this
distinctive session, which is special in terms of its
timing and subject matter.

With regard to its timing, this debate is taking
place in the context of an agreement on a follow-up to
the meeting held last year under the presidency of
Burkina Faso and in the light of presidential statement
S/PRST/2008/36. We hope that our discussions today
will help us move forward and reach a new vision that
clarifies the mediation role played by the Security
Council.

On the subject matter, I do not need to stress the
special importance of mediation as a tool to settle
conflicts peacefully, as specified in our Charter since
last century. It is incumbent on us to enhance
mediation and its support activities as a practical way
to settle disputes. We should focus on positive ideas
that promote dialogue and help avert the deterioration
of any conflict through agreements between the parties
that would end conflicts and strengthen and promote
peace.
09-30825

We support mediation as a peacemaking tool, as
we believe it to be the most cost-effective instrument to
settle conflicts on the African continent. Mediation
takes into account all the important factors of the
various conflicts and can play a significant role in
addressing them, following the cold war and with the
renewed interest in conciliatory agreements. Mediation
inherently promotes a careful analysis or
reconsideration of positions in a way that promotes all
efforts for the ultimate peaceful settlement of conflicts.

We believe that the maintenance of international
peace and security requires serious initiatives that
enhance mediation and its support activities,
particularly in Africa. That enhancement should not be
limited to the neutrality and skills of the mediator and
his or her experience, but should include an in-depth
knowledge of the geography, history and culture of
Africa and the root causes of the conflicts there. We
believe that the African Union is the natural body to
assume that task, and that it is capable of achieving
effective mediation with genuine and full international
support and partnership.

Nevertheless, allow me to clearly state that we
have still not fulfilled our commitments. My country's
experience in the mediation efforts in many African
conflicts, as a member and Chairman of the African
Union, has highlighted the continuing need for a new
international vision for mediation and the Security
Council's role in it that does not ignore the root causes
of conflicts because of pressures and that effectively
prioritizes the tools provided for in Chapters VI and
VIII of the Charter over those of Chapter VII. It has
shown the need for a vision that provides the tools to
address conflicts before, not after, they deteriorate; that
is based on lessons learned in supporting preventive
diplomacy in Africa that strengthens the African Union
and its partnerships and institutions; and that enables
the Secretariat and the Mediation Support Unit to
provide the necessary momentum for that dynamic
union. In that way, we could put an end to ongoing
human tragedies and support the international system
by upholding the authority and credibility of the
Security Council as a guarantor of international peace
and security.

Finally, we support the Secretary-General's
recommendations in their entirety and the statement to
be made by the representative of Cuba on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement. We express our hope once
again that our deliberations will go beyond mere
9

support for recommendations and will be a practical
step towards planned and organized measures.

I would like to thank the delegation of Burkina
Faso for preparing the draft presidential statement,
which we fully support, and we look forward to its
adoption at the end of our debate.

