Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this open debate. Iwelcome
the leadership that Malaysia has shown on this important
issue, and I am pleased at the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2225 (2015). I also thank the Secretary-
General, his Special Representative Ms. Zerrougui and
UNICEF Deputy Executive Director Brandt for their
briefings. I welcome the powerful words of Ms. Eunice
Apio. Her insights into the consequences of abduction
require us all to reflect deeply. She has underscored the
importance of the Security Council hearing from those
working directly on these issues.

Last week, a 17-year-old British boy, a child, died
in an attack by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL) on an oil refinery in Iraq. His name was Talha
Asmal. To those who knew him, he was an ordinary
Yorkshire lad. He was friendly, kind; he worked hard
at school. He should have been looking forward to
university. Instead, he died a long way from home.
Amid the tragedy that left 11 people dead, a sad truth
emerged: Talha was not an innocent bystander caught
up in the attack, he was a suicide bomber. Talha was
a perpetrator, but also a victim. He was a victim of
ISIL and its sickening propaganda. He was a victim
of violent extremists too cowardly to act themselves.
He was a victim of an increasingly violent world that
does not distinguish between children and adults in
conflicts. I do not seek to excuse Talha's actions. What
he did was barbaric and un-Islamic. But in highlighting
this example from my own country, I hope to illustrate
that we all face challenges to do with children and
armed conflict. It is truly a global issue, and it requires
a global response.

Through today's resolution, we have taken a
step forward. The expansion of the listing criteria to
include abductions will enhance our ability to hold
perpetrators to account. The need is great. In February,
at least 89 boys were kidnapped in the Upper Nile state
in South Sudan. These are in addition to the hundreds
of children abducted by ISIL - and by Boko Haram,
as our Nigerian colleague so eloquently described in
2014 (see S/PV.7259), making that arguably the worst
year for children in recent memory. Those sick groups
abduct children to use them forcibly as child soldiers.
They bind them into sexual slavery and turn them into
weapons of war to terrorize families and communities.
The trigger in a new resolution is a clear declaration
from the Security Council that we will not tolerate the
abduction of children in any form or for any purpose.

But listing is just the first step towards ending
impunity. We want to see more progress on ensuring
accountability. States must exercise their national
jurisdiction to bring those listed to account, and if they
fail to do so, the International Criminal Court (ICC) has
an important role to play. As the Secretary-General's
report (S/2015/409) notes, the transfer to the ICC of
Dominic Ongwen, who himself was abducted as a child
in 1989, shows that we must take a long-term approach.
We have seen some progress this year, including the
conviction and sentencing of Thomas Lubanga, and
we welcome the fact that Bosco Ntaganda's trial will
commence slhortly.

More needs to be done. In the case of Syria we
cannot afford to become numb to the recruitment,
detention, torture, killing and maiming in that children
in that country whether by the regime, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant or others. There is a
clear call for action by the international community.
The Secretary-General's report sets out the case: 889
schools attacked, 413 medical facilities damaged, 368
children killed and 771 injured. All ofthese events took
place in 2014. The Secretary-General's report shows
that the vast majority of those acts were committed
by Syrian Government forces. Thus such, the United
Kingdom believes adamantly that situation in Syria
must be referred to the ICC.

 

There are ways out. In Syria we maintain that this
must be through a political solution; there can be no
military solution. We support the efforts of Special
Envoy de Mistura to take forward the implementation
of the Geneva communique (S/2012/522, annex) and
ultimately enable the Syrian people to decide their own
future.

Across the world, there is a way out. The roles that
they play are listed in the Secretary-General's report.
Whether Government or non-State armed groups,
they can adopt concrete, time-bound action plans to
halt violations and abuses. Eventually, that can lead to
delisting. Action plans work. We congratulate Chad for
the successful delisting of the Chadian national army
last year, following the full implementation of their
action plan. I call on all listed parties - Governments
and non-State armed groups - to follow their example.

I would like to conclude with this final point.
How a society treats its most vulnerable - be they
children, the infirm or elderly - is always a measure
of its humanity, and even more so during instability
and conflict. When a society begins to disregard the
vulnerable and their rights, instability and conflict will
only grow. The litany of Violations and abuses against
children in the Secretary-General's report is evidence
of that spread. It has spread so far that children across
the world, whether from Syria or Yorkshire, are now
caught up as both victims and tools of conflict. Through
today's resolution we have taken one step forward to
ending that, but many more steps will be needed if we
are to eradicate this problem. We cannot waver in our
resolve.

