Mr. Wolff (United States of America): I would
like to thank Under-Secretary-General Pascoe for his
briefing.

Before turning to the subject at hand, let me join
other colleagues in extending our condolences to the
Government and people of China on the loss of life and
the injuries suffered by so many as a result of the
devastating earthquake.

Advancing the cause of comprehensive peace in
the Middle East remains one of the United States
highest foreign policy priorities. Our commitment to
that goal is undiminished, and the resumption of
negotiations towards a two-State solution is the best
way forward. All concerned must confront a basic
reality, that is, that the status quo of the past decade
has neither produced long-term security nor served the
interests of the parties. Such a path means more
instability and more unrealized aspirations for Israelis,
Palestinians and others throughout the region.

Today, we are witnessing a struggle between
those in the region who accept peace and coexistence
with Israel and those who reject it and seek continued
violence. The latter course means drawing out a
conflict with tragic human costs that threatens Israel's
long-term future as a secure and democratic Jewish
State and denies Palestinians the dignity of a State of
their own. The two-State solution is the only way to
resolve the conflict. The status quo strengthens the
rejectionists, who claim peace is impossible, and
weakens those who embrace coexistence.

At the same time, those willing to negotiate must
be able to show results for their efforts. Those who
preach violence, strife and bloodshed must be proven
wrong. All of the regional challenges that we face,
including combating violent extremism and promoting
both democracy and economic prosperity, become
harder if rejectionists grow in power and influence.
The current path is not sustainable for either Israelis or
Palestinians.

We therefore call again on our international
partners, both inside and outside the Council, to
support the resumption of proximity talks that lead, as
soon as possible, to direct Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations. We invite all involved to promote an
atmosphere of cooperation between the parties, and we
renew our specific call for Arab States to establish
regional and multilateral dialogues with Israel,
concurrent with the resumption of bilateral
negotiations. Only through good-faith negotiations can
the parties mutually agree on an outcome that ends the
conflict and reconciles the Palestinian goal of an
independent and viable State based on the 1967 lines,
with agreed swaps, and the Israeli goal of a Jewish
State with secure and recognized borders that reflect
subsequent developments and meet Israeli security
requirements. We also believe that the parties can
mutually agree on an outcome that realizes the
aspirations of both parties for Jerusalem and safeguards
its status for people around the world.

The Secretary-General underscored those points
when he addressed the Arab League summit in Libya
on 27 March. He also conveyed the belief of the
Quartet's members that those talks should lead to a
settlement, negotiated between the parties within
24 months, that ends the occupation that began in 1967
and results in the emergence of an independent,
democratic and viable Palestinian State living side by
side in peace and security with Israel and its other
neighbours.

It is also important that the parties fulfil their
Road Map obligations. Unilateral actions taken by
either party cannot be allowed to prejudge the outcome
of negotiations and will not be recognized by the
international community. Our position remains clear:
We do not accept the legitimacy of continued Israeli
settlement activity. Israel should also halt evictions and
demolitions of Palestinian homes. We have made our
views on these issues clear over the past several weeks.

At the same time, the Palestinian Authority
should continue to make every effort to ensure security,
to reform its institutions of governance and to take
strong, consistent action to end all forms of incitement.
In this regard, we strongly condemn the glorification of
terrorists, either through official statements or by the
dedication ofpublic places.

Still, we should not overlook the significant
progress made by both sides in the West Bank over the
past year, including marked improvements in the local
economy, greater fiscal transparency and
accountability, advances in the rule of law and the start
of a more cooperative practical relationship between
Israelis and Palestinians that we hope will develop
further.

The Palestinian Authority has demonstrated its
commitment to reform and institution-building. It is
laying the foundations of a future Palestinian State.
The Authority's strong fiscal policies, supported by
more than $3 billion in donor assistance over the past
two years, and its commitment to improving security
and the rule of law in the West Bank helped generate
significant economic growth in 2009.
The Palestinian Authority's actions are inspiring
investor and consumer confidence, and we are seeing
positive signs of private sector growth and
development in the West Bank. For instance, three
venture capital funds are set to be launched this spring,
with the support of United States, Arab and European
investors. The Authority is also beginning to prepare
for an investment conference in Bethlehem in June that
will focus on small- and medium-size enterprises.
Meanwhile, subscription rates in Wataniya, the
Palestinian's second mobile telephone provider, have
continued to climb since its launch in November 2009.
And nine affordable housing initiatives, which could
result in 16,000 new units, are in various stages of
development throughout the West Bank. We strongly
endorse the Palestinian Authority's two-year
programme to build the institutions for a Palestinian
State that will undergird this progress.

Israel has also taken significant steps to improve
Palestinian access to domestic and external markets,
including by easing checkpoints. For example,
thousands of vehicles per week have been entering the
West Bank from Israel through the Jalameh-Gilboa
crossing since it was reopened and expanded in
November 2009. This step, coupled with continued
relaxation of checkpoints between Jenin, Nablus and
Ramallah has helped infuse cash and raise demands for
goods and services into the northern West Bank. In
another example, tens of thousands of people travel to
Bethlehem from Israel and the West Bank during the
Christmas season, contributing millions of dollars to
the local economy.

Of course, these signs of increased economic
activity and growth can be undermined by renewed
violence. And more needs to be done. But we should
not ignore these reminders that Israelis and
Palestinians can work together to build a brighter
future for ordinary citizens on both sides.

In contrast, the situation for civilians in Gaza
remains extremely difficult, despite some small recent
steps forward. The Palestinian Authority is in effect a
lifeline to more than half a million people in Gaza,
making sure that Palestinian Authority salaries are paid
and social welfare payments are made on time. The
Authority plans to devote roughly half of its
$3.9 billion budget to Gaza in 2010. We urge all parties
and partners, including Israel, to focus on meeting the
humanitarian needs of those in Gaza and rebuilding the
civilian private sector that will be the engine of Gaza's
recovery.

Israel has taken steps to improve the flow of
humanitarian goods into Gaza in order to alleviate the
hardship and stress that civilians in Gaza continue to
face every day. Israel has also increased the quantity
and scope of non-food items entering and exiting Gaza
through the official crossings to include glass, wood,
aluminium, some constructions material, including
cement, and some other goods. Israel has also agreed to
the completion of several critical United Nations
projects.

We continue to urge Israel to further open the
crossings, consistent with resolution 1860 (2009) and
the 2005 Agreement on Movement and Access, and
with appropriate monitoring to address security
concerns, in order to allow the unimpeded flow to and
from Gaza of people, humanitarian aid and commercial
goods.

Hamas's interference with international
assistance shipments and the work of our
non-governmental organization partners complicates
our efforts in Gaza. Hamas's continued arms
smuggling and its recent direct interference with the
official commercial banking system undermine security
and prosperity for Palestinians and Israelis alike.
Hamas has yet to accept the principles established by
the Quartet that are the building blocks of an
independent Palestinian State: renouncing violence,
recognizing Israel and accepting previous agreements.
Nor has it shown an interest in building a future for the
Palestinian people that could exceed its own hateful
rhetoric and embrace of violence.

We have recently seen a significant increase in
rocket attacks from Gaza into Israel - a direct threat
to international peace and security. There were 20 such
attacks in March alone, and a total of 40 this year.
Groups other than Hamas have claimed responsibility
for these terrorist attacks. Nevertheless, Hamas
asserted control of Gaza in 2007 and is thus
accountable for ensuring that these attacks cease. We
also call again for the immediate release of Gilad
Shalit, abducted and held by Hamas since 2006.

In closing, permit me to remind the Council of
the important role that Lebanon can play in efforts to
secure a comprehensive peace. The Special Tribunal
for Lebanon remains a key tool to end the era of
impunity for political assassinations in Lebanon. As
Secretary of State Clinton has noted, the Tribunal is not
a bargaining chip; it is an independent judicial process.
United States support for the Tribunal in its pursuit of
justice will not waiver. We reiterate our support for
Lebanon's sovereign Government and for the full
implementation of resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006), all of which are equally
binding.

But the transfer of weapons from Syria to
Hizbullah undermines the Lebanese Government's
ability to exercise sovereignty over all of its territory
and risks sparking a conflict that no one needs. We are
increasingly concerned about the sophistication of the
weaponry being transferred. We have continued to
reiterate our strong concerns to the Syrian and
Lebanese authorities, and we have made clear that they
need to be taking steps that reduce the risk and danger
of conflict, not taking steps that increase it.

The United States has continued to emphasize to
all relevant parties the importance of implementing
Security Council resolutions 1559 (2004) and 1701
(2006), which call for ending weapons smuggling into
Lebanon and for the disarmament of Hizbullah, among
other things. We remain committed to supporting
Lebanon's sovereignty and independence and working
to strengthen our partners in the Lebanese Government
and armed forces.

