Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Mogae and Ms. Sunday
for their assessments of the situation in South Sudan.
We also welcome the personal efforts of the Secretary-
General to reach a settlement on South Sudan.

We agree on the importance of coordinating actions
by the African Union, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) and the United Nations aimed
at ensuring peace, stability and security in South
Sudan. We support the Secretary-General's approach in
seeking African solutions to African problems with the
appropriate support of the United Nations, including
where the problem of South Sudan is concerned. We
believe that it is appropriate that IGAD should play a
central role in that process. We credit the Secretariat
for its recent provision of more balanced assessments
in its monthly reports, among which we would like
to emphasize the progress that has been made in
preparing for the deployment of a regional protection
force. As the information makes clear, the time frame
for the deployment of front-line units was postponed
somewhat through no fault of the South Sudanese.
Juba's constructive position on the issue of the regional
protection force is evidenced by the fact that the
Government has allocated the first plot of land for their
barracks, while as far as we know, the delays on the
second plot are due to some unavoidable formalities.

We urge the Secretariat to continue to cooperate
with Juba in order to resolve all the current problems
involving the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), including the need to create a mechanism
for the prompt resolution of visa problems and for
determining the modalities for deploying the regional
protection force while complying with the basic norms
of peacekeeping.

We share the concerns about the country's disastrous
humanitarian situation, and we note the efforts of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs to
improve things. We welcome President Kiir's statement
on granting humanitarian access to the regions where
there is a food crisis. We should not omit to note the
assistance that has been given to the people of South
Sudan by Khartoum. At the same time, considering
the situation in neighbouring Somalia and Kenya, we
should also point out that the famine in various parts of
South Sudan is the result not only of security problems
but also of bad weather.
We are also alarmed by the news of armed clashes
in various parts of the country. We continue to hold
the view that to a large degree those incidents are the
result of command-and-control problems, as well as a
certain lack of discipline among Government troops
and those of the opposition. Another factor is the rift in
anti-Government forces between supporters of Taban
Deng Gai and Machar, with clashes that occur for
inter-ethnic or simply criminal reasons.

We welcome President Kiir's announcement of
the forthcoming holding of a national dialogue in the
framework of the peace agreement and call for active
support to it. We trust that the proposed amnesty will
enable progress to be made in the political process
and also help to resolve the problem of the presence
of supporters of the former First Vice-President Riek
Machar on the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. In general, we believe that the parameters of
a national dialogue and the location of the consultations
should be determined by the South Sudanese themselves.
We agree that it will be impossible to promote national
dialogue or implement the peace agreement if the
ceasefire is not maintained. But it would be unfair
to blame the continuing violence exclusively on the
Transitional Government of National Unity.

We consider it absolutely inappropriate to bring up
threats of genocide. The rise in inter-ethnic tensions is
largely the result of provocative statements and actions by
armed and criminal groups and undisciplined elements
of the security forces. That hardly corresponds to the
suggestions of some kind of purposeful, systematic
policy on the part of the authorities.

We welcome the establishment within UNMISS ofa
working group on hate speech and incitement. We would
like to emphasize the importance of preventing similar
activities emanating from any country through Internet
social networks, since otherwise the entire content of
resolution 2327 (2016) would simply be ineffective.

Our position on the new Security Council sanctions
against South Sudan is well known. Ifwe are to establish
lasting peace in South Sudan, what we need is not a
Security Council arms embargo, but rather targeted
measures to disarm the population and to demobilize
and reintegrate combatants. We also believe that it
is essential to heed the views of the regional Powers
on the fact that this is not the time for proposals for
introducing additional restrictions on Juba. Against that
backdrop, we would point to information from United
Nations experts that the same countries that appear to
advocate introducing an arms embargo in the Security
Council may be supplying South Sudan with weapons.

