Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important meeting. I
would also like to thank Under-Secretaries-General
Le Roy and Malcorra and General Agwai for their very
helpful briefings. I want to join you in expressing how
honoured we are by the presence of so many United
Nations force commanders and chief military observers.
We are deeply grateful for their leadership and
sacrifice. We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank again all the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their invaluable contributions.

As the Council may recall, the United States
outlined its overall approach to the challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping on 29 June at this
Council's thematic debate on peacekeeping, convened
by Turkey (see S/PV.6153). Therefore, today I would
like to restrict myself to five brief points.

First, my Government greatly appreciates the
efforts that the United Kingdom and all fellow Council
members have made on today's presidential statement.
It is the product of several months of increased
attention to United Nations peacekeeping, which the
United Kingdom and France helped generate early this
year. Important discussions have also been held in the
Security Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping
Operations and in the General Assembly's Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by
Japan and Nigeria, respectively. Turkey and Canada
have helped to advance the debate through initiatives
and efforts of their own. We thank these Member States
and, again, the troop, police and financial contributors,
who have all been involved in formulating the
presidential statement.

In adopting today's presidential statement, we
will increase the chances of success of peacekeeping
operations both now and in the future. In that
statement, we have committed ourselves to providing
missions with clear, credible and achievable mandates.
We have pledged to think carefully before establishing
new missions that may lack the resources needed to get
the job done or may have to operate in conditions i11-
suited to success. We have resolved to resist the
temptation to simply roll over mandates when they
expire.

These are important steps. We have agreed to
reflect seriously on the progress that has been made
and the obstacles that remain to ensure that we can
make any necessary adjustments. But, as we have
noted before, the United States will not support the
arbitrary or abrupt downsizing or termination of
missions.

Secondly, the presidential statement acknowledges
that both the Security Council and the Secretariat must
do a better job of consulting with troop- and police-
contributing countries, especially when adopting new
mandates or renewing old ones. The troop and police
contributors bring a wealth of experience to these
discussions, and they deserve to have their concerns
heard and heeded. This is one of the most important
messages we have taken away from discussions in the
Council's previous thematic debates, its Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, and the General
Assembly's Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations.

Thirdly, the United States appreciates the efforts
that the Departments of Peacekeeping Operations and
Field Support have made to advance the debate on the
future of United Nations peacekeeping. The recently
issued non-paper, "A new partnership agenda", rightly
reminds us that we are all in this together. While the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the Secretariat
and individual Member States each have distinct roles
and responsibilities, success in peacekeeping depends
on our collective unity of purpose and effort.

In the non-paper, one key partner, the Secretariat,
is appealing for help in energizing faltering peace
processes, rallying missing capabilities, meeting local
capacity-building and peacebuilding needs, considering
new business models for mission planning and support,
and clarifying such key concepts as robust peacekeeping
and the protection of civilians.

As I have said before, the United States remains
ready to do its part, and we will receive new ideas with
an open mind. We look forward to in-depth discussions
over the coming months on the proposals in the New
Horizon non-paper and in the companion draft field
support strategy that was circulated this week. We are
reviewing both documents with great interest, and we
are ready to work closely with all involved to further
develop these proposals.

At the same time, we look to the Secretariat to do
all it can to improve mission leadership and
management, strengthen personnel and procurement
systems, achieve economies and savings, prevent
waste, fraud and abuse and clarify the roles and
responsibilities of United Nations actors at Headquarters
and in the field.

Fourthly, the United States is ready to act on both
the spirit and the letter of the presidential statement
and the New Horizon non-paper. The mandates of
United Nations missions in Liberia, Haiti and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo will come up for
renewal over the next few months. We welcome early
dialogue with troop and police contributors on these
missions. We also welcome early recommendations
from the Secretariat on actions that the Security
Council and Member States can take to increase the
chances that mandates will be successfully
implemented and that missions can be drawn down
responsibly at the appropriate time.

Finally, while the United States will be appealing
to all Member States to do more for United Nations
peacekeeping, we are also asking more of ourselves.
That includes, importantly, meeting our financial
obligations. On that note, I was pleased to make the
case for United Nations peacekeeping on Capitol Hill
last week, while acknowledging its shortcomings and
underscoring the United States' commitment to
strengthening United Nations peacekeeping capacities.

I was also honoured to be able to thank the
United States Congress for the funding it has recently
appropriated. The United States is now in a position to
clear all its peacekeeping arrears accumulated from
2005 to 2008 and to meet our obligations in full for
2009, which are currently estimated at approximately
$2.2 billion.

We remain ready to invest in United Nations
peacekeeping, even in a time of economic crisis,
because this truly global enterprise serves a shared

interest and offers millions of people the prospect of a
more secure, prosperous and dignified future. We look
forward to working closely with our fellow Council
members and with all interested parties to forge an
even stronger partnership, and we look forward to
working together to make United Nations peacekeeping
more effective in the twenty-first century.

