Mr. Vamos-Goldman (Canada): We would also like
to thank Mr. Annabi for his detailed briefing, and like
previous speakers, we also have no objections to the
extension of the reporting period. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Greenstock for sharing his impressions so
frankly with us this morning.

The modest progress made in implementing the Lome
Agreement and in establishing various bodies to that end,
notably the Commission for the Consolidation of Peace and
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, gives some
encouragement.

We are particularly gratified that the security,
humanitarian and human rights situation in Sierra Leone
has improved most in the areas of deployment of the
United Nations Mission in Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL). This
confirms that a robust troop commitment in support of a
strong mandate is the best contribution the Council can
make to individual security.

It is most important that troop-contributing countries
provide their contingents with adequate equipment to use
the full measure of their mandate and rules of engagement.
This is particularly important in the context of sporadic acts
of aggression and systematic interference by ex-rebel
elements against United Nations and humanitarian
personnel. We are concerned that, without an adequate
resource base, UNAMSIL's ability to protect civilians may
erode with future confrontations.

Canada remains concerned by persistent reports of
human rights and humanitarian law violations, particularly
those perpetrated by ex-Sierra Leone Army elements in the
Port Loko area. All parties in Sierra Leone have an
obligation to ensure the protection of civilians and the safe
and voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced
persons, and should recall that the amnesty provisions of
the Lome Agreement do not apply to offences committed
since its signature.

All parties must refrain from interfering with the free
movement of people, goods and, particularly, UNAMSIL
and humanitarian personnel through the use of illegal
roadblocks. Canada is gravely concerned with reports that
the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has begun laying
landmines near Bendu, presumably with a view to
interfering with UNAMSIL deployment to the area. This
would be a basic and grievous violation of the Lome
Agreement.

As expressed by the Council in its statement of 8
March, a tangible expression of commitment to the peace
process is needed from the RUF and its leader, Foday
Sankoh, in the light of the group's inadequate compliance
with the provisions of the Lome Agreement. Specifically,
the RUF must disclose the number of combatants under
its command, as other armed factions have done, and
return equipment seized from the Guinean battalion of
UNAMSIL during a 10 January ambush. For his part, Mr.
Sankoh must respect the travel ban provisions of Security
Council resolution 1171 (1998) and refrain from making
hostile public statements against UNAMSIL which, to say
the very least, undermine confidence in the peace process.

While the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programme (DDR) is making gradual
progress overall, the same cannot be said for the northern
and eastern parts of Sierra Leone still under RUF control.
RUF obstructionism has hindered humanitarian access to
some 2.6 million war-affected Sierra Leoneans and has
stymied the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees efforts to monitor and
facilitate refugee returns. We urge all parties to participate
fully in the DDR programme.

Finally, we agree with the elements of the statement
to the press proposed by Ambassador Greenstock,
including the element added by Ambassador Soderberg.

