Mr. Corman (Turkey): I would like to start by
thanking the Secretary-General for his extensive
briefing concerning his recent Visit to Myanmar on
3 and 4 July 2009. This second visit of the Secretary-
General in just over a year was again timely, and we
hope that it will lead to concrete examples of
cooperation between the Government of Myanmar and
the United Nations. I would also like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Myanmar for his
statement.

Turkey attaches great importance to national
reconciliation and the protection of human rights in
Myanmar. We therefore fully support the Secretary-
General's good offices mission in this direction, as
mandated by the General Assembly, as well as the
efforts of his Special Adviser, Ambassador Ibrahim
Gambari.

Myanmar has undergone very tough times in the
past two years, and we all remember the disastrous
consequences of Cyclone Nargis. This tragedy showed
the resilience of the people of Myanmar, and we are
now happy to hear from the Secretary-General that the
rebuilding efforts are gradually bearing fruit as a result
of effective cooperation between the United Nations,
the Government of Myanmar and the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations. We are also pleased to hear of
some other positive developments in the political and
economic domains, such as the ceasefire agreements
between the Government and armed groups, as well as
the facilitation of external trade and investment.

Yet, we would want to see more substantive and
tangible progress in the protection of human rights and
political freedoms. Echoing the words of the Secretary-
General at the end of his visit to Yangon, peace,
development and human rights are closely interrelated
in all countries, and Myanmar is no exception.

In this regard, the elections to be held in 2010
will be a critical test. These elections, including
developments in the pre-election period, ought to be
free and fair. All political parties should be allowed to
campaign for and participate in these elections freely.
We noted with interest the reassurances provided by
the Myanmar leadership to that end. We would now
like to see that commitment followed up by concrete
steps. Furthermore, the Government of Myanmar
should establish the necessary conditions for national
reconciliation through an inclusive process with the
full participation of all political parties and groups.

This brings me to the issue of the release of all
political prisoners, and in particular to the situation of
Daw Aung San Suu Kyi. As a leading opposition
figure, it is unfortunate that Ms. Suu Kyi has spent
13 years under house arrest. In this context, and even
more significantly, her recent imprisonment just a few
weeks before she was bound to be released of house
arrest raises yet again important questions that need to
be elucidated. In this regard, the refusal of the
Myanmar Government to allow the Secretary-General
to visit Ms. Suu Kyi is certainly not a welcome
development.

However, irrespective of the individual cases, we
believe that it is high time that the Government of
Myanmar heed the repeated appeals of the Security
Council and release all political prisoners. This is
indeed essential to the establishment of a political
environment conducive to dialogue, conciliation and
mutual respect leading to free and fair elections, the
results of which have to be respected and honoured
by all.

We sincerely hope that all parties, and primarily
the Government, will seize the historic opportunity
presented by the 2010 elections in order to embark
upon an irreversible path towards national reconciliation
and peace. The Secretary-General has declared that the
United Nations could and would assist Myanmar in this
process, and Turkey supports the United Nations
efforts in this direction.

