Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (interpretation from Arabic): First of all, I would like to assure the President
and members of the Security Council that I do not intend
to exercise fully my right of reply to the statement made
by the delegate of Israel as this would require a great deal
of time which we do not have available at the moment. I
will therefore restrain myself. The statement made by a
State Member of the United Nations almost led me to
believe that the Palestinian side was confiscating Israeli
lands, not the other way round.

At any rate, I have asked to speak solely to rectify
certain figures and percentages mentioned by the
representative of Israel in his statement.

These figures and percentages are odd. According to
him, 63 per cent of the confiscated land is Israeli land.
These figures and percentages were once put forward by
Mr. Peres, the Israeli Minister for Foreign Affairs, but
they were not taken up in the press or on the radio or on
television, nor have they been put forward by military
spokesmen or by any other Minister. Now, however, we
find them in the statement of the representative of Israel.

If we carefully examine the text of his statement we
note the clever way in which the figures are formulated.
We find an additional 185 hectares, which were
confiscated two years ago by the Israeli authorities in the
Jabal Abu Ghneim area. To that figure have been added
the 53 hectares we are now talking about. These 185
hectares became Jewish land because they were
confiscated two years ago, and, on the basis of legal
arguments put forward by Israel, most of those hectares
were deemed to be Israeli land. Thus, Arab citizens
deprived of their recourse to justice will now see their
land automatically considered as Jewish land. This land,

 

which originally belonged to Arabs. was confiscated two land, in accordance with a situation that has prevailed
years ago, and most of it. through this process. has been since the Ottoman era. For our part. it is our belief that
regarded as Jewish land. the figures themselves are neither correct nor accurate.
The figures set forth in the statement of the Ambassador

As ("or the 53 hectares, even il'the figures contained in of Israel, unfortunately, have no basis in tact. the statement of the representative of Israel were correct and accurate, they indicate that the land belonging to Jews
does not exceed 11 hectares. The rest of the land is Arab

We should like to state clearly that the crux of the
problem is that East Jerusalem is land occupied by Israel
and that the Fourth Geneva Convention is applicable to
that land. as has been repeatedly confirmed by the
Security Council. The question is not one of private
property but of measures the occupying forces are
prohibited from taking, whether they involve confiscation
or any other measure.

