Mr. Anzola (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): Venezuela welcomes the initiative
of France to convene this open debate on the question
of children and armed conflict, which is an issue of
concern to the international community.

The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela regards the
work that the Council could do in this area as
complementary to the primary role of the General
Assembly in the overall handling of the situation of
children in the world and to the mechanisms
established pursuant to the Convention on the Rights of
the Child and its Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict.

The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela recognizes the work done by the Committee
on the Rights of the Child on the issue now before us.
At the same time, we commend the work done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. As regards the working
group established by the Security Council, we believe
that it is important that it carry out its work in close
consultation and cooperation with States, given the
primary responsibility that States bear in advancing
and defending the rights of children. Moreover, it is
vital in negotiations and peace agreements among
parties involved in situations of armed conflict that the
problem of child soldiers is taken into account and
given priority in programmes of disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration after the conflict.

Our country is a party to the international
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Article 38 of
that Convention enshrines the protection of children
during and after situations of armed conflict and
establishes a ban on recruitment by all States parties of
those under 15 into their armed forces. Venezuela
ratified this Convention on 7 September 2000. The
Venezuelan State is also a party to the Optional
Protocol of the Convention on the Rights of the Child
concerning the involvement of children in armed
conflict, ratified on 23 September 2003.

We would like to take this opportunity to voice
some concerns with respect to that Optional Protocol.
The Protocol stipulates that States parties shall ensure
that on their territories there shall be no forceable
recruitment of minors under 18, furthermore
establishing that States parties that allow voluntary
recruitment into their armed forces of those under 18
should take steps to safeguard them and to ensure that
recruitment does not occur by force or coercion, and
that also they will take all necessary measures to
ensure that no member of their armed forces under 18
directly participates in hostilities.

There is some ambiguity in some provisions of
that legal instrument, which is also plain in article 4,
paragraphs 1 and 2, which indicate that armed groups
that are distinct from the armed forces of a State should
not in any circumstance recruit or use in hostilities
those under 18, and that States parties should take all
feasible measures to prevent such recruitment and use,
including the adoption of the necessary legal measures
to prohibit and criminalize such practices.
That may seem contradictory, given that it
prohibits recruitment of minors to armed groups
distinct from the armed forces of a State, whereas
States are allowed to recruit those under 18. Moreover,
it is difficult to ensure that irregular armed groups
respect the legal measures that have been established
against recruiting those under 18 when those groups
are contravening all legal norms.

On this point, moreover, our country has concerns
about the laws whereby those minors might be brought
to trial should they decide to desert when they are in
active service in the armed forces with the consent of
the parents or those who have legal guardianship over
them. What law applies to them? Are the provisions of
the Convention and its Optional Protocol applicable to
them? That aspect is not dealt with in the Convention
or in the Optional Protocol and has not been considered
adequately in order to cover situations falling within a
legal vacuum, which have been arising recently.

In Venezuela, the Conscription and Military
Enlistment Law sets the minimum age for enlistment in
the armed forces and participation in armed conflicts at
18. Moreover, in drawing up its Act on the Protection
of Children and Adolescents, promulgated in 2000,
Venezuela prepared its National Strategic Plan for the
Protection of Children and Adolescents, which, among
other things, covers the right of survival, and within
that the right to protection in the cases of armed
conflict.

The National Council for the Protection of
Children and Adolescents is the Venezuelan agency
that can support the activities of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflict. It can also establish a
collaborative relationship that might provide guidance
to the Security Council Working Group and link its
work to development-related issues, in particular health
and education, in order to give children better
prospects of rehabilitation, physical and psychological
recovery and reintegration into society.

We would like to stress that the quest for proper
solutions to the problem of children and armed conflict
necessary involves tackling the causes that contribute
to the rise of this phenomenon in various regions of the
world. This approach involves applying strategies
designed to overcome poverty and hunger as essential
prerequisites for ensuring the full realization of the
human rights of children. We cannot hide the fact that,

given the tragic situation of poverty and exclusion that
many children face, they are the first affected when
confronting an extremely delicate situation, exposed to
all kinds of risks that endanger their integral
development.

It is also important to recall that General
Assembly resolution S-27/2, adopted in 2002 at the
Assembly's twenty-seventh special session, on
children, stresses in section III, the Plan of Action, that
chronic poverty remains the single biggest obstacle to
meeting the needs and protecting and promoting the
rights of children. This concern has been tackled by the
Government of President Hugo Chavez Frias as a
fundamental element in social programmes promoted
by the State.

Our country rejects any use of children in armed
conflicts, as well as other abuses and violations
committed against children in situations of armed
conflict. Venezuela deplores the impunity that still
prevails in many areas affected by armed conflict
where the parties involved continue to contravene the
relevant provisions of applicable international law
concerning the rights and protection of children in such
situations. Venezuela resolutely supports the adoption
of effective measures to ensure demobilization of child
soldiers and their rehabilitation, physical and
psychological recovery and reintegration into society.

Lastly, Venezuela cannot fail to express its deep
concern for the situation of boys and girls in Lebanese
territory and in the occupied Palestinian territories,
given the tragic events that threaten their physical
integrity. We call on all the States and international
agencies to fulfil their obligation to protect the lives of
those who are unjustly swept up in this outbreak of
violence in the Middle East.

In recent events in the Middle East, we have seen
photos of children being used to support activities of
destruction and war. That is no more than a reflection
of how the warlords use even the innocence of children
who are swept up in traumatic situations around the
world.

