Allow me first of all to welcome the holding of this briefing devoted to the consideration of the nineteenth biannual report on the activities of the International Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya and to congratulate Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the Court, for her accurate and edifying presentation. The Niger would like to assure her of its full support and to urge all States, including those that are not parties to the Rome Statute, to cooperate fully with the ICC in order to combat impunity. My country therefore deplores the intensification of serious human rights violations because of the deterioration of the security situation in the country, which must continue to draw the attention of the Security Council and the ICC. Indeed, only in a stable security environment will there be more effective cooperation between Libya and the ICC. We note with regret that arrest warrants for Libyan nationals have not been executed to date, owing in particular to the current security context. We therefore call on the Libyan authorities, the States parties to the Rome Statute and regional and international organizations to comply with resolution 1970 (2011) by cooperating fully with the ICC in order to bring the alleged perpetrators of crimes before the competent international courts. My delegation holds the belief that the fight against impunity must be an integral part of the national reconciliation process in order to create the conditions for lasting peace in Libya. According to the reports referred to by the Prosecutor of the Court, migrants and refugees in Libya continue regularly to be victims of arbitrary detention, assassinations, enforced disappearances, torture, sexual and gender-based violence, kidnapping for ransom, extortion and forced labour. We therefore call on the competent Libyan authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor to continue to conduct investigations to establish responsibility for ensuring justice for the victims. The security situation in Libya has deteriorated considerably due to the continued fighting between the forces of General Khalifa Haftar and those of the Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister Faiez Serraj, despite the current coronavirus disease pandemic. My delegation is concerned about reports of attacks that have resulted in the loss of civilian lives in Libya and the destruction of civilian infrastructure. We reiterate our call for compliance with the arms embargo. The arms that are pouring into Libya not only contribute to prolonging the Libyan conflict but also fuel other sources of insecurity, as is the case in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin. My delegation would like to join in welcoming the appointment of Ms. Stephanie Turco Williams as Acting Special Representative of the Secretary- General and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNMIL), and to commend Mr. Ghassan Salame for the many actions undertaken and dedicated effort during his tenure. We commend the excellent work done by UNSMIL, which is providing valuable assistance to the ICC investigations. In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its congratulations and support for Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for their dedication to the fight against impunity, the establishment of the rule of law and the deterrence of new crimes. We would also like also to call on the United Nations - particularly on the Security Council - the African Union and other stakeholders to join their efforts to bring about a swift end to the clashes so that peace can be restored in Libya and in the Sahel.
