Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): At the outset, I would
like to thank the Peruvian presidency for convening
this important quarterly open debate under the agenda
item entitled "The situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question". I also wish to
thank Special Coordinator Nickolay Mladenov for his
informative briefing.

I wish to join others in extending my deepest
condolences to the Government and the Permanent
Mission of Cote d'Ivoire for the loss ofthe distinguished
and dedicated diplomat, our dear colleague His
Excellency Ambassador Bernard Tanoh-Boutchoue. He
will be very much missed at the United Nations.

Viet Nam aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.

Today's meeting represents an urgent appeal by
the international community for concerted action to
push forward the peace process in the Middle East and
address the Palestinian question.

For over half of a century, the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has become even more complex and tense as
a result of confrontation and unilateral actions. Viet
Nam is deeply concerned by the dangerous situation in
the region as reported by the Special Coordinator for
the Middle East Peace Process, especially the lack of
dialogue between the parties, the continuing expansion
of illegal settlements, the killing of innocent people,
deadly clashes in the West Bank and East Jerusalem,
the deterioration of the humanitarian and economic
situation in Gaza, growing incitement to violence
and the violation of the rights and dignity of the
Palestinian people. Those negative developments have
imperilled the prospect of the two-State solution, put
the security of the whole region at stake and had an
adverse impact on world peace. Allow me to highlight
the following points.

First, de-escalating tensions on the ground is a
prerequisite for any future negotiation and dialogue.
We urge all parties concerned to strictly comply with
the Charter of the United Nations and international
law, exercise maximum self-restraint, refrain from any
provocative acts and foster a favourable environment
for dialogue and the pursuit of peace.

Secondly, it is clear that foreign occupation is illegal
under international law and constitutes an obstacle for
peace. We call on Israel to halt and reverse all settlement
development, lift its blockade in the Gaza Strip and step
up its efforts to protect civilians and improve the living
conditions of the Palestinian population.

Thirdly, we stress the need for all parties to respect
international human rights law and international
humanitarian law, avoid any acts of hostility,
incitement or violence and ensure unimpeded access
to humanitarian assistance. My delegation reaffirms
its unwavering support to the indispensable role and
tireless efforts of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East to ease
the suffering of the Palestinians.

Fourthly, Viet Nam reaffirms its unconditional
support for the legitimate struggle of the Palestinian
people for their inalienable rights, including the right
to self-determination and the establishment of an
independent and sovereign State. We firmly believe that
a two-State solution that provides for the establishment
ofthe State ofPalestine coexisting in peace, security and
mutual recognition with the State of Israel on the basis
of the pre-1967 borders is the only path to peace. All
solutions to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, including
with regard to the status of Jerusalem, must be in line
with international law and the relevant resolutions of
the United Nations, in particular resolutions 478 (1980)
and 2334 (2016), as well as the Madrid principles, the
Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet road map, and
must be agreed upon by all the parties involved. In
that regard, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to Bolivia, France, Kuwait and Sweden for
hosting an Aria Formula meeting on 22 February on the
theme "Prospects for the two-State solution for peace".

In conclusion, Viet Nam supports all efforts
and initiatives aimed at seeking a peaceful, just,
comprehensive and long-lasting solution to this
protracted conflict. In that vein, we welcome President
Mahmoud Abbas's proposal and his call for an
international peace conference. It is high time now for
the United Nations, especially the Security Council, to
play an important role in encouraging the resumption of
peace talks between the parties, ending the suffering of
the Palestinian people and bringing peace to the region.

