Mr. Boukadoum (Algeria): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open debate on
the central issue concerning the situation in the Middle
East, including the Palestinian question.

I would like also to thank the Special Coordinator
for the Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Robert Serry, for
his comprehensive briefing. My delegation obviously
aligns itself with the statements to be made on behalf of
the Group of Arab States, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation and the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

Algeria regrets that all serious and credible efforts
exerted recently to salvage the prospects ofa peaceful,
just and lasting solution, especially those engaged by
the United States of America, have been challenged
and undermined. Israel's continued unlawful actions
on the ground provide the starkest evidence of the
contrast between its deeds and its professed intention to
participate in a peace process. They clearly demonstrate
that the occupying Power is not on the path of peace
and that the only goal it pursues is to set aside any
future prospects for a peaceful settlement through a
wide range of activities carried out daily with the aim
of altering the demographic composition and cultural
character of the Palestinian territory.

In that regard, Algeria rejects and condemns
the continuing policy of settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, and
reaffirms that those activities remain the major
obstacle to peace and impair all efforts and negotiations
to achieve the two-State solution. We also recall
that the occupying Power continues its illegal and
inhumane blockade of the Gaza Strip with disregard
for international humanitarian law and all resolutions,
especially resolution 1860 (2009). Similarly, we continue
to register numerous acts of provocation and incitement
by Israeli extremists and officials in occupied East
Jerusalem, particularly at Al-Aqsa Mosque, which are
aggravating tensions and religious sensibilities.

Algeria welcomed and supported the conclusion of
the reconciliation agreement between our Palestinian
brothers, which is an important step towards the
fulfillment of the Palestinian aspirations. Unity in
the Palestinian ranks is a positive and necessary step
for peace. It should be perceived as so by all parties.
Algeria congratulates the Palestinian Government on
the recent accession by the State of Palestine to several
international conventions. Those steps will undoubtedly
go a long way towards consolidating the wide support
gained through General Assembly resolution 67/19,
which accorded the status of non-member observer
State to Palestine. While reaffirming the important
significance of that political achievement for the
Palestinian people and for the Government of the State
of Palestine, Algeria expresses its full support for the
enhancement of Palestine's status to ensure its rightful
place among the international community, including by
its admission to full membership of the United Nations.

Almost 67 years have passed since the adoption
in 1947 of General Assembly resolution 181 (11),
providing for the establishment of two States, and more
than 25 years since the proclamation of the State of
Palestine in Algiers in 1988. Yet, the Palestinian people
are still pursuing their homeland and still yearning to
achieve their inalienable right to self-determination.
The international community must exert all efforts
to compel Israel to abide by its obligations and
commitments in order to achieve the two-State solution
on the basis of the core principles of resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973), 1397 (2002), 1515 (2003) and 1850
(2008), the Madrid terms of reference, and especially
the principle of exchanging land for peace.

Algeria expresses its hope for genuine and rapid
progress to be renewed during the current International
Year of Solidarity with the Palestinian People, to
resolve all final status issues, in particular the central
issue of occupation, which remains the source of the
problem and the core of the problem of the entire Middle
East. It is our firm conviction that peace cannot be
achieved in the Middle East without the international
community, in particular the Security Council, taking
a firm and courageous stand to end the occupation of
Palestinian land and all Arab territories occupied by
Israel since 1967 and to allow the Palestinian people to
exercise their right to self-determination and establish
an independent State within the 1967 borders and with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital.

