Mr. Molyviatis (Greece): The 14 February 2005
terrorist bombing in Beirut, Lebanon, which took the
life of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri
and others and caused injuries to dozens of people,
shook the international community and threatened to
destabilize Lebanon during the difficult and sensitive
transitional period it was going through. The
international community reacted with a strong and
unequivocal condemnation and a firm resolve that the
perpetrators of that heinous act be found and brought to
justice.

Terrorism constitutes one of the most serious
threats to peace, freedom and human dignity. Acts of
terrorism are under no circumstances justifiable on any
ground, be it political, religious or philosophical.
Those committing such horrific acts must be brought to
justice. The Security Council has repeatedly shown its
determination to eradicate that scourge of our times.

By unanimously adopting, on 7 April 2005,
resolution 1595 (2005), the Security Council did
exactly that. It sent a message, in no uncertain terms,
that those responsible for the assassination of Rafik
Hariri have to be identified and held accountable. That
was the Council's common objective then; it continues
to be our common goal now.

The resolution we have just adopted does not
prejudge the outcome of the investigation. It does not
have a punitive character, but a supportive one. It is
primarily meant to assist and to equip with the
necessary tools the International Independent
Investigation Commission that the Security Council
itself has established so that it will be able to fulfil its
mandate and complete its mission.

The Council reiterates its demand for the full and
unconditional cooperation with the International
Investigation Commission of all those involved in that
terrorist act and it seeks to guarantee that that message
is heard clear and loud. Based on recent statements
made by the Syrian Government, we hope that Syria
will cooperate fully and unconditionally with the
International Investigation Commission in order to
identify and bring to justice the perpetrators of the
terrorist act, thus facilitating the peaceful settlement of
the issue and opening a new chapter in its relations
with Lebanon.

In the context of those considerations, when
voting today, our main concern and preoccupation was
also focused on two issues: the unity of the Security
Council in dealing with an extremely sensitive issue
with far-reaching effects, and the need to maintain
lasting peace and stability in the broader region.

It is important, we believe, that the Council stand
together in dealing with issues it has itself identified as
constituting a threat to international peace and security.
That will preserve the integrity of the Council and give
moral weight to the message. We believe that the full
implementation of today's resolution will not only do
justice, but will also help to preserve the unity and
political independence of Lebanon and, therefore, to
restore security and stability in the greater Middle East
area.

