In recent years, we have seen that the meaningful participation of women significantly strengthens protection efforts, expedites economic recovery, enhances peacebuilding efforts and leads to sustainable peace. Every year, the Council has therefore been paving the way for reducing the vulnerability of women and girls, particularly on the basis of resolution 1325 (2000) and its subsequent resolutions. That once again convinces us that lasting peace cannot be achieved without the protection of women and girls. Today, by means of this debate, we are bringing added value in order to ensure the full implementation of the women and peace and security agenda. Twenty years after the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), it is important that each State Member of the Organization assess the direction of our actions so as to continue the implementation of this important resolution. We must conduct a review and identify the outstanding gaps in order to strengthen and fulfil the commitments that we have made at the national, regional and international levels. Since the signing of the Peace Accords, in 1996, Guatemala has taken on a series of commitments to the international human rights agenda, in particular to women in a post-conflict context. These agreements include 28 substantial commitments to advance the rights of women, who constitute 51.5 per cent of the total population of the country. Along these lines, efforts have been made in the implementation of mechanisms, programmes and plans for the advancement of women, among which we can mention the Political Peace Agenda for the period 2017 to 2026, which is aligned with the national development plan "Kattn Nuestra Guatemala 2032" and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. We also have in place an advisory and coordinating entity that guarantees the implementation of public policies in terms of promoting the comprehensive development of Guatemalan women and fostering a democratic culture, which is the result of the demand of Guatemala's women's movement, the commitments assumed by the country through the adoption and ratification of international instruments by the State of Guatemala, such as the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and the Beijing Platform for Action, among others. Similarly, Guatemala has a national action plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), which is a tool for advancing women's rights, women's full participation in decision-making and their access to justice and reparation through concerted interventions among the stakeholders involved, allowing for better follow- up and coordinated implementation of the global agenda for women and peace and security. This plan has substantially contributed to strengthening national legislation, women's mechanisms and the coordination of institutional initiatives that have generated internal changes in the public administration. At the international level, we have participated in various meetings and forums, including the network of focal points on women, peace and security. We believe that these meetings are a platform for the exchange of experiences and best practices on the global agenda of women and peace and security, and we are convinced that the strategic alliances that have been generated within this network are important to achieve the goal of a world with inclusive, peaceful societies that advocate protecting and strengthening women's rights in all aspects. Women's leadership and participation in conflict prevention and resolution remains necessary. Furthermore, it is necessary for our countries to increase the representation of women at all decision-making levels in the various national, regional and international institutions and mechanisms for conflict prevention and resolution. Based on this argument, Guatemala, committed to the noble task of contributing to the United Nations peacekeeping operations and taking into account the need to increase the number of female personnel in these operations, has so far deployed more than 270 women and has trained more than 380 women in different national and international courses. The Security Council has the primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security. We recognize that the challenge of sustaining peace requires the creation of close and functional partnerships among the United Nations, Governments and civil society to complement efforts and increase the role of women in decision-making with respect to conflict prevention and resolution. On this twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), Guatemala stresses that we must redouble our efforts to continue achieving concrete results in realizing the commitments of the global agenda on women and peace and security. This will allow States and the United Nations together to increase the full participation of women in peace processes. I urge the Council to continue to work hard on an inclusive agenda that will strengthen the role of women as peacemakers.
