Ms. Powers (United States of America): I wish to
thank Minister Simmonds of the United Kingdom for
having convened this important event. I should also
like to thank Angolan Defence Minister Goncalves
Lourenco; the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Tshibanda
N'tungamulongo; South African Defence Minister
Mapisa-Nqakula; and Ugandan State Minister Okello
for making the time to join us today at this critical
meeting. I also thank Special Representative Martin
Kobler, Special Envoy Mary Robinson and Force
Commander Dos Santos Cruz for all of their herculean
efforts to ensure that the people of the Great Lakes
finally once day get to live free from fear and free from
want.
A year and a half ago, leaders from across the
region came together to create an ambitious agreement
to break the horrific and long-running cycle of violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework Agreement that
they signed was predicated on the understanding that not
only the region but the entire international community
had a stake in forging a durable and lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, an understanding
reflected in the significant, unprecedented support that
the accord received from the African Union, the United
Nations, the World Bank and other partners.

In the time since, significant progress has been
made towards that collective goal. With strong support
from the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUSCO), the Democratic Republic of the Congo's
military defeated the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23),
which is currently being demobilized, as well as several
other armed groups. MONUSCO'S Force Intervention
Brigade has demonstrated that with a robust mandate,
peacekeepers can effectively protect civilians from
atrocities. They have performed with bravery and
competence, putting their lives on the line for people
from a country that is not their own.

We welcome MONUSCO's commitment to
investigating any and all occasions when civilians
are massacred when United Nations peacekeepers are
nearby, as well as Special Representative Kobler's call
today to shift from a mindset of protection by presence
to one of protection by action.

However, significant obstacles continue to stand
in the way of peace in the Great Lakes region, which
undermines the hard-won progress of our collective
effort. The greatest threat is posed by the Forces
democratiques de liberation du Rwanda (FDLR), whose
members continue to carry out serious human rights
violations and sow fear across the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. For example, according to the report of
the Secretary-General, in April, the FDLR abducted at
least 60 civilians in the Walikale territory (S/2014/450, para. 69). Their crime was refusing to carry out forced
labour. The FDLR also continued to forcibly recruit
children.

Those abuses, in turn, fuel more intercommunal
violence, displacement and fear, and foster a climate
in which new armed groups are likely to emerge. The
longer FDLR militants remain at large, the greater the
risk to all that has been achieved up to now.

The FDLR leadership must be held accountable for
their crimes, beginning with Sylvestre Mudakumura,
who was charged by the International Criminal Court
on nine counts of war crimes, including murder,
mutilation, torture and rape. He should be immediately
handed over.

We have heard here today an alarming report from
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The FDLR has interpreted the recent announcement
of a six-month timeline as a call to stall the process.
As Special Representative Kobler has put it, standing
still means we are moving backwards. We cannot move
backwards. Spoilers will re-enter the game. Yet we
hear that the FDLR is cancelling meetings and ignoring
international delegations. Any demobilization process
must lay out specific time-bound benchmarks.

In the 20 years since the genocide in Rwanda, the
FDLR has made many promises to disarm. Results are
all that matter, and military pressure is needed, we have
found, for results to be obtained. We have seen that with
the M-23, we have seen it with the Allied Democratic
Forces, and we will need to see it applied against any
and all FDLR holdouts.

The six-month timeline should not be treated as
a grace period during which military pressure on the
FDLR is suspended. Given the FLDR's track record
of committing atrocities at the same time that it
claims to be demobilizing, that would put even more
innocent civilians at risk and undercut broader efforts
to establish peace and stability. Therefore, even as the
demobilization process is under way, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO must continue
to apply robust and persistent military pressure on the
FDLR, specifically against those parts ofthe FDLR that
have refused to engage in a process of demobilization.

Another obstacle is posed by members of the M-23
who remain in Rwanda and Uganda. Members eligible
for amnesty should be promptly repatriated, while
those who are not must be held accountable for their
crimes. We call on the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, with cooperation from Uganda
and Rwanda, to finalize implementation of the process.

Beyond the urgent objective of ending the violence
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, countries
in the region can also advance peace, stability and
prosperity by continuing to shore up democracy and
good governance. In the next three years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Burundi and Rwanda will all hold
elections. While we all know that elections alone do not
make democracy, concrete steps may be taken today to
help lay the foundation for free, fair and participatory
processes in accordance with international standards.
To that end, it is critically important that electoral
calendars be determined promptly and that opposition
parties be guaranteed space for equal participation.

It is also crucial that countries across the region
continue to shore up what President Obama called
the ingredients of progress - the rule of law, open
Government, accountable and transparent institutions,
strong civil societies and respect for the universal
human rights of all people. As he made the case to
nearly 50 Heads of State from Africa this week in
Washington, DC, while hosting the Africa Leaders
summit, those ingredients promote not only free
societies but also vibrant economies.

A year and a half ago, the commitments contained
in the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
Agreement were just that - commitments, words on
paper, aspirations. That, today, so much progress has
been made towards making them real is a result of
unprecedented regional leadership and cooperation,
robust peacekeeping and a two-track approach that
couples demobilization with significant military
pressure. That formula has worked so far, and if it is
applied to the FDLR and the remnants of other armed
groups, the end of one of the longest and deadliest
conflicts in the work is within reach. We must not stop
yet.

