Mr. Allam-mi (Chad) (spoke in French): Chad
has lengthy experience in managing and protecting
child soldiers, based on the deepest respect for its
national legislation and international obligations, as
it has suffered the tribulations of many civil wars and
wars in neighbouring countries. Various so-called
"politico-military" movements have been a feature of
my country. In other words, Chad is indeed a post-
conflict country, but it is also a country that has
endeavoured to achieve stability through an ongoing
national reconciliation policy and to build a country
where the rule of law and democracy prevail.

My country has also fulfilled its obligation to protect
refugees from neighbouring countries, particularly
children. The reconciliation policy reflects our concern
for the fate of children as former combatants in armed
movements and seeks to provide them with training
aimed at returning them to civilian life.
I take a moment to thank our bilateral and
international partners, in particular UNICEF, Care
International and the International Committee of the
Red Cross, which have provided extremely valuable
assistance on that front.

However, we have never denied the accidental
presence, in the past, of children in our armed forces.
Mistakes in determining the ages of children were on
occasion inevitable in that the State infrastructure was
at an embryonic stage.

Having said that, in 2011 it became possible to state
that there are no longer any child soldiers in Chad. My
country would therefore have been de-listed from the
annex to the report of the Secretary-General had it not
been for the isolated cases of about 30 children from
the Baba Ladde group, who returned from the Central
African Republic following a reconciliation agreement.
Those children have, in any case, been freed.

My country has many young people and adults and
does not need minors in its military. The paradox is that
our armed forces remain on the Secretary-General's
list, generating an unfair denigration campaign
against the Chadian national army, which carries out
its international missions responsibly, with courage,
dignity and respect for human rights, particularly the
rights of the child.

We are on that notorious blacklist owing simply
to a process that began in 2012 and that is aimed at
implementing, with our partners, an action plan
that had not been completed. That process has been
accelerated since the most recent visit of Ms. Zerrougui
to N'Djamena in mid-May, during which a road map
was signed in that connection. We rely on our partners
in UNICEF to work actively beside us to implement the
road map.

If there is time, allow me to underline certain
essential measures already undertaken by my
Government aimed at accelerating Chad's de-listing
from the list and at preventing any violations
against children. First, in early July we improved
the aforementioned legislation on prohibiting the
recruitment of minors by adopting a draft directive,
worked out with the support of UNICEF. A programme
of work has been agreed upon with respect to the joint
verification, involving the Chadian national army and
a United Nations task force, of the situation in the eight
military regions.

The first pilot joint mission will launch activities
in two regions on 24 and 30 June. Other regions will
follow in July and August. Draft legislation on child
protection, including civilian status and penalties for
recruitment and the use of children under the age of
18, was submitted to the National Congress on 31 May.
It has also created a department on child protection
within the national army.

Once again, it appears unfair to us that, for
procedural reasons, our entire army should be
denigrated and its reputation tarnished in the eyes of
the world. We call for the clear-sightedness of those
who defend the rights of children and who, it is certain,
are playing a role that we respect, but who appear to
assess the situation in Chad more unfavourably than
it deserves to be, thereby exacerbating the situation,
which is much healthier than that in many countries
throughout the world.

In conclusion, I reaffirm that there are no longer
any child soldiers in the Chadian national army or
the Chadian contingent in Mali and that Chad is
cooperating actively with the United Nations to ensure
that the Chadian national army no longer appears on
the Secretary-General's list. Chad respects and will
continue to respect its commitment to the rights of the
child in armed conflict.

Allow me to conclude by congratulating you,
Sir, on having organized this important debate. I also
congratulate all of the eminent persons present on their
important and relevant comments which have been
closely followed by the Chadian delegation.
