Mr. Edrees (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
Mr. President, I wish to thank you and the Permanent
Mission of the United Kingdom for having taken the
initiative to convene this open debate on peacebuilding
and sustaining piece and the role of reconciliation in
maintaining international peace and security. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and all the
other speakers for the valuable statements this morning.

National reconciliation is very important as one
of the main factors that assists in achieving lasting
peace. This idea is at the heart of the two identical
resolutions - resolution 2282 (2016) and the General
Assembly resolution 70/262 - on the review of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Both
resolutions highlight the shared responsibility of
Government and other national stakeholders to achieve
lasting peace with the assistance of, and support from,
the international community. The aim is to address the
root causes of conflict and help parties to conflict put
an end to hostilities, achieve national reconciliation
by launching inclusive national dialogue, and make
progress along the path towards recovery, reconstruction
and development.

Moreover, both resolutions consolidate the
comprehensive approach to ensure sustainable peace
and transitional justice in order not to relapse into
conflict. They both list many key measures that should
go hand in hand with reconciliation efforts, the most
important of which are operationalization of the system
of justice, accountability and the rule of law, prevention
of impunity, and security sector reform so that it can
play its role professionally, effectively and responsibly.

Equally, we must implement comprehensive
programmes to disarm, demobilize and reintegrate
elements of armed groups into society and restore
legitimate State authority. In that context, the
peacebuilding review process is an important
opportunity to benefit from the best practices and
expertise of the Peacebuilding Commission to ensure
support for national reconciliation efforts in post-
conflict countries and to enhance the advisory role
of the Peacebuilding Commission in supporting
those efforts.

Practical experience has led the United Nations
to play a leading role in supporting post-conflict
countries to achieve national reconciliation. On one
hand, the Security Council has on many occasions
entrusted peacekeeping operations and special
political missions with tasks that include promoting
comprehensive national dialogue in host countries in
order to achieve national reconciliation. On the other
hand, United Nations country teams have implemented
a range of activities and programmes to that end. The
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
have also played a fundamental role in support of the
national priorities of post-conflict countries, including
in terms of achieving national reconciliation. However,
to enhance the effectiveness of the support it provides
to national reconciliation processes, the United Nations
system must strengthen coordination among its various
bodies in order so make their roles complementary and
put an end to isolation among them. Furthermore, it is
important to strengthen partnerships and coordination
between the United Nations and regional organizations,
including the African Union.

As the Council is aware, post-conflict reconciliation
is a long-term process that requires constant support
from, and the commitment of, the United Nations and
the international community, while taking into account
the specificities ofeach context. There is no on-size-fits-
all model that can be applied to all situations. National
reconciliation also requires political will on the part of
all stakeholders and taking accompanying measures that
create an enabling environment to ensure successful
reconciliation processes. Such processes also require
the international community to respect the principle of
national ownership of the reconciliation process.

Egypt is convinced that regional and international
organizations have an important role to play in
maintaining international peace and security in
partnership with the United Nations under Chapter
VIII of the Charter. In the same vein, Egypt, as Chair
of the African Union, is working to open the African
Union Centre for Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development, based in Cairo. Once operational, the
Centre will support national priorities to tackle the root
causes of conflict and consolidate and sustain peace
across the African continent, based on the concept
of African solutions for African problems. Moreover,
on assuming the chairmanship, Egypt announced the
launch of the Aswan Forum for Sustainable Peace and
Development, which aims to be an African platform
that brings together Africa's partners to discuss issues
of peace, security and development. The aim will also
be to find practical solutions to the different challenges
in that regard. We are creating this forum based on our
conviction that there is a linkage among peace, security
and development issues and as a confirmation of the
comprehensive approach to addressing the root causes
of problems and challenges faced by Africa, from a
perspective that strengthens the concept of national
ownership of efforts to achieve lasting peace and
development across the African continent.

Egypt has also actively participated in
peacekeeping activities, including by contributing
significant contingents of troops and police forces to
United Nations peacekeeping operations, primarily on
the African continent. That reflects our commitment
to our African brothers, and, in that connection, we
wish to support efforts to achieve peace, stability and
prosperity for all African peoples. We support the role
of peacekeeping in assisting parties to conflicts with
confidence-building and national reconciliation.

We reiterate the importance of having an overarching
political framework in place alongside peacekeeping
operations. Such a framework is necessary for these
operations to fulfil the role entrusted to them.

In conclusion, we thank you, Madam President, for
having convened today's important meeting. We wish
the United Kingdom presidency every success this
month in its efforts to guide the Council in carrying
out its main responsibility pursuant to the Charter of
the United Nations, namely, to maintain international
peace and security.

