Mr. Holter (Norway): Anti-personnel land-mines are
among the most insidiously destructive weapons
commonly used in war. They continue to spread terror for
years or even decades after hostilities have ended. We
should all recognize that the military utility of anti-
personnel land-mines is far outweighed by their cost in
humanitarian and socio-economic terms. For many years,
Norway has been involved in United Nations peace-
keeping operations and mine-clearing missions and has
been able to gain first-hand experience of the
consequences of the widespread and irresponsible use of
land-mines. A bold and concerted effort by all nations is
urgently needed.

We therefore welcome this open debate in the
Security Council on the question of demining in the
context of United Nations peace-keeping. Given the
Security Council's responsibility for peace-keeping
operations and the very grave and direct problems which
the use of land-mines represents for these operations, we
believe it is extremely useful to discuss within the
framework of the Council ways and means of addressing
these problems in peace-keeping mandates. It is a tragic
fact that over the years, hundreds of United Nations
peace-keepers have been killed or wounded by mines. It
is also a persistent problem that the use of land-mines by
the parties to a conflict represents a serious impediment
to the carrying out of the mandate of peace-keeping
operations: it causes important delays, it reduces the
effect of the operation, and it represents serious additional
financial costs.

Important efforts are now being made by the
Secretariat to improve coordination between relevant
departments with regard to demining in peace-keeping
operations. We strongly welcome and encourage these
efforts. Coordination between the Departments of Peace-
keeping Operations and Humanitarian Affairs is
particularly important. Increased attention should be given

 
to the different aspects of demining activities when
mandates for peace-keeping operations are being drawn up.
My delegation would like to associate itself with the
interesting ideas put forward in this respect by the
European Union, and we also support the suggestion that
these questions could be further considered within the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations.

In a number of conflict-torn areas, demining is also an
important element in the overall efforts towards achieving
lasting peace and conditions for reconstruction and
development. Demining, as well as measures to prevent
renewed use of land-mines, as part of broader disarmament
measures, should therefore also be considered in the context
of post-conflict peace-building, as pointed out by the
Secretary-General in his Supplement to "An Agenda for
Peace".

The question of anti-personnel land-mines has a
number of different dimensions: it represents a grave
humanitarian problem; it has direct bearings on United
Nations peace-keeping operations; it is an important
disarmament issue; and it has a development dimension. It
should therefore be addressed on a broad and
comprehensive basis. Today's debate in this framework is
a significant expression of the growing awareness of the
need for such a comprehensive approach. In the view of the
Norwegian Government, the only sane, humane response to
the scourge of anti-personnel land-mines is their total
prohibition and elimination. Norway is one of the countries
that has consistently advocated a total ban on the
production, transfer and use of anti-personnel mines. In
June 1995 we declared a moratorium on the production,
stockpiling, transfer and use of anti-personnel mines. All
anti-personnel mines currently found in Norwegian military
stockpiles will be removed and destroyed. According to the
present schedule, this work will be completed by 1 October
this year. Norway hopes that its example will add weight to
the ongoing international efforts to ban anti-personnel land-
mmes.

The outcome of the Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have
Indiscriminate Effects earlier this year fell far short of our
expectations. The amended Protocol II, the land-mine
protocol, does not ban anti-personnel mines and does not go
as far in the area of interim protection for civilians as we
and many others would have wished. While this is
disappointing, it does not prevent us from welcoming the
amended Protocol as an important first step on the road to
a legally binding global ban. We believe that the annual
meetings of States parties and the next review conference
in 2001 will serve as important forums in which to
maintain political pressure for a global ban.

We are convinced that the conclusion of the Review
Conference is only the beginning of a challenging process
which requires persistent and widespread efforts if its
humanitarian objectives are to be fully achieved. In this
context three points should be mentioned.

First, it is encouraging that more than 30 countries
are now advocating a total ban on anti-personnel land-
mines. In our view, a concerted effort by those countries
will be the most effective way of continuing the fight
against these weapons. The meeting to be held in Ottawa
this autumn will provide an important opportunity to
discuss a joint strategy for achieving a total ban on anti-
personnel land-mines. Such a strategy should include a
plan of action with specific short- and medium-term
objectives en route to the goal of the total elimination of
these weapons. We hope that the Ottawa meeting will be
the first of a series of meetings for the countries that
support this work.

Secondly, in order to build on and enhance the
momentum of this movement, Norway would like to see
a strong resolution at the forthcoming fifty-first session of
the General Assembly, embodying the objectives of the
pro-ban States. The existing General Assembly consensus
resolutions on demining should maintained.

Thirdly, Norway is prepared to take part in
negotiations on a comprehensive ban on anti-personnel
mines. These negotiations should begin as soon as
possible.

In addition to these political measures, practical
efforts should be made to strengthen the capacity for
demining activities in various parts of the world. The
Norwegian Government would like to see a radical
increase in such efforts, aimed primarily at enhancing
permanent facilities and schemes at the local level. Local
expertise should be developed in the fields of mine
awareness, detection and clearance activities. Norway has
so far trained more than 1,000 deminers and 400 mine
awareness instructors in various countries. The Norwegian
Government has spent more than $20 million on
demining-related activities in a number of countries, and
we intend to maintain or increase this level of support.

 

We must devote more attention and resources to
improved mine clearance technology. Far more resources
are set aside for the production of new weapons than for
remedying the damage they have caused. Norway is about
to start a pilot mine clearance programme in the former
Yugoslavia, utilizing a mechanical mine clearance machine
invented in Norway and developed by a Swedish company.
It is expected to dramatically speed up the clearing of open
fields, either detonating the mines or chewing them into
harmless pieces.

We should strengthen the ability of the United Nations
to initiate and coordinate demining activities throughout the
world. The United Nations should also provide funding for
demining activities. Norway has contributed about $1.3
million to the United Nations Voluntary Trust Fund for
Assistance in Mine Clearance. Norway is also ready to
contribute expert personnel to the standby capacity of
United Nations mine action assistance programmes through
the Norwegian Emergency Preparedness Systems
(NOREPS).

In dealing with the land-mine problem, we believe that
humanitarian ideals will be best served if political stands
are backed up by measures with the maximum practical
effect. In this context, we cannot allow humanitarian
concerns to be subordinated to military requirements.

