Ms. Colakovic' (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
would like to thank you, Madam President, for having
organized this debate. We also express our appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his comprehensive report
and our thanks to Under-Secretary-General Holmes and
to High Commissioner Pillay for their comprehensive
briefings today. We also wish to thank the Department
of Peacekeeping Operations and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for the study on
implementation of protection mandates in
peacekeeping operations.

In four days, on 11 July 2010, we will solemnly
commemorate the fifteenth anniversary of the genocide
committed in July 1995 in the United Nations safe area
of Srebrenica, which was established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 819 (1993). In that
resolution the Council demanded that "all parties and
others treat Srebrenica and its surroundings as a safe
area which should be free from any armed attack or
any other hostile act". However, the Bosnian Serb
forces attacked Srebrenica, and the United Nations
failed to deter their attack.

The International Court of Justice, in its
Judgement of February 26 2007, ruled that
24
"the Bosnian Serbs devised and implemented a
plan to execute as many as possible of the
military aged Bosnian Muslim men present in the
enclave" (para. 292)

and that the acts committed at Srebrenica

"were committed with the specific intent to
destroy in part the group of the Muslims of
Bosnia and Herzegovina as such; and accordingly
that these were acts of genocide, committed by
members of the VRS [Army of Republika Srpska]
in and around Srebrenica from about 13 July
1995" (para. 297).

The Srebrenica genocide has become a symbol of
the international community's impotence to intervene
and protect the civilian population.

The United Nations, by its own admission, bears
part of the responsibility for the crimes committed at
Srebrenica. The Secretary-General's 1999 report on
Srebrenica unequivocally states:

"Through error, misjudgment and an inability to
recognize the scope of the evil confronting us, we
failed to do our part to help save the people of
Srebrenica from the Serb campaign of mass
murder. Srebrenica crystallized a truth
understood only too late by the United Nations
and the world at large: that Bosnia was as much a
moral cause as a military conflict. The tragedy of
Srebrenica will haunt our history forever."
(A/54/549, para. 503)

It is therefore only appropriate to begin this
statement by paying sincere and heartfelt tribute to the
more than 8,000 boys and men killed in what has been
declared the worst atrocity committed in Europe since
the Second World War. Our heart goes to their families
along with sincere hope that all of them will find the
remains of their loved ones and that all those
responsible for the genocide in Srebrenica will be
brought to justice.

The issue of protection of civilians in armed
conflict is one to which Bosnia and Herzegovina
attaches great importance. We express our commitment
to work jointly with others to implement the study
recommendations, in consultations with all relevant
actors.

Last year we marked 10 years of the Security
Council's activities regarding the protection of
10-43853
civilians in armed conflict, and we can freely say that
much has been achieved. Nevertheless, unfortunately,
civilians are still and too often targets of armed attacks
and atrocities as well as victims of human rights
abuses, in particular rape and sexual violence. Hence
we are of the View that even stronger efforts should be
made in the future to ensure more effective protection
of civilians in armed conflict.

To that end, Bosnia and Herzegovina urges
Member States to work on full implementation of
resolutions 1325 (2000), 1674 (2006), 1820 (2008),
1882 (2009), 1888 (2009), 1889 (2009) and 1894
(2009), which give peacekeeping missions and all other
relevant actors the mandate to take effective measures
to protect civilians in armed conflict. We also request
all parties to armed conflicts to fully comply with their
obligations under international humanitarian law
concerning the protection of civilians in armed
conflict.

In that context, Bosnia and Herzegovina
underlines the need to combat impunity for
perpetrators of violence against civilians. The Security
Council should take every opportunity to send a
message that crimes committed against civilians are
unacceptable and that all perpetrators of grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law will be brought to justice.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is deeply concerned
about the issue of unsafe and too-often impeded
humanitarian access to populations affected by
conflict. As a result of this phenomenon, millions of
vulnerable people, particularly internally displaced
persons and refugees, are deprived of assistance and
protection. We are also troubled by attacks against
humanitarian workers, which must be strongly
condemned. We call for strengthened action in this area
and point out the importance of broadening
understanding and acceptance of independent, neutral
and impartial humanitarian actions.

We point out that peacekeeping operations
continue to make significant contributions to the safety
and security of civilians. The Security Council expert
group on the protection of civilians and aide-memoire
on the protection of civilians (see S/PRST/2009/l, annex) have further contributed to systematic and
consistent attention to the issue in their mandates.
However, the challenge remains of determining how,
on the one hand, to maximize the impact by addressing
10-43853

gaps between mandates, interpretations and
implementation capacity, and, on the other, how to
improve the tools which already exist.

Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to take this
opportunity to urge the Secretariat to work towards
developing a strategic framework and to recognize the
importance of improving planning processes and
developing training modules by using a best practices
guide of measures taken by current peacekeeping
operations to protect civilians. We also stress the need
to launch a website of the Policy, Evaluation and
Training Division of the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations in order to enhance global peacekeeping
capacity by providing the peacekeeping community
with timely access to relevant training standards,
materials and tools, as well as relevant guidance
documents. In addition, increasing the number of
female peacekeepers and trained civilian personnel will
largely contribute to adapting strategies and concrete
methods to properly address sexual and gender-based
violence.

Before concluding, and in regard to current
United Nations peacekeeping missions, I would like to
reiterate Bosnia and Herzegovina's grave concern
about the consequences which the premature
withdrawal of the United Nations Mission in the
Central African Republic and Chad could have on the
protection and security of civilians, access to
humanitarian assistance for refugees and internally
displaced persons, and security sector reform efforts.
For that reason, we would like to see the United
Nations presence remain in Chad until clear signs of
stable humanitarian and security situations on the
ground are reported and the transfer of responsibility
for the protection of civilians to the Chadian
authorities has been carried out effectively. Assessment
of the progress in implementing standards with regard
to the protection of civilians would be useful in the
evaluation of further engagement of the United Nations
in Chad.

In conclusion, on the basis of our tragic
experience, I would like to underline that Bosnia and
Herzegovina attaches the utmost importance to the
protection of civilians in armed conflict. We consider
that the Security Council, Member States and the
United Nations must do everything to ensure full
respect for the principles of international humanitarian
law, human rights law and refugee law, as well as other
relevant principles related to the protection of civilians
25
in armed conflict. The mistakes made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and Rwanda should serve as constant
reminders that we must give top priority to the
protection of civilians and do our utmost to never allow
a repeat of Srebrenica.

