Mrs. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity for Switzerland to express its views on the
situation in the Middle East. That region continues to

be prey to strong tensions that give rise to instability
and suffering, in particular among the civilian
population. The difficulty of forming a Government in
Lebanon, in spite of the free and transparent elections
held there in June, and the precarious status of the
ceasefire between Israel and the Gaza Strip are both
strong indicators of this recurrent instability.

Switzerland expresses its serious concern with
regard to the situation prevailing throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. It has proved impossible
to achieve any significant progress towards a
sustainable response to the humanitarian situation in
Gaza or the reconstruction and economic development
needs of its population. We also note that Israel is not
honouring its obligations under international law and
that the construction of settlements, including in East
Jerusalem, continues in contravention of the law.

Recent events in relation to the Temple
Mount/Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as consideration of
the report (A/HRC/ 12/48) of the independent United
Nations Fact-Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict
from December 2008 to January 2009, demonstrate the
need for a resumption of the peace talks and the
urgency of finding a negotiated solution to the conflict.

Switzerland welcomes the Goldstone Mission's
investigation of the allegations of violations committed
by all the parties. However, we are preoccupied by the
Mission's finding that very serious crimes were
committed by the various parties in the context of the
conflict in Gaza. It would be irresponsible not to
follow up that finding.

It is vital that all parties to the conflict adopt
forthwith the measures necessary to launch
independent inquiries in conformity with international
standards. They bear primary responsibility to follow
up. If the parties to the conflict are unable or unwilling
to meet their obligation to bring to justice those
suspected of having committed serious violations of
human rights and international humanitarian law, it is
up to the international community to ensure that such
violations do not go unpunished.

In our view, it is essential, first, to urge the
parties to the conflict to adopt the appropriate
measures, within a specified time frame, to open
independent inquiries that meet international standards;
and, secondly, to consider the establishment of an
independent committee of international humanitarian
law and human rights experts to supervise any judicial
proceeding undertaken by the parties to the conflict.

To conclude, the quest for a negotiated solution to
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict can never be imposed to
the detriment of the main goal of seeking justice and
fighting impunity. Following up the Goldstone Mission
in a serious way would indicate the international
community's will to actively promote a lasting solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

The fight against impunity is, however, just one
component of this solution. Intra-Palestinian
reconciliation remains a cornerstone of the
construction of a future Palestinian State. We
encourage the parties involved to make a credible
commitment to the efforts under way. Moreover,
nothing can replace direct negotiations between the
parties. My country can only encourage them to return
to the negotiating table. The Geneva initiative offers a
model solution and, with its recently completed
annexes, a practical instrument for putting in place a
peace accord. This important work accomplished by
civil society could thus inspire these discussions and
the settlement of the conflict.

