Mr. Manongi (United Republic of Tanzania): We,
too, would like to welcome the Prime Minister of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to thank him for his
presence here. We also wish to thank the High
Representative for his briefing and for his effort and
dedication in advancing the peace process in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

We are concerned that the progress made during
the first half of the year in the negotiations on the
Stabilization and Association Agreement is in danger
of suffering a setback owing to the decision of the
Republika Srpska to reduce its presence to observer
status. We urge all parties to participate fully in the
negotiations and to comply with the requirements of
the European Commission, including by restructuring
the police, developing a legislative framework and
administrative capacity, instituting reforms in public
broadcasting and fully cooperating with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY). We are equally concerned by the
pronouncements made by the new Premier of the
Republika Srpska regarding a possible secession and
the month-long boycott of the Parliamentary Assembly
by its delegates. Those are matters that cannot be taken
lightly.

On a positive note, we are pleased to note that in
October 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina held its first
election that was fully administered by the country's
authorities, with the initial results showing a move
away from nationalist parties. We are also encouraged
by the advances made in the economy, which has
recorded growth that is among the highest in the
region.

We commend Bosnia and Herzegovina for having
made tremendous progress in defence reforms. That
progress has enabled the country to have one Minister
of Defence, one Chief of Staff, one chain of command
and one army. We also commend the High
Representative and NATO for their full involvement in
those reforms and for helping Bosnia and Herzegovina
to achieve them. It is also gratifying to note that
progress in intelligence reforms has continued as a
result of the High Representative's efforts to oversee
the process and of the financial assistance of the
Norwegian Government.

The High Representative's report notes that the
number of returnees has grown smaller owing to
factors ranging from a lack of housing to a lack of
schools and employment. We call for more concerted
efforts to enable refugees who wish to return to Bosnia
and Herzegovina to do so with the assurance of a
decent livelihood in their homeland.

We condemn the violence that occurred in the
streets of Mostar on 13 June following the World Cup
football match between Croatia and Brazil, which
caused dozens of injuries and damage to property. The
High Representative rightly states in his report that in a
city like Mostar, such an incident may go further than
simple football hooliganism and may be used by
religious and political leaders to incite more violence.

We believe that, as the drawdown of the Office of
the High Representative comes to a close in June 2007,
it is advisable for the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina to enhance their efforts to implement the
remaining reforms - especially cooperating with the
ICTY by handing over the remaining indictees and
forging closer and cordial relations with all the
country's neighbours.

Finally, we wish to express our support for the
High Representative, the European Union Force and
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the months to
come as they strive to make the final transition to a
viable and vibrant democracy, leaving behind the
legacy of war.

