Mr. Eliasson: I thank the members of the
Security Council for their very constructive and
productive remarks, and also for the strong support
they have expressed for our work. I think we have
identified certain directions in which we should go in
the future.

I am pleased that members referred to the six
points that I mentioned in my presentation. As to one
of those points, namely the north-south relationship to
the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), I would
like to provide members with some additional
information. This relationship is crucial for Darfur and,
of course, for Sudan as a whole.

As to the terms of reference of the new joint chief
mediator, a role whose creation we have proposed for a
long time, we would recommend that he take into
consideration the regional and national dimensions of
the issues. Those criteria were not contained in our
terms of reference, but we hope that, in the light of this
discussion, it is seen as a constructive step forward. In
a way, the mandate has been widened, not in a formal
manner that will require the mediator to deal in detail
with these issues, but one simply cannot deal with
Darfur without taking into consideration the
relationship with Chad, for instance, and the
relationship to the Comprehensive Peace Agreement.

Another aspect that I would like to mention, in
response to the question posed by my friend
Mr. Kumalo, is the issue of incentives and
disincentives as well as action taken or pressures
brought to bear by the Security Council. This is a
difficult question for Salim and me to answer. We are
in the business of mediation, of bringing the parties
together. We try to present a fair report on the situation,
but then it is the role of the Security Council to draw
conclusions from our reports. I must say, however, that
in the course of our talks it has been helpful to know
and to remind the parties that the Council has to take
certain measures and has certain tools to use. I
remember in particular the presidential statement that
the Council issued on 24 October 2007, where it was
stated that parties - including, of course, both the
Government and the movements - that obstruct the
political process, the peacekeeping operation or the
humanitarian operations, will be subject to measures
from the Security Council. At times, Salim and I
reminded the parties of the Council's action and it
certainly had an effect. I think similar discussions
should take place at present.

I think it is important that members look both at
incentives and disincentives. Talks have to be an
attractive option for the movements as well. Here, I
believe the Government has a particular role to play,
not only as the party with the resources and
responsibilities for the security and prosperity of the
nation, but also as the party that could deliver at least
some constructive ideas on power-sharing, wealth-
sharing and security.

The movements are constantly asking about
compensation for the horrible years of 2003 to 2005
and are asking for the disarmament of the Janjaweed
militias. We are asking the Government to send signals
of a more concrete nature so that the incentives are also
coming from the Government side. I believe it
important that there be a new reminder from the
Council, similar to the message contained in the
24 October presidential statement, which emanates
from Council's latest consideration of the issues.

I was asked whether the Justice and Equality
Movement (JEM) had a national agenda. Yes, it does
have a national agenda, and I think that that is one of
the reasons why the Government reacts more strongly
vis-a-vis JEM. than with respect other movements,
apart from the fact, of course, that there was an
offensive attack against Umdurman in the
neighbourhood of Khartoum only a few weeks ago.
I would claim that we should probably continue
to encourage a process for talks or dialogue with the
JEM. The Government is now aiming to put JEM. on
terrorists lists and the like. That is not something with
which we as mediators will become involved. But I
believe it to be important that channels of
communication also be extended to the JEM. in line
with the conclusion that we usually reach in conflicts
around the world, namely, that in the end one has to
speak to one's enemy, one has to speak to the parties
relevant for the ending of the conflict.

The issue of impunity was raised. This is not,
again, part of our negotiation mandate, but I still wish
to repeat one point I made during my presentation,
which places impunity in a larger context. Respect for
human rights and the rule of law is crucial for trust to
be established, for a credible political process to be
made possible and for reconciliation to occur. We made
that point in our general perspective where I believed it
to be appropriate.

My last point is related to the Council President's
very good summary of today's discussion. I believe it
to be important for us not to fall into despair and
passivity. On the contrary, with the situation reaching
such a serious level and the margins being so thin out
there - we have been in the field, we have seen
women crying out for water, we have seen kids dying
more or less in front of us, we have seen the despair in
the eyes of the people - I think it is now extremely
important that we take a realistic approach, both in the
short-term and in the long-term. I believe the short-
term perspective should be that everyone should feel a
responsibility to make sure that we do not have an
escalation of hostilities, in fact, that we take steps in
the direction of a cessation of hostilities, and that we
are extremely sharp with everyone or anyone who goes
down the military road.

There is no military solution to the problems in
Darfur. We have to prove that point, and I believe we
have to make that point not only as mediators or as the
Security Council or as the African Union Peace and
Security Council, but also all of us individually,
representing nations that, for example, in your case,
Mr. President, sit on this extremely powerful body
responsible for international peace and security.

So I believe we also need to mobilize our
individual countries' leverage and influence. Only if
we do this, only if we show that there is a solid front in
denouncing insecurity and stopping escalation, that we
can now make a contribution. By that, as you, Sir, just
said, we can create the environment in which we can
then take the steps more in the medium-term, but as
soon as possible, for a credible political process. I

08-3959]
think that that is an agenda. It is not driving us into
hopelessness; rather, it is a realistic approach. Let us
deal with security and then take the step to a credible
political process.

With those remarks, I thank the Council for
calling this meeting and giving us the opportunity to
have a discussion in such an open and transparent
fashion as we have done today.

