Mrs. Pellegrom (Netherlands): The Kingdom of
the Netherlands aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
detailed and thorough report (S/2015/942) and Special
Representative Haysom for his briefing and for all the
hard work carried out by United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) in Afghanistan,
and, of course, I would like to thank Ambassador Saikal
for his informative statement.

The UNAMA report describes an increase in the
overall number of security incidents, which have also
intensified in nature. That is a worrisome trend. Recent
attacks in Kunduz, Kandahar, Kabul and, just today, in
Helmand underline the conclusions of the report that
Afghanistan faces ongoing and increasingly pressing
security challenges. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
stands by the Afghan Government and the Afghan
people and offers its condolences for the lives lost
in recent attacks, including those of civilians as well
as those fighting for the Afghan National Defence
and Security Forces. The continued support of the
international community, including the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, remains essential.

The developments , such as those seen in Kunduz,
have shown the need to ensure women's protection
and their meaningful participation. For that reason,
the Netherlands welcomes the implementation of the
Afghan National Action Plan for Security Council
Resolution 1325 (2000) and the establishment of
prosecution units dealing with violence carried out
against women in all provinces.

Lasting peace and stability cannot be established
without a regional peace and reconciliation process.
That process should be Afghan-led and Afghan-owned,
and needs the buy-in of countries of the region whose
security is closely interlinked with Afghanistan. I
would like to stress that the sincere commitment of the
countries ofthe region is crucial to achieving a peaceful
and stable Afghanistan. In that context, we welcome the
positive steps that were taken during the recent Heart
of Asia Conference held in Islamabad. Apart from the
security issues, Afghanistan also faces serious economic
challenges. Recent reforms, such as the tax reform, are
encouraging. Both the National Unity Government
of Afghanistan and the international development
partners must remain focused on building confidence
in the Afghan economy, including by strengthening the
rule of law. The Netherlands will continue to support
that effort through contributions to reconstruction
programmes, such as the Afghanistan Reconstruction
Trust Fund, but also through the political and economic
empowerment of Afghan women.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands has been a
long-time partner of Afghanistan, having contributed
significantly in the areas of security, justice and
development. We are committed to supporting
Afghanistan throughout the transformation decade.
Therefore, the Netherlands is assessing its post-2016
contributions, which will be made in the context of
increased Afghan ownership and leadership. The
Netherlands recently pledged to continue to support
the NATO Resolute Support Mission to train, advise
and support Afghan security forces and institutions
in northern Afghanistan. We also contribute staff to
UNAMA and to the European Union Police Training
Mission.

The NATO Summit in Warsaw in July 2016 and the
Brussels summit in October 2016 will mark significant
moments to show our commitment to Afghanistan
beyond 2016, be it military, political or through
development assistance. It is important that both the
international community and the Afghan Government
demonstrate their commitment to achieving progress in
these fields.

The continued engagement of the international
community will remain crucial to safeguarding the
progress that has been made. In the years to come
the Kingdom of the Netherlands will stand by the
Afghan people. We are committed to our partnership
with Afghanistan, based on a mature and productive
relationship and broad cooperation, focusing on peace,
justice and development.

