Mr. Gnehm (United States of America): We welcome
the Secretary-General's report of 5 March on the situation
in Tajikistan and express our appreciation for the efforts of
Special Representative Merrem to bring about a lasting
solution to the conflict. Our thanks also go to the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Tajikistan (UNMOT) for
its contributions under stressful conditions, as well as to
those member States that contributed personnel for
UNMOT.

The United States is pleased with the progress being
made in the inter-Tajik talks to bring an end to the conflict.
In this regard, the United States supports the adoption of a
three-month extension of UNMOT's mandate to signal the
Council's encouragement of the political process.

The search for peace has gained momentum rapidly in
the three months since the Council last renewed UNMOT's
mandate. Since then the parties, in a spirit of compromise
and reconciliation, have held two full negotiating rounds
and another summit meeting. They have succeeded in
abiding by an effective ceasefire, evolved a framework for
restructuring the Government and sharing power and, most
recently, at the latest Moscow round, agreed on a method
of combining armed forces. The Protocol on Military Issues
signed in Moscow represents a very significant, practical
step forward towards building trust, ending Tajikistan's
civil conflict and reintegrating the Tajik nation. We are
grateful to the Russian Federation for facilitating those
negotiations.

The United States congratulates the parties for these
accomplishments and at the same time urges them to
complete successfully the difficult task of negotiating peace
for their country. We call upon the parties to implement
fully their agreements and to ensure the participation of all
their forces in implementing the accords.

In contrast to these successes, however, the security
threat to international personnel has hindered the ability of
the international community to assist the parties in their
quest for peace. These threats have forced the Secretary-
General to suspend United Nations activities in Tajikistan
to the real detriment of the people of Tajikistan. This
situation must be resolved immediately. In the last three
months, unarmed UNMOT personnel have been taken
hostage and subjected to gross mistreatment, including the
threat of execution. Other international personnel have
also fallen victim to similar abuse. A campaign of
terrorism has targeted for assassination persons appearing
to be ethnic Russians, including two guards at the United
States Embassy. We are deeply concerned that this
unacceptable security situation makes it impossible for
UNMOT to fulfil the military portions of its mandate.

In this regard, we welcome the communique from
President Rakhmonov and Mr. Nuri deploring acts of
terrorism, and we call upon the parties to fulfil their
commitments to create a reasonably safe environment for
international personnel. We recognize that the
Government of Tajikistan has made efforts to bring to
justice some of the criminal elements responsible for
these abuses.

Nevertheless, the United States cannot in good
conscience condone the return of all UNMOT personnel
to Tajikistan or another extension of its current mandate
beyond 15 June until it is clear that the personnel will be
able to carry out their mandate free of threats to their
lives and liberty.

We look forward to continued good news from the
inter-Tajik talks, and we look forward to an easing of the
security situation so that the international community can
return to its work. The establishment of peace in
Tajikistan requires support for national reconciliation from
the entire population of Tajikistan, from all its regions
and from all its political movements. Reconciliation will
create conditions for a democratic society and a peaceful
and prosperous Tajikistan.

