Mr. Al-Nasser (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): Permit
me at the outset to thank Ms. Loj, Mr. Mayoral and
Mr. Burian for their comprehensive briefings on the
activities of the Committees over which they preside,
which are part of our comprehensive fight against
international terrorism.

Terrorism remains one of the main challenges
facing the world today. The State of Qatar has always
emphasized that we reject terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and that we have supported all legal
procedures aimed at eradicating terrorism. We have
dealt firmly with this phenomenon through legal means
and with full respect for democracy and human rights.
We have adopted many counter-terrorism laws, we
have acceded to many of the counter-terrorism
conventions, and we continue to cooperate with the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, established pursuant to
resolution 1373 (2001).

We must fight extremism by tackling a number of
issues, including making a joint commitment to work
together to oppose hatred, in the name of liberty and
freedom. I believe it is appropriate to remind everyone
that Council resolution 1624 (2005) stresses the
importance of continuing to do everything possible at
the international level to enhance dialogue and
interaction and to reach out to various civilizations and
cultures so as not to arbitrarily attack any particular
religion or any particular culture. The resolution also
stresses the important role of the media in enhancing
such a dialogue among cultures and civilizations, in
encouraging tolerance and coexistence and in creating
an environment which is not conducive to terrorism.
Here, we urge the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC) to address this issue with great resolve and call
upon States to stop criminalizing and demonizing
certain religions.

Qatar believes that we should not seek security at
the expense of freedom. Our belief in human rights is
the cornerstone of our fight against terrorism. Counter-
terrorism efforts must conform to the basic principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and to
the norms of international law, international
humanitarian law and human rights law, and they must
avoid double standards in moral and political matters.
Many issues are being addressed by the Al-Qaida/
Taliban Sanctions Committee, and they are a source of
grave concern. We must work as swiftly as possible to
deal with them.
In the short time since it became a member of the
Security Council, my delegation has therefore
undertaken substantial, objective, transparent and
professional efforts and will very soon offer proposals
for the needed development of the Committee's work
and for identifying fair, honest and balanced
procedures within the Committee's guidelines for
placing individuals and entities on the consolidated list
and for delisting them for humanitarian and religious
reasons.

My delegation shares the moral assessments of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004), whose main task is to analyse country reports.
In that connection, my delegation congratulates the
many States that have submitted their national reports;
it welcomes those submissions. We call on those States
that have not yet submitted reports to begin the
submission process, and we urge the Committee to
provide the technical assistance such States need so
that we can make further progress in facing the threat
posed by the acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction. The Committee should be vigilant in
pursuing its activities in order to ensure the non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction either by
States or by non-State actors. Non-proliferation
measures should not be selective.

Finally, I call upon the three Committees to
closely coordinate and cooperate with a view to
ensuring the greatest possible cooperation in the fight
against terrorism.

