Mr. Serry: As 2009 draws to a close, Israeli-
Palestinian negotiations are yet to resume, confidence
between the parties remains low, facts continue to be
created on the ground, tensions persist in Jerusalem,
and the actions of both Hamas and Israel are not
contributing to the stability and welfare of Gaza. Even
the genuine progress taking place in parts of the West
Bank runs in parallel with negative trends.

We are in a race against time to overcome the
contradictions on the ground and the crisis of
confidence between the parties, and move decisively
towards a political endgame. Israel must do more in
that regard, by implementing Road Map commitments,
including on settlements, easing measures which stifle
the Palestinians, and being prepared unambiguously to
negotiate and resolve all core issues in a fixed time
frame, including Jerusalem.

The Palestinians need to play their part, too, by
engaging constructively on efforts to bring about
resumed negotiations in earnest and continuing to
advance their important State-building project. The
situation in Gaza needs to be addressed with an end to
the blockade and a period of calm and responsible steps
2
from all concerned. The region and the Quartet need to
work together, without delay and with united purpose, to
support that agenda over the crucial months ahead.

On 26 November, Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu
announced that Israel would restrain certain settlement
activity by temporarily freezing new construction
permits and starts for a period of 10 months. Prime
Minister Netanyahu described the decision as designed
to "encourage resumption of peace talks with our
Palestinian neighbours". Teams of Israeli inspectors
have been visiting settlements to ensure compliance
with the Cabinet decision, facing protests from settler
groups.

Under the terms of the announcement,
construction already under way on over 3,000 units and
on public buildings will continue, as evidenced by the
approval of a further 28 public buildings in
settlements. The restraint does not apply to settlement
activity in the Israeli-determined municipal boundaries
of East Jerusalem. In addition, on 13 December the
Cabinet granted additional budget allocations to some
110,000 settlers, many living in isolated settlements
deep in the West Bank.

The policy announced by Prime Minister Netanyahu
is a step beyond previous Israeli Government positions
and has not come without domestic political
challenges. We will follow closely the impact of the
decision on the ground, and it must be hoped that it
contributes to forward movement.

However, particularly as regards East Jerusalem,
the policy falls considerably short of Israel's
commitments under the Road Map to freeze all
settlement activity, including natural growth, and to
dismantle outposts erected since March 2001. I reiterate
the Secretary-General's and the Quartet's calls on Israel
to implement its Road Map obligations. Settlement
activity is illegal under international law and unilateral
actions on the ground prejudicing final status issues
will not be recognized by the international community.

On the Palestinian side, the inability to hold
elections decreed for 25 January 2010 has further
deepened the internal crisis. This has presented new
challenges for the institutions of the Palestinian Authority,
in a context where President Abbas has confirmed his
decision not to stand in any future elections.

In that extraordinary situation, the Palestinian
Liberation Organization (PLO) Central Council
09-65522
convened on 15 and 16 December and resolved that the
terms of the Palestinian Authority presidency and the
Legislative Council should be extended until elections
can be held, as soon as possible in 2010. The PLO Central
Council resolved to meet again in 2010, and we continue
to hope that it will be possible to hold free and fair
elections throughout the occupied Palestinian territory.

President Abbas has indicated his readiness to
continue to serve until elections, and restated his
commitment to a negotiated two-State solution and his
rejection of violence. He has called for a full Israeli
settlement freeze in accordance with the Road Map in
order to resume negotiations.

Significant and urgent improvements on the
ground are needed if the two-State agenda is to be
sustained and advanced. The Palestinian Authority
must continue its efforts to meet its Road Map
obligations, and Israeli-Palestinian cooperation to
enable security and economic performance must be
further developed. I underscore the full political and
programme support of the United Nations for the
Palestinian Authority's agenda, and I was pleased to
welcome Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad to
participate in the United Nations country team retreat in
Bethlehem to plan United Nations activities for 2010.

Palestinian security forces have continued
exercising their important security responsibilities, often
at risk. On 26 November, the residence and vehicle of
the Deputy Mayor of Nablus were riddled with bullets
by unknown assailants. A fifth battalion of newly
trained Palestinian security forces is due to be deployed
in a West Bank city before the end of the year.

Israel needs to build on previous steps in the
economic and security fields with a range of further
measures, including a reduction of incursions into
Palestinian areas, facilitation of Palestinian
development in Area C, and a further easing of
closures, which currently number approximately 575
obstacles to movement across the West Bank.

Citing security concerns, Israeli forces arrested
172 Palestinians and injured 27 others in 64 operations
in the West Bank, and two explosive devices were
defused near the settlement of Beit E1 on 3 December.
Six members of the Israeli security forces were injured.

Palestinian, Israeli and foreign protesters
continued demonstrating against the barrier built in
occupied territory contrary to the advisory opinion of
09-65522
the International Court of Justice, mostly in Nil'in and
Bil'in villages, and there have been clashes with Israeli
security forces.

Settler attacks against Palestinian civilians,
property and places of worship have continued, some
in the context of the so-called price tag policy to
protest the Israeli Government's settlement restraint
announcement. There were 33 violent incidents
between settlers and Palestinians. Tensions further
increased on 10 December, when a group of settlers set
fire to the mosque in Yassuf Village, in a deplorable
desecration of a place of worship. Israel continues to
fall short in imposing the rule of law on such Violent
extremists, and this issue must be addressed. I
welcome the strong condemnation of the mosque attack
by the Israeli Government and I urge the authorities to
seek out those responsible for this incident, along with
other such acts of Violence, and bring them to justice.

The situation in Jerusalem remains tense and
makes prospects for successful negotiations more
difficult. Palestinian institutions remain closed,
contrary to the Road Map. There are concerning reports
of increased revocation of the identity cards of
Palestinians from East Jerusalem. Provocative actions
continue in sensitive neighbourhoods such as Silwan
and Sheikh Jarrah, where many properties remain
under threat of demolition.

On 1 December, pursuant to an order of the
Israeli court, a group of armed Israeli settlers escorted
by Israeli security forces entered and took control of
part of a Palestinian home in Sheikh Jarrah, claiming
ownership of the building. The United Nations efforts
to persuade the Israeli authorities to apply a
moratorium on demolitions and evictions and to cease
installing settlers in Palestinian neighbourhoods have
so far not been heeded. I have taken careful note of
reports that Prime Minister Netanyahu has appointed a
focal point to oversee decisions on these matters. I
hope that this step signals an intention for Israel to take
this issue in hand in a positive manner. Jerusalem
remains a final status issue, and a way must be found
through negotiations to resolve the status of Jerusalem
as the future capital of two States.

A different approach is needed to the situation in
Gaza, grounded in resolution 1860 (2009). During the
reporting period, imports were at approximately a
quarter of the level prior to the imposition of the
blockade after the Hamas takeover in mid-2007, which
3
represents a decline on the last reporting period. Food
and hygiene items continue to constitute the vast bulk
of goods allowed into the Strip, although there was an
increase in the amount of cooking gas allowed in. The
Gaza Strip remains closed to exports of its agricultural
products, with the exception of one truckload of flowers
allowed out of the Strip during this reporting period.

The lack of fuel for the Gaza power plant and a
shortage of materials to repair damaged electricity
infrastructure leave the majority of the population of
Gaza subject to rolling electricity blackouts. It is
essential that Israel increase the quantity and quality of
supplies through the crossings, including to meet
urgent winter needs in accordance with United Nations
requests. Discussions on this issue are ongoing with the
Israeli authorities, and we hope that approval followed
by swift entry of winterization materials will take place
in the coming days.

Beyond immediate humanitarian needs and
measures for the winter, I regret that the Israeli
authorities have not provided a satisfactory response to
the United Nations proposal to complete stalled
projects of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East and
United Nations Development Programme for housing,
schools and health facilities. On a recent Visit to Gaza,
I visited one of these projects. It is painful to see a
project that is 70 per cent complete and needs only the
remaining materials to be completed to provide
housing for several hundred families.

The Gaza business community expressed its
frustration that legitimate commerce has been
destroyed by the blockade. Smugglers and militants
control commodities flowing through tunnels, with
attendant revenues reaching Hamas. The blockade is
unacceptable and counterproductive, and must end.
Normal economic life must be restored for the civilian
population, half of which is under the age of 18.

I do not overlook legitimate Israeli concerns
regarding the situation in Gaza. We continue to be
concerned at reports of the continued smuggling of
weapons into the Gaza strip. According to the Israeli
authorities, an S-SK rocket was fired on 5 December.
We continue to note the efforts of Egypt to increase
security along the border, including seizing a truck
loaded with a ton of explosives on 23 November, the
installation of sensor equipment, and actions taken to
close down tunnels.
During the reporting period, however, Violence
was at a comparatively restrained level. Ten rockets
and mortars were fired by Palestinian militants towards
Israel, although there were no reports of injuries or
damage. Four alleged Palestinian militants were
injured by an Israeli air strike on 27 November, and a
Palestinian man died on 12 December after being shot
by Israeli forces near the border area. Despite these
worrying incidents, it is our assessment that neither
side is seeking escalation. There are possibilities for a
sustained calm if wisdom and restraint prevail.

Efforts continue to secure the release of Israeli
Corporal Gilad Shalit, along with a number of the more
than 9,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails, and as
the United Nations we continue to be supportive of
these efforts with all concerned. We urge both Israel
and Hamas not to miss the current opportunity and
resolve this issue.

The great majority of the 750 students seeking to
leave Gaza to study abroad remain in Gaza. Within
Gaza, there have been new measures imposed by
Hamas on Gazans trying to pass through the Erez
crossing into Israel. Civil society organizations and
non-governmental organizations have been the targets
of what appear to be politically motivated burglaries
for which no culprits have been held responsible,
despite the total security control of the de facto
authorities. We take note that on 26 November, 150
prisoners from all political factions were released in
Gaza on the occasion of the Eid al-Adha holiday.

As the de facto authorities on the ground, Hamas
must act with responsibility towards the population.
Hamas should also work more constructively under
Egyptian auspices, on the basis of Egypt's proposal for
national reconciliation.

In addition to my regular consultations with the
Israeli Government, I visited Syria on 9 December to
discuss the prospects for a resumption of the Israeli-
Syrian track. Important work has been done on this file
in previous efforts, including under Turkish auspices
during 2008, and this progress should be built upon.
We support all efforts in this regard as part of our
commitment to a comprehensive regional peace.

On the ground, the situation in the occupied
Syrian Golan remains stable, although settlement
activity continues. I draw to the Council's attention the
fact that a Knesset bill requiring a certain majority of
Knesset members, or a referendum, to approve the
09-65522
return of any territory in the Golan Heights or East
Jerusalem passed its second reading on 9 December. A
further reading is required, but if passed this bill could
make any future territorial return more complex.

Turning to Lebanon, on 10 December, and
following a three-day debate, Lebanon's Parliament
formally expressed its confidence in Prime Minister
Hariri's Government, which has now officially
assumed its functions. The vote of confidence saw 122
out of a total of 128 members of Parliament express
their support. The parliamentary vote followed the
adoption by the Council of Ministers on 2 December of
the new Government's Ministerial Statement, which
outlines the Cabinet's programme of work. In the
Ministerial Statement, the new Government of Lebanon
affirms its commitment to the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) "in all its
aspects". The Cabinet also affirms its exclusive right to
decide over war and peace, and envisages the extension of
the Government's authority over all Lebanese territory.

Following the parliamentary vote of confidence,
Prime Minister Hariri paid his first official visit to the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia before travelling to the
climate change summit in Copenhagen, where he met
with the Secretary-General. President Sleiman
undertook a trip to the United States, where he
reiterated Lebanon's commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006).

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon has remained
quiet. However, air violations have continued on an
almost daily basis.

In conclusion, in recent briefings we have warned
of the danger of a political vacuum. If we cannot move
forward towards a final status agreement, we risk
sliding backwards, both with the Palestinian Authority
and with the two-State solution itself imperilled. In my
meeting with United States Special Envoy Mitchell in
Washington earlier this week, I was reassured of
President Obama's determination to work not only for
the early resumption, but also for the early conclusion,
of negotiations, as called for by the Quartet, as well as
a comprehensive approach to peace.

The Secretary-General believes that a revitalized
Quartet must play its full role in urgently advancing a
common agenda in the crucial few months ahead. He
remains committed to an end to the occupation and an
end to the conflict, through the creation of a
09-65522
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security, and comprehensive regional peace, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, previous
agreements, the Road Map and the Arab Peace
Initiative.

