Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the High Representative for the statement that he has
just given and assure him of France's support. I
welcome the presence of Mr. Silajdzic', Chairman of
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
congratulate him on his country's presence in the
Security Council. France associates itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
European Union.
We welcome the progress made by Bosnia and
Herzegovina on two important matters. First, on the
matter of the road map for lifting the visa obligations,
the report transmitted on 26 April by the European
Commission to the Council of Europe and the
European Parliament stresses the progress made on
securitizing documents in the fight against illegal
immigration and for readmission. This represents a step
forward that brings Bosnia closer to the liberalization
anticipated by Europeans and Bosnians alike.
Secondly, on the matter of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, a month ago the allies offered Bosnia
and Herzegovina the Membership Action Plan on the
condition that the property of the Bosnian Ministry of
Defence be duly registered.

Unfortunately, much remains to be done. Month
after month, year after year, we have called on the
Bosnian authorities to resolve the internal conflicts that
are hindering their country from progressing towards
the prospects we offer. Unfortunately, judging from the
High Representative's report (S/2010/235) and the tone
and substance of the briefing we have just heard, we
are still far from that point.

In 10 days, a Western Balkan summit will take
place in Sarajevo, 10 years after the Zagreb summit,
which enshrined the prospects of European
membership for all the countries of the region.
However, the international community has had a
massive presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina for
10 years and helped to rebuild its institutions.
Objectives and conditions have been set to seek a
transition that would allow the Bosnian authorities
themselves to decide the fate of their country. The
European Union and the United States have made a
commitment to a process to facilitate negotiations
among the Bosnian leaders and to help them to meet
the conditions set and to implement limited
constitutional reform.

To our regret, the country's political leaders, in
particular those of Republika Srpska, have not seized
this opportunity. On the contrary, they have stepped up
their attacks on the international community which is
trying to stabilize the country. Such attacks are
intolerable on the part of the leaders seeking to get
their country into the European Union and NATO. We
call on all leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to adopt
an attitude worthy of the larger interests of their
country, especially in the run-up to the October
elections. It is high time that the interests of their
citizens be taken into account and that the latter no
longer be held hostage to an outdated political game.

We welcome the gestures made in the region in
recent months, showing that dialogue and
reconciliation have a place in the Balkans and that the
regional cooperation sought by the European Union is

not a pipedream. Once again, we call on the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement such initiatives
at the national level and to finally engage in a positive
process that will confirm Bosnia and Herzegovina's
European perspective. The international community
cannot resolve the problems of Bosnia and
Herzegovina on behalf of its leaders and people. The
fate of their country depends on them alone. It is up to
them to understand that an honest compromise is better
than outmoded rhetoric or sterile intransigence. It is up
to them to exhibit the courage to resolve their
problems.

