Mr. Suarez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I wish at the outset to
thank you, Sir, for convening this debate. My delegation
expresses its gratitude to Ms. Malcorra, Mr. Kay,
Mr. Te'te Antonio and Prime Minister Omar Abdirashid
Ali Sharmarke for their briefings.

Despite the security constraints, the political
situation in Somalia has seen progress, as reflected in
the commitment of the political leaders of that sisterly
nation and the Somali people to promoting for peace and
stability. On 23 October, the Permanent Representative
of Somalia briefed the Council (see S/PV.7541) on the
progress seen in the functioning ofinstitutions, such as
the Board of Directors of the Central Bank of Somalia,
Somalia's parliamentary oversight committees, the
Office of the Accountant General and the independent
Office of the Auditor General.

We applaud the various achievements under
way in the country's political process, in particular
the establishment of the Boundaries and Federation
Commission, which will be responsible for advising
Parliament on the delimitation of the federal states'
borders, regional Administrations and districts in the
country. Venezuela emphasizes that the achievement
of lasting peace in Somalia will depend largely on that
important federalization process.

We also look forward to achieving an agreement
on security sector reform, with clearly defined roles
and responsibilities for the institutions in the new,
federalized Somalia. Such reform must encourage the
integration of the militias into the national security
apparatus and create human rights accountability
mechanisms. Importantly, the measures to strengthen
peace and political stability must be implemented
holistically, with improvements in the socioeconomic
conditions ofthe Somali people at the core ofthe process
as a whole. Without a genuine focus on the conditions
that fuel terrorism, neither peace nor security will exist
for Somalia and the neighbouring countries that are
suffering the brunt of such acts.

With respect to the security situation in Somalia,
we highlight the smooth triangular cooperation among
the African Union, through the deployment of ground
troops, the United Nations through its political and
logistical assistance, and the European Union and other
countries in providing financing. Everything has been
carried out with the consent and active participation
of the State of Somalia, including its national armed
forces.

In that context, Venezuela reaffirms its full support
for resolution 2245 (2015), which was just adopted by
the Council and, inter alia, establishes the mandate
of the United Nations Support Office in Somalia to
provide logistical support to the African Union Mission
in Somalia (AMISOM), the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia nd the Somali armed forces through
joint operations with AMISOM. However, Venezuela
remains concerned about the spread of Al-Shabaab
deeper into the Horn of Africa, particularly in north-
eastern Kenya, and its new strategy of blocking
humanitarian access routes and asymmetric attacks. We
are also concerned that the absence of a viable civilian
administration in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab is
leading to a resurgence of intercommunal conflict in
southern and central Somalia.

With respect to the humanitarian situation, we must
keep in mind that, although the situation has improved
exponentially compared to 2010 and previous years,
3.2 million people still require survival assistance.
I recall that Somalia ranks second worldwide in
infant mortality, to which we must add the 203,000
malnourished children and 1.1 millions individuals
displaced from their homes.

In that context, Venezuela expresses deep concern
over the decline in humanitarian aid due to financial
and security constraints. On the one hand, United
Nations action is severely underfunded, achieving only
28 per cent of the necessary funding; on the other, the
important and noteworthy humanitarian effort that took
place in Mogadishu in 2011 has been undermined by
the actions of the Al-Shabaab terrorist organization,
which has resorted to blocking humanitarian aid access
routes. It is particularly alarming that, as the presence
of new diplomatic actors has increased in the capital,
the number of humanitarian actors in the country has
been reduced by the lack of resources and insecurity.

In short, Somalia has accomplished important
progress in the political sector in recent years. Going
forward, the Somali authorities should proceed with
caution, ensuring that the process of federalization is
compatible with the sustained political and institutional
momentum.

To conclude, the ongoing dynamic compels
us to maintain and strengthen our commitment to
the State of Somalia and its authorities in the fight
against Al-Shabaab, to overcoming the conditions
of socioeconomic exclusion of the majority, to
consolidating the political process and to caring for
those affected by the conflict. Without international
help, that will prove impossible.

