Mr. Malok (South Sudan): I thank you, Sir, for
giving me the floor to speak on this vital issue related to
my country. Since this is the first time for me to address
the Security Council under your leadership, permit
me to congratulate you and your delegation on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May, and although it is rather late in
the month, with only a few hours of your presidency
left, I should like to assure you of the full support and
cooperation of my delegation.

Let me also thank you and the members of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to
address you on this topic of great importance to
my country.

Today, as the Security Council renews the mandate
of the South Sudan sanctions regime for another year
through the adoption moments ago of resolution 2290
(2016), the parties in the Transitional Government of
National Unity, after the signing and the implementation
of the Peace Agreement, have chosen to fully implement
the Peace Agreement and usher in a new era of peace
and stability in the country.

The Transitional Government of National Unity,
since its formation last month, has committed itself
to fully implementing the Peace Agreement in its
entirety. The Council of Ministers of the Transitional
Government of National Unity have formed a technical
ministerial committee to look into the matter of 28
States. The Council of Ministers has also approved
the establishment of cantonments for the former rebels
in the Greater Equatoria and Greater Bhar El-Gazal
regions, where there was no rebellion.

The cantonments of the former rebels will help in the
implementation of the permanent ceasefire, improve the
security situation in the country and advance the work
of security sector reform. The Transitional Government
of National Unity is investigating violations that
are recurring in Greater Equatoria and other parts
of the country, in order to verify whether or not the
elements provoking those incidents and disrupting
traffic flow on the inter-state after the formation of the
Transitional Government of National Unity. These are
new developments that will be addressed. These steps
demonstrate the commitment of the parties to fully
implementing the Agreement.

Since the signing of the Peace Agreement last year,
followed by the formation of the Government a month
ago, His Excellency President Salva Kiir Mayardit has
consistently spoken of the need for reconciliation and
forgiveness among the South Sudanese. Transitional
justice, reconciliation, accountability and healing are
part ofthe Peace Agreement, which as a Government we
are committed to implementing as per the Agreement.

Over five decades, the South Sudanese were pitted
against each another for one reason or another, but
despite all that they emerged victorious with a country
to call a home. Today, with the bitter past behind
us, we are called on to initiate transitional justice,
reconciliation, accountability and healing from the
events that began in December 2013. The Transitional
Government of National Unity and all stakeholders in
South Sudan should be allowed to look at this process
holistically, with the assistance and partnership of
the international community as deemed fit by South
Sudanese stakeholders. As such, we will lay a strong
and sustainable foundation for transitional justice,
reconciliation, accountability and healing, which
will continue for 30 months from the signing of the
Peace Agreement.

We note with great disappointment that the
resolution adopted today fails to recognize the sovereign
right of the Government of South Sudan to exercise
its national constitutional right to govern and manage
its own affairs without interference from the Security
Council. Despite the Agreement, the resolution refers
to the review of the Non-Governmental Organizations
(NGO) Bill. The Bill has not been disputed by the
South Sudanese stakeholders; they cherish the Bill
in its entirety because the Government introduced it
through a consultations and legislative process. The bill
is therefore inclusive and stands to address problems
within the humanitarian governance of the country. We
call on the Security Council to support the efforts of
Member States in addressing issues of humanitarian
delivery. The NGO Bill will make humanitarian
activity in South Sudan an inclusive process; it stands
to outlive the current crisis and is in line and consistent
with international best practices.

The Government is in compliance with the
provisions of the Agreement and is neither placing
any restrictions on the freedom of movement and
operation of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
(UNMISS), nor attacking the personnel and facilities of
the United Nations or the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development. Recently, the Government ordered
the removal of all roadblocks, wherever they are in the
country, in order to allow the easy flow of humanitarian
assistance to affected areas. The Government has been
calling on UNMISS and humanitarian personnel to
cooperate and coordinate their movements with the
Government so as to ensure their safety and security.
UNMISS should provide concrete and hard evidence to
the contrary, if there is any.

Resolution 2206 (2015) imposed targeted sanctions
on individuals alleged to have impeded the peaceful
settlement of the conflict in South Sudan. However,
today's resolution questions the armament of the Sudan
People's Liberation Army (SPLA). As South Sudan is
not under an arms embargo or sanctions, questioning
its right to arms calls us to question the motive behind
such language. The stability of South Sudan in the Horn
of Africa relies on its readiness to protect itself against
any aggression from within or without. The region is
awash with small arms and light weapons.

Civil society in South Sudan is synonymous with the
liberation struggle of the people of South Sudan, who
today are partners in the development of South Sudan.
Therefore, any disagreement between the Government
and civil society is not and should not be viewed as oil
and water. However, we differ on how we look at issues
of governance, with the NGOs being driven more by a
foreign agenda. As a country, we need to develop our
own agenda tailored to and for our needs.

The Ministry of Gender, Child and Social Welfare
launched its national actions plan on resolution 1325
(2000), on women and peace and security, with the help
and support of the UN-Women country team. Within the
Office of the President of the Republic of South Sudan,
on 11 October 2014 His Excellency President Salva
Kiir Mayardit and Ms. Zainab Hawa Bangura, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict signed a joint communique with
sets of commitments. Early this month, Ms. Bangura
was in Juba to follow up at the invitation of the Office
of the President, and agreed to work closely with the
SPLA and the South Sudan National Police Service in
the development of national action plans, in accordance
with resolutions 1960 (2010) and 2106 (2013). These are
steps to address issues relating directly to women, with
the support ofthe United Nations. Therefore, we believe
that such steps needs to be encourage with the support
of all United Nations agencies, funds and programmes.

Permit me to conclude by saying that the Transitional
Government of National Unity has an obligation to
fully implement the Peace Agreement. However, we
call for the cooperation of the Council to positively
engage the Government in its implementation of the
Peace Agreement.

The meeting rose at10.30 am.
