Ms. Robinson: I am pleased for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council today. First, allow me to thank
the Council for its continuous and valuable support to
Special Representative of the Secretary - General
Martin Kobler and myself in the implementation of our
respective mandates. The Council's recent visit to the
region, on which the Council received a report today,
has sent a strong signal about the Council's commitment
to supporting the long-term stability of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes region.
Furthermore, the Council's participation at the second
meeting of the regional oversight mechanism held on
23 September in New York, preceded by the 25 July
high-level ministerial meeting on the Great Lakes
region, presided over by Secretary of State John Kerry,
are concrete demonstrations of that strong commitment.

My briefing will focus on the following
elements: the Kampala dialogue, the progress on the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework, as well as the priorities and next steps in
the implementation of my mandate.

I arrived here in Addis Ababa after spending four
days in Kampala, where I led ateam ofenvoys comprising
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Martin
Kobler, United States Special Envoy Russ Feingold,
African Union Special Representative Boubacar Diarra
and European Union Senior Coordinator Koen Vervaeke.
We arrived in Kampala in the wake of alarming reports
of a military build-up around Goma and the areas
held by rebels of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23).
That situation highlighted the urgency of reaching a
political agreement to prevent a return to hostilities
and the escalation of tensions in the region. It was also
important to conclude the Kampala dialogue in order to
shift the focus towards addressing the deeper and long-
term causes of instability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region, including through the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. At my request, the group of envoys agreed
to travel to Uganda to collectively provide assistance in
the conclusion of an agreement among the parties.

We arrived in Kampala on 16 October. Prior to
that, I obtained the assurance of Foreign Minister
Raymond Tshibanda that he would lead the Democratic
Republic of the Congo delegation, which was crucial
for significant progress to be achieved. He also assured
me that the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo was willing to negotiate an agreement with
the M-23 in good faith, which was evident during the
recent dialogue process.

In Kampala, we met with the parties several
times on the margins of the talks, to listen to their
views and concerns as well as to encourage them to
adopt a constructive approach. From the outset, we
made it clear that we were not there to convene the
process but to assist the facilitator and the parties to
reach a negotiated solution to the process, which had
been ongoing for far too long. We stressed the need to
adopt of a principled approach towards the issues of
amnesty and integration. As Special Representative
of the Secretary - General Kobler has explained,
we concurred with the parties on the crucial role
that the Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
will have in facilitating the implementation of the
security arrangements and in building confidence
among the parties on the ground, especially during the
disengagement, cantonment and disarmament process
of the M-23. We were also clear that any role envisaged
for MONUSCO in the peace agreement should remain
within the Mission's mandate and should receive the
consent of the Security Council.

The facilitator of the talks, Mr. Crispus Kiyonga,
Minister of Defence of Uganda, very much welcomed
our presence. I think we provided him with morale
and a certain backup that up to then he had in a way
been lacking in his approach as a one-man facilitator.
On the margins of the process, we worked closely
with him, advised him and reinforced his facilitation
efforts, including in reducing the gaps among the
parties, keeping the talks alive and the parties present
at the negotiation table, and in generating regional and
international pressure on the parties in support of the
conclusion of an agreement.

While in Kampala, I spoke by telephone to
President Kabila, who demonstrated goodwill and
agreed to extend the presence of his Foreign Minister
and Head of Intelligence for several additional days in
order to increase the chances of reaching an agreement.
Furthermore, on 18 October, the group of envoys went
to Kigali to speak with President Kagame and provide
him with an update on the ongoing negotiations. We
wanted to seek his support for a quick conclusion of an
agreement.

We told President Kagami that the Kampala process
had run its course and that it was now the moment to
conclude in order to provide the required attention
to the broader challenges at hand in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. We emphasized
that a peace agreement would enable the Force
Intervention Brigade to deal with other armed groups
in eastern Democratic Republic ofthe Congo, including
the Forces democratiques de liberation du Rwanda and
the Allied Democratic Forces.

President Kagame saw the presence of the envoys
in Kampala as very useful. The President believed
that while the M-23 was not Rwanda's issue, a peace
agreement between the rebel group and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo would benefit
the entire region. He further assured the envoys of
his support and commitment to encouraging a peace
agreement. He issued a public statement and privately
communicated his strong support for an agreement.

Let me now provide a brief overview of the
negotiations and content of the draft agreement, to
supplement that provided by Special Representative
Kobler.

Despite a very difficult resumption on 17 October,
the talks gained some speed on 18 October. On
19 October, the parties reached consensus on eight
out of the 11 articles of the draft agreement under
discussion. These are the release of prisoners; the
end of M-23 as a rebel movement, and the possibility
to re-establish itself as a political party; the return
and resettlement of refugees and internally displaced
persons (IDPs); the question of the properties that were
extorted and looted during the M-23's brief occupation
of Goma in November 2012; the establishment of a
national reconciliation commission; governance and
socioeconomic reforms; the implementation of the
provisions of the March 23 2009 peace agreement that
were partially or not implemented and are still relevant;
and the implementation, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms of the Kampala Agreement.

However, regrettably the parties found it difficult
to agree on certain contentious and difficult issues that
had remained problematic throughout the talks, namely,
the amnesty, disarmament and integration of M-23.

As will be evident to experts, several articles
discussed and agreed upon in Kampala are similar - at
least in spirit - to those of the 2009 peace agreement
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Government and the Congres national pour la defense
du peuple rebel movement. In this regard, one should
also be mindful that this process carries with it some
of the limits of the 2002 peace agreement, particularly
with some provisions that could be easily interpreted as
general commitments.

However, I am also glad to stress that the parties and
the Facilitator considered positively our strong message
that the Kampala Agreement should be based on certain
principles, including sustainability, accountability and,
related to that, there should be no amnesty for those
who have committed crimes against humanity or war
crimes. I believe it is the big picture that we should have
in mind, including the fact that continuous direct and
indirect pressure on the M-23, and the determination
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Government
and the Facilitator to draw lessons from the 2009 peace
process, resulted in a principled approach in negotiating
the provisions on amnesty and integration.

In the draft under consideration, amnesty and
integration would be granted to

"all members of M-23 for all acts of war and
insurrection covering the period from 1 April
2012 to the date of signature of the Agreement,
except for individuals indicted for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide or
gross violations of human rights, including sexual
violence, recruitment of child soldiers".

Moreover, amnesty would "be subject to each
beneficiary making a written personal commitment to
permanently refrain from acts of rebellion". It would
also "be automatically withdrawn in the event of the
commitment being violated".

The integration or reintegration process of
commissioned officers, non-commissioned officers and
troops of M-23 would take place on a case-by-case basis
and be subject to conditions. Key among them would
be to "swear allegiance to the state and Constitution of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo" and to "commit
themselves, individually and unconditionally, to serve
in any part of the country".

While the parties have made progress in the
negotiations, they have not been able to reach an
agreement on the issues of amnesty, integration,
disengagement and security arrangements. They have
agreed to reconvene soon in order to overcome their
differences. It will be critical that the parties and the
Facilitator remain committed to a swift conclusion of
the Kampala process. The E-Team will continue to be
helpful with the View to achieving that goal. I join with
Special Representative Kobler in also looking for the
support of the Security Council for the finalization of
the Kampala Dialogue.

The conclusion of the Kampala Dialogue will pave
the way for the end ofthe conflict in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I know that some Council
members have expressed doubts about the usefulness
and legitimacy ofthese talks. I am also aware that some
have expressed concerns about United Nations support
to this process, for fear of being associated with a bad
deal. I fully understand and share these concerns.

But as we all know, there is no perfect agreement.
There is also no certainty that even with the best
possible peace agreement there will be lasting peace
and stability in eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes Region. Sustainable peace,
development and justice in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the region require the political will of all
stakeholders, including the international community, to
make it happen.

For the first time in years, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the region and the international
community have decided to tackle the root causes of
instability in this part of the word in a genuine and
concerted manner. The Kampala talks are not meant
to address all the root causes of the conflict, but if an
agreement is reached it would have immediate value in
ending the fighting and the unacceptable sufferings of
the people in eastern Democratic Republic ofthe Congo,
and it would pave the way for progress in our collective
work to fully implement the commitments made under
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework.

I would like to pay tribute to the Facilitator,
Mr. Crispus Kiyonga, for his tireless efforts in support of
the process. I would also acknowledge the commitment
shown by the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and in particular by Foreign Affairs
Minister Raymond Tshibanda N'tungamulongo, who
has demonstrated a great sense of leadership and
patience throughout the process, despite other pressing
commitments. Obviously, the progress in the talks
would have not been possible without the good faith
and political will of Presidents Kabila, Museveni and
Kagame, who have on several occasions assured me of
their determination to do whatever would be possible for
peace in the region. I would also like to thank Special
Representative Kobler, my Special Adviser Modibo
Toure, who are still in Kampala on my behalf, for the
support that they have provided to the peace talks.

As much as we all look forward to the rapid
conclusion of the Kampala talks, we should also
acknowledge that peace should not be achieved to
the detriment of justice. As I have said privately and
publicly, and as former High Commissioner for Human
Rights, that we should no longer tolerate impunity in the
Great Lakes Region. There should be accountability,
not only for the M-23 members, but also for those of
other armed groups found responsible for war crimes,
crimes against humanity, acts of genocide, or gross
violations of human rights, including sexual violence
and the recruitment of child soldiers. The minimum we
can do for the memory of the millions of victims and
their families is to ensure that a fair judicial process is
carried out against the perpetrators of those atrocities
at the appropriate time.

Let me now say a few words on the progress in the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework.

In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, with
regards to the National Dialogue, which was opened by
President Joseph Kabila on 7 September and ended on
5 October, a list of recommendations was developed,
focusing on the six reform areas outlined by the Peace,
Security and Cooperation Framework. President
Kabila presented these recommendations to the two
houses of the Parliament on 15 October, and Special
Representative Kobler has provided the Council
with further details on this issue.I feel increasingly
conscious that we will have to somehow match progress
at the national level with progress at the regional level.
The two are connected under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework, and we will have to ensure
that we make progress at both levels.

At the regional level, the Chiefs of Defence Staff of
the International Conference for the Great Lakes Region
(ICGLR) met in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, on 7 October
and agreed on the modalities to strengthen existing
security mechanisms, in particular the Expanded Joint
Verification Mechanism (EJVM) as decided at the last
extraordinary Summit in Kampala on 5 September. The
EJVM. will now include MONUSCO and the African
Union representatives, which will significantly help
overcome some of its current shortcomings. Although
a divergence of opinions exists among Member States,
the security mechanisms of the ICGLR remain useful
confidence-building tools and are essential to advancing
collective security efforts in the region. The support of
the international community to the strengthening of
those mechanisms is crucial, and I count on its support
in that regard.

I would like now to highlight some of the next steps
and outline the priority areas that I plan to focus on
in the next few months in the context of the need to
address a mediated high-level political process.

At the regional level, the regional oversight
mechanism has tasked its technical support committee
with preparing a plan of action for the implementation
of the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework. The
committee will meet on 24 and 25 October in Nairobi
to discuss, and hopefully finalize, a plan of action. I
will personally go to Nairobi and take part in those
discussions in the coming days.

Furthermore, it is my intention to propose modalities
for the monitoring and evaluation of the plan of action
upon finalization by the technical support committee.
In addition, I will follow up with the committee on the
establishment of a multi-donor trust fund to support
the implementation of regional priority programmes
and projects as requested by the regional oversight
mechanism at the meeting in New York in September.
The establishment of the trust fund will be essential for
the implementation of the Framework.

I also plan to engage the international partners
in the coming weeks, with the view to finalizing the
international benchmarks. In that regard, I would
also like to discuss areas of collaboration between
international partners and the member States of the
Great Lakes region.

I intend to use the platform offered by the upcoming
joint summit between the ICGLR and the Southern
African Development Community to promote the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework. I also plan to use existing political
platforms, such as the Oyo quadripartite process and
the tripartite framework between the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, South Africa and Angola to
support peace initiatives in the region.

I would like to conclude by outlining elements of
the road map that should guide my engagement for the
period of 2013 to 2014.

In line with my mandate and with resolution 2098
(2013), the roadmap seeks to, first, address the immediate
obstacles that could hamper the implementation of the
Framework; secondly, encourage measures to address
the root causes of instability in the region; and, thirdly,
continue advocacy to promote confidence-building and
regional cooperation, as defined by the Framework. The
sequenced political approach I propose is articulated
around six priorities.

The first priority is to continue supporting the
Kampala dialogue. Since July, I have been supporting
the facilitator, in close collaboration with Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Kobler and now
with the other envoys. We will continue to encourage a
quick conclusion of the process and continue to assist
in that regard.

Secondly, in order to rebuild trust and confidence
between countries in the region, I will continue to
work with Governments, particularly the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, to bolster the
ongoing peace process with the inclusion of active
participation by civil society and international partners.
I also plan to use my good offices and those ofmy fellow
envoys to consolidate relations between the countries
by identifying potential flash points and proactively
initiating mitigating measures, in close coordination
with regional leaders and other key high-level officials.

Thirdly, in support of the development of a plan
of action for the implementation of the commitments
under the Peace and Security Council Framework,
my office will continue to support the technical
support committee and will develop modalities for
an independent monitoring and evaluation capacity.
In that regard, our attention will focus on a set of
priority benchmarks against which I will assess the
implementation of the key commitments. Those include
commitments at the national level where I shall, in
close coordination with the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Kobler, engage the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government on critical follow-
up actions to the recently concluded national dialogue,
including monitoring the progress on national structural
reforms and decentralization, electoral reform and the
calendar for local elections, security sector reform and
the national economic development agenda.

At the regional level - and I emphasize again that
both levels must be seen to be making progress and
are inexplicably linked under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework - I shall work with regional
Governments in order to achieve progress in enhanced
cooperation on justice matters, joint security strategy,
strengthening the EJVM. and other security mechanisms,
joint measures to curb the illegal exploitation of natural
resources, and regional economic integration.

Fourthly, I shall work with regional Governments
and partners on comprehensive measures to enable
the reduction and strength of armed groups operating
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, including through the development of a regional
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiative.

Fifthly, I shall continue to provide leadership and
coordinate the international community's support for the
implementation of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework agenda, which is a shared responsibility
that requires unity of purpose and actions. To that end,
I will encourage greater collaboration among partners
to ensure a convergence of agendas. I will also support
efforts, which I believe are incredibly important, to
create immediate peace dividends on the ground.
Furthermore, it is my intention to seek the support
of bilateral and multilateral donors to fund specific
activities, such as those included in the action plan for
the implementation of the Framework. In addition, I will
work closely with other guarantors of the Framework
to ensure that the Great Lakes region remains high on
their agenda. I will also continue to pay close attention
and support to women and youth interests in the region.
We are working on a platform for communication and
funding for women's groups in the region, following the
Bujumbura meeting of women's groups in July, and I
hope to share that very shortly with members of the
Security Council.

Sixthly, I will work in close collaboration with
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Governments of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and countries in the region to
support efforts to alleviate the conditions of refugees
and internally displaced people, by ensuring that the
conditions for voluntary return are in place.

Those ongoing and anticipated actions are based on
the assumption that national, regional and international
actors will remain willing and focused on implementing
the commitments made under the Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework. In that connection again,
I look very much to the Council's support and to the
engagement that the it has shown, which needs to
continue.

The momentum that was generated by the signing
of the agreement must be sustained by all means. That
will require the determination of all concerned. Let me
conclude by warmly thanking the Council again for its
very visible, very tangible and, I believe, very needed
support.

