Mr. Pressman (United States of America): Last
week, the United Nations reported that during the month
of July when fighting in Juba surged, soldiers killed
innocent civilians and raped women in broad daylight.
The United Nations documented 217 cases of sexual
violence between 8 and 25 July in Juba alone. Those
are the cases that were reported. The actual number
is undoubtedly much higher. In a single incident, on
18 July, 16 women and 12 girls were reportedly raped
by soldiers at a Sudan People's Liberation Army
(SPLA) checkpoint in the capital. It is grotesque, and it
must stop. Since 7 July alone, more than 69,000 people,
the overwhelming majority of whom are women and
children, have fled South Sudan for Uganda. The status
quo in South Sudan is unbearable. The status quo for
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
is unsustainable.

Today, the Security Council has taken important
action in support of calls from key regional partners to
address this. It is because of this horrific violence that
South Sudan's regional partners and the African Union
have called upon the Security Council to authorize
urgently a regional protection force. Resolution 2304
(2016) does that. In our deliberations, some members
of the Council expressed concern that we were moving
too quickly. The opposite is true. It has been more
than one month since the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD) Council of Ministers called
for urgent revisions to the UNMISS mandate with
additional troops to secure Juba - a decision that the
African Union Peace and Security Council endorsed
the same day. On 5 August, IGAD Plus Heads of
State and Government again called upon the Security
Council to urgently extend the mission of UNMISS
with a revised mandate, including the deployment of a
regional protection force. That decision was endorsed
once again by the African Union Peace and Security
Council just yesterday.

South Sudan's neighbours have been clear about
what this moment requires, and the resolution adopted
today responds directly to those repeated and urgent
calls. Further delays would not help those in Juba
wondering ifthey can venture outside safely to find food.
Further delays would not have helped those waiting for
humanitarian aid that currently cannot arrive. Further
delays would not have helped protect those who face
extraordinary threats with each passing day.

We consulted extensively with fellow Security
Council members and countries in the region to shape
the resolution. While we hoped to achieve unity on
the vote, let us be clear: we have had Security Council
unity on UNMISS for some time, and one only need
look at what unity has achieved with respect to
UNMISS's ability to operate on the ground. UNMISS
is facing daily threats, daily impediments and daily and
sometimes deadly challenges. Security Council unity
has not solved that. Additional authorities and resources
might. The Council simply could not wait any longer to
give UNMISS the tools that it needs to respond.
The resolution sets out three priorities for the
4,000-strong regional protection force. First, the force
will facilitate safe and free movement in the capital.
Secondly, it will protect key facilities essential to the
well-being of the people of Juba. Thirdly, it will have
the authority to prevent attacks against civilians, the
United Nations and humanitarian actors.

Like the UNMISS troops already on the ground,
the force will operate under a United Nations Charter
Chapter VII mandate, with the authority to use all
the necessary means to carry out its responsibilities.
The regional protection force is part of UNMISS's
broader mission, the core responsibilities of which
include protecting civilians, monitoring human rights,
facilitating conditions for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance and supporting the implementation of the
peace agreement.

We are grateful to the UNMISS troop contributors
for the sacrifices that they have made during this
incredibly challenging period and to the troops who
serve in the Mission, some of whom have made the
ultimate sacrifice. The regional protection force has
been created in response to the collapse of security in
Juba, and it will remain until South Sudan's leaders
take the steps necessary to provide that security for
their own people.

Some Council members today will speak about
the importance of obtaining the South Sudanese
Government's consent. We recognize the importance
of Government cooperation, but the United States
would point to the actions of the Government. For
while we expect the South Sudanese Government to
treat the United Nations like the partner that it is, that
is simply not what is happening on the ground in South
Sudan today. Instead, as we all know, the Government
of South Sudan's troops are actively blocking United
Nations personnel from carrying out their life-saving
work, which in some cases has led to the death of United
Nations peacekeepers. Those peacekeepers, including
from countries represented on the Council, who are
operating under a mandate adopted by the Council,
could not be evacuated to receive urgent medical
attention because the South Sudanese Government
would not provide flight clearances.

Consent is of course important, and the Government
of South Sudan, in dialogue with the Heads of State of
Uganda, Ethiopia, Rwanda, Kenya, the Sudan, Djibouti
and Somalia and the presidential representatives of
Algeria, Chad, Nigeria and South Africa, has offered
its consent to the deployment of the regional protection
force in principle. But we must be clear-eyed about the
challenges that UNMISS and its new regional protection
force are up against.

I appeal to all Security Council members - the
Ambassadors on the Council - to read the three-page
letter the Secretary-General sent to the Council a
few days ago setting out the severe restrictions by
the Government of South Sudan, which are crippling
the Mission's ability to operate. Chapter VII of the
Charter of the United Nations confers upon the Council
the responsibility to take steps necessary to restore
peace and security. That includes giving UNMISS the
mandate that it needs to protect civilians and maintain
security in Juba. To suggest otherwise would mean
negotiating a mandate with the same Government
that has consistently restricted the movement of
those very peacekeepers, organized protests against
those peacekeepers and harassed humanitarian staff
generally. The Council can deliberate only for so long
about the terms of a mandate as the situation in South
Sudan deteriorates, an increasing number of innocent
people are killed, women and girls are raped and the
country's neighbours call for action and express a
readiness to respond.

More time will amount to only more death and
suffering. Today, the Council has taken a step forward
in its efforts to prevent that from happening. The
stakes are high, and the consequences of continued
obstruction should be clear. By adopting this resolution,
the Security Council has made very clear that if the
Government of South Sudan obstructs the deployment
of UNMISS's regional protection force or continues to
stand in the way of UNMISS carrying out its mandate,
the Security Council is prepared to vote on the arms
embargo draft resolution that is contained in annexed to
resolution 2304 (2016). The United States is prepared to
support imposing an arms embargo on South Sudan if
the obstruction continues. If in 30 days the Secretary-
General reports obstruction, the Council has decided
to vote, and we are confident that consequences
will follow.

While the resolution marks a steps towards
addressing the violence in South Sudan, UNMISS
alone cannot bring an end to the persistent struggle for
power among the country's leaders, which has caused
the suffering of so many people. Until the leaders of
South Sudan are willing to put what is good for their
people before themselves, putting peace ahead of
personal ambition and power, and until they show the
will to find a political solution to this grinding conflict,
the people of South Sudan will continue to suffer from
the bloodshed and instability that their leaders reap.

Let me conclude with the account of a young South
Sudanese woman, a 19-year-old named Betty Christian.
Betty fled her home in Juba last month during the latest
wave of violence. Betty told a reporter that as she fled
her home that she had to pass by a group of soldiers who
debated whether or not to shoot her. Eventually, they
decided to let her live, and so Betty thanked them. She
thanked them for not killing her. That is the world in
which so many of South Sudan's people live today: they
thank people for letting them live.

Far too many people do not even get to do that.
Perhaps no other country has invested as much in South
Sudan's future as the United States of America has.
We share the desire of the people of South Sudan for
a peaceful and prosperous future, but it is the actions
of South Sudan's leaders - their dangerous, deadly
choices - that stand in the way of that future.

When South Sudan's leaders recommit to the cause
of peace, they will find in the United States a steadfast
partner. In the meantime, we will continue to seek a
way to end the atrocities on the ground so that people
like Betty Christian do not have to be thankful every
time they are not killed.

