Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank President Agius, Prosecutor
Brammertz, President Joenson, Prosecutor Jallow and
President Meron for their briefings on the reports of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (see S/2015/585), the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (see S/2015/577) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (S/2015/896, annex).

China welcomes the ICTR's last report, and
congratulates the Tribunal on completing its work and
its preparations to close down by the end of the year.
Through its judicial activities over the past 21 years,
the ICTR has prosecuted some of the most serious
international crimes. Meanwhile, it has also promoted
the development of international law, particularly
international criminal law, and has proudly set records
in many areas. It has also played a role in promoting
peace and reconciliation in the Great Lakes region.
The Tribunal's various Presidents, Prosecutors and
staff have accomplished a great deal and for that China
expresses its appreciation.

Through its report and the events centred around
its closure, the Tribunal has already begun reviewing
and reflecting on its judicial process. We believe that
its experiences and lessons learned in prosecuting some
extremely serious international crimes and addressing
the relationship between the pursuit of justice and the
maintenance of regional peace and stability will go
down in the annals of history, for future generations to
comment on and learn from.

China would like to congratulate Judge Agius
on his election to the presidency of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and we
welcome the fact that the Tribunal will reach a verdict
on two of its appeal cases in mid-December. We have
also noted that a number of cases have been delayed,
for various reasons, and that their initial trials will not
be completed within the expected schedule. We hope
that under President Agius's leadership, the ICTY will
continue to fully implement the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council and, while ensuring judicial
fairness as a precondition, will rationalize its work
arrangements and use of the available resources,
overcome its difficulties and complete all of its work as
soon as possible.

China welcomes the Council's first review of the
the work of the Residual Mechanism and appreciates the
Mechanism's report (S/2015/883, annex I) on its initial
work and the six-month progress report. We thank the
Secretariat for submitting the summary of the report of
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) . We
commend the progress that the Mechanism has made
since its inception and appreciate the improvements it
has instituted, in accordance with the recommendations
of OIOS. We hope that the Council's first review of the
Mechanism will highlight the progress it has made and
the areas that still need improvement, including those
related to its request for keeping the minimum levels
necessary for staffing and financial resources, in order
to urge the Mechanism to continue to abide by Council
resolutions and conduct its work efficiently and cost-
effectively.

The two Tribunals and the Mechanism represent
an important effort by the international community
to punish the most serious types of international
crime and demonstrate the international community's
determination to adhere to the rule of law at the
international level. We hope that the ICTY and the
Mechanism will continue to work hard to improve and
enhance their work in order to live up to the expectations
of the international community.

Last but not least, I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Chile, in its capacity as Chair of
the Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and the Office of Legal Affairs for their work.

