Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We are very pleased to see
you, Mr. President, assuming responsibility for the
presidency. I wish to thank High Representative Izumi
Nakamitsu for her briefing, which, as always, we found
to be balanced, and therefore useful. We are in need
of that kind of approach. Frankly speaking, we need
that very desperately. During times such as this, when
we seem to be so deeply divided, the role of United
Nations officials like her becomes all the more critical.
We thank her.

We remain deeply concerned by the continued
reports on the use of chemical weapons in Syria.
We strongly condemn the use of chemical weapons
by any actor, State and non-State alike, in Syria or
anywhere else. As we have stated repeatedly, the use
of chemical weapons is totally unjustifiable under any
circumstances. It constitutes a threat to international
peace and security and undermines the international
non-proliferation architecture. We cannot agree
more with what the Secretary-General stated in the
concluding paragraph of his letter of 1 February:

"The fact of these continuing allegations again
highlights the shared obligation to identify and
hold to account those responsible for the use of
chemical weapons."

That is why the unity of the Council is absolutely
important. Without it, the Council's ability to respond to
grave threats to international peace and security, such
as the use of chemicals as weapons, will be seriously
hampered. In that regard, what High Representative
Nakamitsu said a while ago is most relevant: "unity,
not impunity".

Let me say that we regret that the Council was not
able to renew the mandate of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons-United Nations Joint
Investigative Mechanism. If we are not able to address
this institutional gap by drawing lessons from last year
and forge the necessary unity and compromise, we
will be sending the wrong message and encouraging
impunity. The fact that chemical-weapon attacks have
continued as recently as yesterday worries us very
much. That is why it is so critical that we seek an
independent way of establishing accountability.
We appreciate the initiative taken by the Russian
Federation to propose a draft resolution on the
establishment of a new mechanism, which has been
the basis for discussion in recent days. This is a
conversation that we welcome. As we continue to
discuss this very important matter, our consultations
should be constructive and forward-looking. Of course,
we are not naive; we have no illusions about how
matters are becoming more and more complicated by
the day. However, we still hope that the Council will
restore its unity to reach common ground and create
an independent, impartial and professional mechanism
that will be able to identify those responsible for the use
of chemical weapons in Syria, based on robust evidence.

We welcome that the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) has
continued to assist the Syrian Government in destroying
the remaining stationary above-ground facilities. As
the High Representative stated, we hope the facilities
will be totally eliminated in the coming month. We
have just heard a very encouraging statement from the
High Representative.

We note that the OPCW has translated and finalized
its analysis of the 19 documents submitted by the Syrian
Government. While we look forward to the final report,
we encourage continued cooperation and meaningful
communication between the Syrian Government and
the OPCW that leads to tangible results to address the
outstanding issues. We also note that its Fact-finding
Mission has continued its investigation related to
allegations of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. We
look forward to its reports.

Let me conclude by again reiterating, at the risk of
sounding naive, how the unity of the Council is vital to
ensuring accountability and deterring and stopping the
use of chemical weapons in Syria and elsewhere. We
only hope that the challenge we face in this area is not a
reflection of the growing lack of trust that characterizes
international relations today, making joint action in
most critical areas more complicated than it should be.

