The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as President of
Croatia.

(Spoke in Croatian; English text provided by the delegation)

Let me repeat two points that I made in the
introduction to this debate. First, the events in Mumbai
12 days ago have confirmed in an extremely tragic way
that terrorism is a global threat. Thus, it is not a threat
affecting any particular country, but all of us. It is a
threat to international peace and security. Needless to
say, we can only counter such a threat globally.

Secondly, such a global response can achieve
success only if it is based on the broadest possible
international cooperation, and we believe that such
solidarity is not currently at the requisite and desirable
level.

The first point only makes the debate that we
initiated long before the Mumbai events more topical,
and the second explains why we wanted to open such a
debate in this very forum, in the United Nations.

In the wake of 11 September 2001, the Republic
of Croatia immediately advocated that an effective
global coalition be formed to fight international
terrorism. At the time we called it an alliance. We
proceeded from the assessment, which has not changed
to date, that such a coalition can function only on the
basis not only of equal relations, but also of mutual
trust among its members. We believe that mutual trust
is extremely important, even in a broader context.

The global solidarity that initially was sincere
faded, not to say disappeared, owing to the lack of such
trust. It waned because it appeared that, from the
beginning, the war on terrorism as an unquestionable
threat to international peace and security had actually
turned into a kind of exclusive competence of one
country or of a group of countries that it led. Moreover,
the fight against terrorism as a global project was also
compromised by the way in which it was waged. That
has led to the disappearance of the basic preconditions
for its success.

However, at the same time, terrorism neither
disappeared nor weakened. Arguments could even be
found for the claim that it grew even stronger. At any
rate, it has become our companion and a part of our
everyday life, and that is the situation which we
currently face. Its basic elements include a significant
decline in global solidarity, a one-sided approach to the
fight against terrorism and its focus, which at times
leaves something to be desired, and, finally, a climate
of insufficient trust in relations among the key
elements on the global scene.

When we considered how to present the view of
the Republic of Croatia regarding that complex issue in
this very forum, we were aware of the options. Either
we could resort to the standard vocabulary of
international forums or, most unusually, we could state
candidly how the Republic of Croatia views terrorism
and its threat to global peace and security. We chose
the latter because we deeply and sincerely believe that
we would all achieve better results if we paid more
attention to considering the essence of the problem -
any problem - rather than focusing on the choice of
words.

Since 2001, we have persistently claimed that the
war on terrorism can be waged and ultimately won
only if we proceed on two tracks. The first refers to
actions of the security apparatus - to the use of force
against the direct perpetrators and their masterminds
and against the terrorist network. Such actions are
inevitable and remove the immediate danger, but will
be of little use if, at the same time, we do not focus on
the deeper causes of terrorism - on the sources of this
disease - rather than on attacking its symptoms. That
is our second track.

Today, on this very spot, we are asking questions,
not expecting to receive or to formulate definite
answers to them. Yet we believe that even by asking
questions, we can draw attention to certain factors that
appear to be unavoidable in the consideration of the
topic on our agenda today.

The first question is: As long as there are people
deprived of all rights, poor through no fault of their
own, doomed to disease, hunger and death, deprived of
opportunities for education and victims of unfair

relations between States, local wars or unresolved local
crises - in a nutshell, as long as there are people who
have lost everything; who know that they will never
get anything, and have only one thing left, namely,
their life - will it be difficult to exploit that
unfortunately inexhaustible pool and recruit potential
terrorists from it?

The second and last question is: Will it be
difficult to turn individuals or groups in that pool of
poverty and hopelessness against those who are
described to them as the causes underlying their
condition, especially when that struggle is presented in
terms of loyalty to faith and high ideals and, ultimately,
of martyrdom?

Those are the questions. We are expected to find
the answers and act accordingly.

The Republic of Croatia once again stresses its
flrm conviction that the use of force, however
indispensable and unavoidable, will resolve nothing in
the long run. A one-sided approach to the fight against
terrorism will not achieve anything either, nor will
pre-emptive action outside the United Nations. We are
firmly committed to the achievement of consensus on
the issue that we are discussing. We do not wish to
open new controversies with these views, but we find it
necessary to present them because that is how we think
and how we see things.

We also deem it necessary and, even more,
imperative to present our view that the only true
answer to the question of how to remove the danger
posed by terrorism to international security lies in
turning to its deeper underlying causes, in emphasizing
development policies, in undertaking enhanced efforts
focused on the establishment of equitable international
relations, in working towards the de-monopolization of
the war on terrorism and its universal implementation
based on re-established international solidarity and
trust - and that is where we believe the United
Nations plays a key role.

But let us avoid any confusion: in focusing on the
environment that breeds terrorism, we are not trying to
justify anyone. Nor have we forgotten that some
attempt to use terrorism in order to achieve specific
goals that, as a rule, have nothing in common with
what drives fanaticized or indoctrinated terrorists.
However, we do claim that, if the pool of potential
terrorists were to dry up, those who exploit them would
lose the weapon for attaining their goals.
All indicators show that we are on the threshold
of creating new relationships within the international
community - not only in the area of economic
relations but also in political relations. The structure
created at the end of the Second World War is worn
out. It must be strengthened and expanded. In a
nutshell, it must be modernized and adjusted to our
time. Such a conclusion is pressingly warranted by the
crises that we are facing - namely, the financial,
economic, food and energy crises - and by global
terrorism as well.

If we do not want the situation to deteriorate into
pure anarchy and chaos, let us take matters into our
own hands - let us control them. But let us do it by
facing reality rather than by closing our eyes to reality.

The United Nations is the place for debating all
these issues. The United Nations is the decision-
making forum -the very same United Nations that, 60
years ago, adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, one of the fundamental documents intended to
regulate the conduct of States and of all subjects in
international relations.

As for its own contribution to the debate on the
dangers posed by terrorism to international peace and
security, the Republic of Croatia would like to
highlight in particular how extremely important it is to
respect human rights and how absolutely unacceptable
it is to jeopardize or limit such rights under the guise of
the fight against terrorism. It is equally unacceptable to
justify terrorism by invoking any religion or
identifying it with any faith or nation.

Therefore, we need a new international solidarity
in the fight against this evil that currently or potentially
threatens us all. All of us must wage this war, united in
a global coalition based on equality and mutual trust.
This solidarity is in fact one of the aspects of the new
multilateralism that is being mentioned ever more
frequently.

The United Nations must be the place that will, at
least politically, coordinate all efforts to check and
eradicate terrorism in the world and reduce it to the
level of incidents. Our fate is not and cannot be to
reconcile ourselves with terrorism or to accept
terrorism as an inevitable evil of the present-day world.
The future of the world is in our own hands.

The founders of the United Nations mentioned
succeeding generations in the Charter of the
Organization. But they were not the only people
responsible for these succeeding generations. We share
the same responsibility. All of us, all the members of
the international community, share the responsibility
for those who have yet to come. And that is something
that we must never forget.

(spoke in French)

I now resume my functions as the President of the
Security Council.

I now give the floor to Mr. Sven Alkalaj, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

