Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA), Mr. Abou
Moussa, for his comprehensive and instructive remarks.
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight
the efforts and energy that he has brought to launching
UNOCA's work. Similarly, I would like to thank the
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Lord's Resistance Army Issues,
Ambassador Francisco Caetano Jose Madeira, for his
informative briefing.

In recent years, Central Africa has made
considerable progress in consolidating its democratic
political systems, strengthening its institutions,
achieving economic growth and establishing
cooperation mechanisms that enable it to provide
coordinated responses to the various cross-border
problems affecting States in the subregion. We very
much welcome the fact that three Central African
countries have launched electoral processes, and that
the average economic growth for 2011 was 5.2 per cent
and is expected to reach an even higher level in 2012.
Similarly, we should highlight the dynamism of the
national debates on political, electoral, economic and
human rights reform.

Despite such progress, as the Secretary-General's
report (S/2012/42l) explains, national authorities must
be supported so that they can establish frameworks that
will enable them to develop and strengthen national
and regional institutions and capacities so that they can
address the various challenges that have the potential
to jeopardize the security and stability of the countries
and the region as a whole.

In that context, UNOCA has a particular role to play
in formulating regional approaches aimed at addressing
the security problems affecting Central Africa. To that
end, the support and closely coordinated efforts of the
entire United Nations system are crucial to making a
reality of the motto "Delivering as one". UNOCA plays
a very important role in channelling and promoting
dialogue and exchange between the subregion and the
United Nations system.

Electoral issues, systems for protecting human
rights, the various manifestations of transnational
organized crime, piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf
of Guinea and the illicit trade in small arms and light
weapons are priority areas on which UNOCA must
continue to focus the attention and coordination of the
various United Nations agencies and programmes, as
well as of the international community in general, with
the goal ofpromoting an approach based on cooperation
and on strengthening national and subregional
capacities.

While progress has been made in combating the
Lord's Resistance Army, the group continues to pose
a serious threat to the security of countries in the
region, and its activities continue to have very bad
humanitarian effects on the population. Grave violations
of international humanitarian law and of human rights
are the key traits that define and characterize the actions
of one of the worst armed groups ever to have emerged
in history.

We welcome the actions undertaken by the Central
African Republic, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, South Sudan and Uganda. We very much
welcome the support and cooperation that has been
provided by the African Union as led by Special Envoy
Francisco Caetano Jose' Madeira, the United States of
America and the European Union in order to meet the
challenges posed by the Lord's Resistance Army.

In the same vein, we are pleased to acknowledge
the further development of the United Nations regional
strategy to address the threats and impact of the
activities of the Lord's Resistance Army, which is a
fundamental tool designed to guide the actions of the
United Nations in support of the regional cooperation
initiative against the Lord's Resistance Army led by the
African Union. Now is the time for the sustained and
comprehensive implementation of the strategy, with
equal importance to be attached to all of its components.
Achieving lasting and definitive success against the
Lord's Resistance Army will require long-term political
commitment, the provision of sufficient resources and
the effective coordination of all stakeholders with the
aim of achieving quantifiable, feasible objectives.

Particular attention must be paid to addressing the
precarious living conditions of the population dwelling
in the areas affected by the presence of the Lord's
Resistance Army. There is a need for the implementation
of robust economic development programmes that will
improve social and economic indicators and which
will enable the population to live in an environment
conducive to their well-being.

Finally, we wish to express our support for the draft
presidential statement that has been prepared on the
issue.

