Ms. Pedros (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): Today's
debate is indeed relevant, as a large part of the Security
Council's efforts is focused on its subsidiary bodies,
which account for much of the work done by the
Permanent Representatives of the elected members who
chair them, at any rate in Spain's case. As the Council
is aware, Spain currently chairs two of them - the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1540
(2004) and the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1718 (2006) - and, until 17 January, we
also chaired the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006). Any improvement in those
bodies is therefore an improvement in the way the
Security Council itself functions.

I shall focus today on the three questions posed
by the presidency for this debate. However, allow me
to reiterate the obvious: each subsidiary body is a
world unto itself and the situations they cover are not
really comparable. A committee on non-proliferation,
such as the 1540 Committee, is not the same as a
sanctions body, such as the 1718 Committee. In each
of the sanctions committees, every situation requires a
case-by-case analysis. However, we should always be
guided by respect for the rule of law, and in particular
for the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations.

Transparency is an inescapable requirement in the
work of the Council and its subsidiary bodies in the
twenty-first century. Global society today, marked by
progress in the area of democracy, demands a Council
that act in a transparent manner. For the Security Council
and its bodies to enjoy authority, they must interact
properly with the whole host of Member States. That is
why we believe that open briefings by the Chairs of the
its subsidiary bodies should become the norm, together
with the publication of the reports of the panels of
experts that support the committees. Interactive public
briefings open to all Member States are also helpful,
although they should be carefully prepared in order to
avoid repeating information from Council briefings.
Rather than addressing formal issues, the Committees
should strive to ensure that meetings are useful and
substantive. Whenever possible, we should make better
use of informal meetings on the margins of formal
committee meetings - what is known as informal
informals. A lot of progress on highly controversial
issues can be made in such meetings.

In the era of the Internet, there is no better tool
than the web pages of subsidiary bodies. In that regard,
we should acknowledge the work being done by the
Secretariat. We would particularly like to highlight
the 1540 Committee's web page, which is an excellent
source of information on this area.

One issue that is much discussed is that of
interaction with the affected States. While that is an
unavoidable requirement, each case has to be considered
individually. Moreover, committees must be able to
count on the necessary confidentiality in discussing
what are often very difficult and controversial issues.

With regard to preparing future Chairs to assume
their functions, there is room for improvement. Starting
this year, the new members of the Security Council will
be elected in June. It is therefore logical to assume that
the new Chairs will also be appointed earlier. But let
us be practical. The non-permanent members serve on
the Council for two years. As a result, there is not much
sense in assuming that the Chairs' transition process
will begin six months ahead of time. We think three
months is a reasonable period for that transition. As to
the training for Chairs, the Spanish delegation received
a great deal of support from the Secretariat for several
weeks before taking its seat on the Council - indeed,
perhaps more than we were really able to absorb. We
also had a lot of support from the outgoing Chairs from
South Korea, Luxembourg and Australia. We therefore
cannot but hope that our experience will serve as a
reference for others.

It is clear that sanctions are not an end in themselves.
They are imposed when other possibilities have been
exhausted, and always with the aim of guaranteeing
international peace and security while ensuring that
they do not have unintended consequences. We should
remember that sanctions are preventive, rather than
punitive, in nature. And they are increasingly being used
to support Governments and regions that are struggling
to establish peaceful transitions. However, some
measures are unavoidable in certain circumstances,
such as arms embargoes designed to avert an escalation
of Violence and to save lives. Furthermore, experience
has shown that the adoption of coercive measures can
be an effective instrument for correcting or modifying
specific behaviours. However, to a great extent, their
effectiveness depends upon proper implementation by
all Member States, and that effect must be assessed as
part of a comprehensive strategy that should include all
instruments used in a particular context. Nor should
we forget that it is those committing the acts that the
Council is attempting to prevent through its imposition
of sanctions who, in the final analysis, are doing the
most harm to the people as a whole. The best way to
prevent undesired consequences is to implement the
Council's resolutions.

Before I conclude, and speaking practically, I would
like to suggest some ways of improving the work of
subsidiary bodies. We should, for example, improve the
coordination among subsidiary bodies with situations
or subject areas in common, such as the excellent
collaboration among the 1540 Committee, the Counter-
Terrorism Committee and the 1267 Committee. We
should also promote coordination among penholders
and the relevant subsidiary bodies working on
specific situations or topics, especially with regard to
sanctions, which are often a fundamental tool in the
implementation of measures instituted by the Council
in the case of serious threats to international peace and
security - as attested to by the Council's own agenda.

