Mr. Valle (Brazil): First of all, I would like to
thank Assistant Secretary-General Hedi Annabi for
presenting the Secretary-General's report on the
activities of the United Nations Mission of Support in
Timor-Leste (UNMISET), which are quite promising.

Important progress has been made in the
implementation of UNMISET's mandate in the last few
years. The security situation is calm and stable,
although incidents can occur and will have to be dealt
with accordingly. However, it is a fact that, after
20 May, a new phase will begin in United Nations
commitments as regards the fulfilment of Timorese
aspirations to the creation of a functioning, viable and
democratic State.

Enthusiasm about the success of the United
Nations presence must not lead us to lose sight of the
challenges still facing that country. The foundations for
the Timorese State have now been laid. Nevertheless,
there are urgent tasks that must still be carried out in
order to ensure the minimum required conditions for
the success of the transition in the country and the full
exercise of sovereignty by its people. Timor-Leste is a
country mired in poverty and in urgent need of
international assistance in the socio-economic, security
and political fields. Overall cooperation and support
are still required in a vast array of critical areas.

International responsibilities vis-a-vis the country
are by no means over, and my country stands ready to
do its share as we continue to enhance our bilateral
cooperation with the Timorese Government.

Timor-Leste requires a smooth transition to a
situation conducive to the preservation of stability and
security as well as continuity in the strengthening of its
national institutions and State administration. The
progress achieved so far cannot be jeopardized.

Brazil welcomes and fully supports the creation
of the United Nations Office in Timor-Leste (UNOTIL)
as the successor mission to UNMISET.

Challenges related to the transition towards a
post-conflict situation in Timor-Leste and to the
promotion of rehabilitation and the implementation of
peacebuilding measures, including the establishment of
development strategies, will represent a test for the
United Nations and the international community. We
trust that stability will be preserved in the country as
the democratic process evolves and reconciliation
efforts gain momentum.
We also welcome the signing of the Provisional
Agreement on the Borderline by the Foreign Ministers
of Timor-Leste and Indonesia, which came into effect
on 8 May, as well as the establishment on 9 March of
the Truth and Friendship Commission by Presidents
Gusmao and Yudhoyono and Prime Minister Alkatiri.

Brazil welcomes the holding of local elections
last March in the eastern districts, which bodes well for
the future of political parties in Timor-Leste. The
careful handling of problems related to religious
education in school programmes reflects maturity and a
promising ability on the part of the Timorese
Government to overcome potentially divisive issues in
a peaceful manner.

We recognize the important role to be played in
this new phase by the United Nations development and
humanitarian agencies and by the donor community,
especially neighbouring countries such as Australia,
Indonesia and New Zealand and the small islands
members of the Pacific Group. In our view, providing
assistance to promote Timor-Leste's long-term
development is the best way to ensure that violence
does not recur in the future.

Brazil appreciates in particular the efforts of the
Governments of Indonesia and of Australia to resolve
pending issues and strengthen bilateral ties with Timor-
Leste based on friendship and respect, including the
delimitation of their borders and the conclusion of
mutually beneficial agreements concerning the sharing
of common natural resources.

An open-ended United Nations presence in
Timor-Leste is not warranted. Yet we believe that only
one step should be taken at a time. In that context,
income-generating projects to minimize any potential
adverse impacts caused by the decrease in United
Nations personnel and expenditures are more than ever
necessary.

It is essential to maintain the current level of
public services following the end of UNMISET's
mandate. Strides have been made towards the
Timorization of the public administration, and
important progress has been achieved in building the
capacity of Timorese State institutions during the
consolidation phase. It is critical for the future of the
country to strengthen the rule of law, including the
justice system and law-enforcement institutions,
especially the police. That is a precondition not only
for ensuring the observance of human rights but also
for providing a solid basis for a sound economic
system.
Despite improved relations between the
Indonesian Armed Forces and the Timorese Border
Patrol Unit, there is an urgent need for the
establishment of an effective mechanism for the
management of the border, to replace the military
liaison arrangement, which will expire in June 2005.

In the area of criminal justice, Timor-Leste still
faces a serious lack of specialized personnel. We stress
the need to conclude as soon as possible the pending
activities of the Serious Crimes Unit with respect to
finalizing the process of handing over all relevant
documentation related to those serious crimes to the
Timorese authorities.

It is also important to address other legal
problems that might inhibit economic recovery and
development, particularly as concerns the need for
clear and stable legislation in various domains.

We cannot rely solely on voluntary
contributions. It is necessary to secure a predictable
source of funding, as rightly pointed out in the
Secretary-General's report. We call on donors to
disburse all pledged funds as soon as possible. Now is
the time to protect the huge investment we all have
already made. In that context, the major factor that
must guide the renewal of UNOTIL's mandate in future
should be the capacity of the Government of Timor to
carry out its State duties.

I wish also to take this opportunity to commend
once again the excellent and professional work
performed by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Sukehiro Hasegawa, and his team
of civilian and military personnel. We sincerely hope
that the Security Council and other organs of the
United Nations will continue to attach a high priority
to Timor-Leste.

