Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom):
Thank you, Mr. President, for guiding us again today in
what I think is proving a very interesting debate. I
congratulate first those who have participated in it. I
think that we are moving the subject forward in a way
that would be not nearly as productive if we were
sticking to our written text. I congratulate Ambassador
Apata of Nigeria for abandoning his written text,
leaving it with us because it makes some good points,
and making even better ones in his ad lib intervention.
A lot of good points have been made. We got off to a
good start with the interventions of Ambassadors
Koonjul, Simonovie, Kebe and Assistant Secretary-
General Fall. There was a lot of meat in all their
interventions. I want to draw out one or two points,
perhaps touching, as Ambassador Levitte did, on one or
two sensitive areas.

First of all, the ad hoc Working Group is a good
idea. Ambassador Koonjul is taking it forward in
exactly the right sort of way. But the proof of it has got
to be that it makes a difference, just as the proof of a
better relationship between the Security Council and
the Economic and Social Council - which is another
area that has got warm support from everybody who
has spoken so far - has to be that coordination in New
York and indeed with Geneva, where it matters, makes
a difference on the ground. Sierra Leone is a very good
example of this, a peacekeeping operation that has
covered much wider areas than straight peace and
security. But it has needed the input of different
agencies.

The way we work in New York has to reflect the
results that we need in the field; that is the point of
doing it. I think a good example is one which
Ambassador Simonovie and others have drawn
attention to - Sierra Leone and Gambia were quite
clear on this - and that is the gap between the end of a
crisis and the beginning of normal development. It is
an area that we have begun to point to, but it was only
when the Secretary-General established a particular
office for Afghanistan that we had somebody
responsible for the recovery period. This is something
that the United Kingdom has been looking for and
which we have been talking about in theoretical terms
for a long time, and indeed starting to seminar on. But
10 and behold, it has begun to happen in Afghanistan.
Why is it not yet happening in Africa?

I think our relationship with the regional and
subregional organizations has rightly come out as a
very necessary theme. I am very glad that the African
Union is going to establish a Peace and Security
Council, which will give the kind of links that we want
to have with the African Union - a very practical
utility. I very much like the approach in Ambassador
Kebe's speech, where he makes points A to D on his
page four of what the mechanism of coordination
between the Security Council and the African Union or
the Peace and Security Council should actually cover.
We should note his focus, because it is first of all
rightly typical of the African approach, but it is also
something we must pay attention to on funding and on
the evaluation of humanitarian needs and of recovery
and reconstruction needs - all areas on which the
Security Council is not necessarily the primary player.
So we need horizontal coordination. We need vertical
coordination with other bodies that are our sisters in
this and with the main players, the regional players, the
subregional players. That is the grist to the mill of
cooperation between the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council.

I am very pleased that there is warm support for
that. As everyone knows, we the United Kingdom have
been pushing for it for a long time, and the
establishment of an ad hoc advisory group of the
Economic and Social Council is going to make that
much more practical. I do not see why we should not
have - I would have no objection - in at least some
meetings of those ad hoc or advisory groups members
or one member of the other sitting in the sessions so
that there is immediate cross-seeding of the ideas in
both groups.

I continue to be very interested in the whole area
of governance, which Ibrahima Fall spoke of at some
length, as have others. It is remarkable how Africans
themselves are now talking about governance. It is the
key to a new era of progress, in my view, on dealing
with African problems. I want to point to a little
contrast that I noticed between what Ambassador
Kumalo said about the New Partnership for Africa's
Development (NEPAD), that this is about Africans
solving African problems, and what Ambassador
Sharma of Nepal said as an interested outsider looking
at Africa, that - I paraphrase - the weight of African
problems all coming together is too great for Africans
alone to bear.

How do we put those two things together? I
suppose that one answer is to say, as we often feel on
the Security Council, that we are all Africans now. But
there is a political sense in which Africans must take
the lead in solving African problems. The important
thing about NEPAD is not only that the document
recognizes for Africans the whole gamut of things that
need to be done, but that Africans are also, as African
leaders, inviting outsiders to come in on a partnership
to solve those problems. If we follow Ambassador
Kumalo's formulation, we are being invited to become
Africans in solving the problems of Africa. I think that
is the frame of mind in which the Security Council
established the ad hoc Working Group.

But there is also this trade-off, if you like, or
interface between conflict and development. I was
particularly struck by Sierra Leone's intervention on
this, strongly put from a strong recent experience.
Peace, democracy and good governance are
prerequisites for sustainable development, and the
causes of conflict and their solutions are nearly always
linked to aspects of wider regional stability.

The fact is that it is only since the Security
Council has taken on board that conflict resolution is
an aspect of development that we have begun to
develop working methods that have a chance of solving
the concatenation of problems that conflict and
development produce. This is why it is not only just a
good thing, as a matter of coordination, that we should
be working with the Economic and Social Council and
with other organs ofthe United Nations; it is absolutely
essential if we are to have an effect on the ground in
resolving the problems that hit both conflict resolution
and development. What the Ambassador of Benin said
for the African Group on this is relevant. Frankly, what
the European Union has done by way of analysis and
action on this - as the interventions of Spain and Hans
Dahlgren, the Special Representative of the European
Union to the Mano River Union demonstrate - is
extremely important and is an area with which we will
continue.

To sum up, what the United Kingdom is
interested in out of all of this is results on the ground,
better coordination to that end, continuing the
institutional progress that we are making in debates of
this kind, and learning the lessons not just of our
failures, but also of our success stories. We must do a
"lessons learned" exercise on Sierra Leone, the latest
success story to date, and apply those lessons, if
necessary, to the Great Lakes region, which for Africa
must now be gotten right, first of all by Africans, but
also with us supporting them.

We must take up the cross-cutting issues. AIDS is
one such issue. AIDS was not our subject first of all,
yet it was the Security Council that gave political
impetus to the fight against HIV/AIDS, something we
may have to come back to when the Economic and
Social Council takes it up later this summer. Also,
there is the matter of support for the New Partnership
for Africa's Development (NEPAD), which we are all
talking about. But, as Ibrahima Fall said so clearly in
his intervention, what matters now is follow-up.

Disarmament, demobilization, reintegration and
repatriation or resettlement (DDRRR) is a matter of
follow-up and is something we have not yet got right in
Africa, because we do not look at the "RRR" aspects of
demobilization. Many other delegations have
underlined this, because they are looking for
implementation of the analysis that we have all done.
They are looking for results.

So we will follow up this debate. We are setting
aside time during the United Kingdom presidency in
July for an Africa workshop which will build on what
we learn in this debate, so that it does not just get left
in reports on Council members' shelves or in their
capitals as something ephemeral. Rather, it will lead to
something that we take up, implement the sensible
elements of, move forward in coordination about and
produce results on, so long as we are working under the
leadership of Africans who know what they want and
invite those who want to help to do it with them. That
is what we are talking about.

