Mr. Moungara Moussotsi (Gabon) (spoke in French): Allow me also to thank President Mkapa and
Mr. Menkerios for their very detailed briefings on the
recent consultative referendum on Southern Sudan.

I would like to comment briefly on the
referendum, which took place in a peaceful
atmosphere, as well as on the challenges that remain to
be addressed and the situation in Darfur.

The referendum held on 9 January marked a
decisive turning point in the history of the Sudan. By
respecting the timetable set out by the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement, the Sudanese parties once again
showed their courage and their capacity to overcome
their differences to push forward peace and stability in
their country. I would therefore like to pay them a
warm tribute. My delegation urges them to show the
same restraint until the announcement of the final
results and to respect the outcome.

We would also like to congratulate the Southern
Sudan Referendum Commission for having ensured the
smooth conduct of the ballot. We are also grateful to
the various international observers, who made it
possible to monitor the ballot and affirmed its fair and
democratic nature. Likewise, the support of the United
Nations Mission in the Sudan (UNMIS), the United
Nations Development Programme and other partners
deserve to be commended here.
We remain convinced that the same clear-
sightedness shown by the Sudanese parties during the
referendum will prevail in addressing the no less

crucial issues that remain to be settled, in particular
border demarcation, citizenship, the sharing of
resources, the management of assets and debts, and
security provisions. The future of fraternal relations
and peaceful coexistence between the North and the
South depend on that.

To that end, we are encouraged by the
establishment of a framework to guide the talks on
those important issues, and we would like to commend
the role played by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel in that regard. Such progress,
although minimal, merits support. The international
community should encourage the parties to continue
their efforts and to make the necessary concessions in
order to reach a final agreement.

Moreover, we urge the parties to take courageous
decisions in order to find an agreement on the issue of
Abyei. The clashes that occurred during the voting
show the volatility of the situation in that region. They
also require the strengthening of UNMIS in the most
sensitive areas of the border between the North and the
South.

The success of the referendum in the Southern
Sudan should not conceal the precarious nature of the
situation in Darfur and its impact on civilian
populations and humanitarian workers. Here too, the
mobilization of the international community is
important. We must keep the pressure on all parties and
support the peace process, which is having difficulty in
moving forward.

We welcome the joint efforts of Joint Chief
Mediator Djibril Bassole and Qatar that have made it
possible to establish committees for talks between
Khartoum and the Liberation and Justice Movement on
issues such as power-sharing, wealth and security.

We reiterate our support for the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID). We also call on the Sudanese authorities
to lift the restrictions imposed on UNAMID and
humanitarian workers in order to allow them access to
the needy populations in Darfur. Gabon hopes to see
the Doha talks end in an inclusive peaceful agreement.

To conclude, my delegation would like to
encourage the international community to invest in the
economic development of the Southern Sudan in order
to guarantee lasting peace and security, whatever the
outcome of the referendum.
Finally, my delegation will support the draft
presidential statement to be adopted at the end of our
discussions.

