Mr. Fesko (Ukraine): I thank Assistant Secretary-
General Wane for his update.

Ukraine is extremely concerned by the scale of
terrorist activities in the Sahel region. We strongly
condemn the terrorist attack in Burkina Faso's capital,
Ouagadougou, on Sunday. My delegation expresses
sincere condolences to our colleagues from France and
Senegal in connection with the loss of their citizens in
this attack. Similarly, we condemn the attack against
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and mourn
the death of a Togolese peacekeeper. This and other
recent militant strikes in the region illustrate the fact
that the threat of terrorism continues to loom over most
of the Sahel.

The ongoing instability in Mali remains one
of the main factors causing a spillover of violence
into neighbouring countries. In that regard, we are
convinced that the deployment of the Malian defence
and security forces throughout the country to combat
violent extremists and maintain law and order is
urgently needed.

However, given the scope of the security challenges
in the Sahel, it is apparent that Mali cannot fight
terrorism alone. The international community and the
region in particular must continue consolidating their
efforts to battle this scourge.

As we learned today, the deployment of the
Group of Five for the Sahel joint force is under way.
We understand that funding remains a challenge. In
that context, we hope that the conference scheduled
for mid-September in Berlin as well as other relevant
initiatives will help to cover existing financial gaps.

There is information to suggest that Mali and
Burkina Faso were on alert about the planned attack that
occurred on Sunday. Even though it was not prevented,
this shows that MINUSMA's intelligence-gathering
operation is bearing fruit. In that context, we believe
that intelligence-sharing between MINUSMA and the
joint force, once it is fully operational, should be one of
the priority areas of cooperation.

Finally, we look forward to the October report of
the Secretary-General on this issue and are ready to
engage constructively in considering its findings.

