Mr. Chungong Ayafor (Cameroon) (spoke in French): Thirty months ago, following the tragic
attacks of 11 September 2001, the Security Council
unanimously adopted its historic resolution 1373
(2001) under Chapter VII of the Charter. That
resolution has become the road map for a worldwide
mobilization against terrorism. It is only natural that
from time to time we should stop to assess the progress
we have together made in this common struggle, which
we hope will never let up. Terrorism is unjustifiable. It
is unacceptable.

Mr. President, I want to say how much we
appreciate your initiative to convene this open debate
on an item that has mobilized us all. Also, I
congratulate Ambassador Arias on the detailed updated
information he has just provided about the activities of
the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC), which he has
chaired in an outstanding manner since April 2003. In
his statement earlier this morning, he did not merely
take stock of the situation; he spoke also about the
necessary revitalization of the Committee's working
methods to ensure greater effectiveness and more
productive endeavours.

In general, the Committee's record is a positive
one. The Committee has already considered 461 reports
in less than three years: that is a record in the history of
the United Nations. To that we can add the following
achievements: the establishment of a global anti-
terrorism network involving States and international,
regional and subregional organizations; ensuring
awareness by the international community of the threat
posed by terrorism and of the need for a united fight
against it; the creation of a real counter-terrorism
database; and strong encouragement over the past three
years to ratify the 12 international counter-terrorism
instruments.

We must keep up this momentum by providing
the Committee with means commensurate with its
mission. For that reason, Cameroon supports
Ambassador Arias's suggestions for addressing the
problems encountered by States and by the Committee
in implementing resolution 1373 (2001). Here, I
welcome the revitalization proposal the Committee
approved on 19 February.

Cameroon has always advocated strengthening
the current legal framework, which remains sectoral in
nature and which thus displays gaps. We will therefore
continue to join other members of the great United
Nations family in their efforts to bring to fruition the
plans for a comprehensive anti-terrorism convention
and for a convention to prevent and punish acts of
nuclear terrorism.

In addition to such legal concerns, there is also
the question of building the capacity of some States,
such as mine, to enable them to combat terrorism
effectively. True, the Committee is considering that
question as a matter of priority, but the logistical and
technological gap between States remains, and it could
be exploited at any time by terrorists and their
sponsors. Here, we hope that idea once put forward by
the French delegation - of providing the Committee
with a special counter-terrorism fund - is still of
interest to the Committee.

The new, ambitious programme of work appeals
to us, and, naturally, we fully support it. We also note
with approval the profound concern for greater
productivity and effectiveness that now seems to be the
Committee's leitmotif. It is from that perspective that
we View the Committee's determination to make its
activities more operational. We share the view that it is
not enough just to adopt national counter-terrorism
legislation or to become parties to the various
international conventions on the subject: we must first
and foremost ensure that these measures are effectively
implemented.

That is also how we understand the Committee's
determination to review its working methods. The
delegation of Cameroon has always considered that the
three phases - A, B and C - for analysing the reports
submitted by States did not provide the best way of
assessing the international community's efforts in
implementing resolution 1373 (2001).

Further, my country considers that the
establishment of a Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate could provide the Committee
with a real mechanism both to follow up and monitor
its work and to assess its activities with a view to
adapting them as necessary. Setting up an assessment
and technical assistance office within the Directorate,
inter alia, to provide liaison with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and other human rights organizations would meet the
legitimate concerns of many Member States.

My country would be happy to welcome those in
charge of that structure, once they have been
appointed, in order to strengthen our dialogue and our
fruitful relationship of cooperation with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We also welcome the news that,
in the sphere of technical assistance, the Committee
has decided to go beyond the role of a mere
intermediary between donors of assistance and
applicants, and to play a more active role in the future.

With its proven links with transnational organized
crime, terrorism today poses a real threat to
international peace and security. Our common fight
must therefore be a long-term endeavour; it must be
based on a clear-minded strategy that will rally support
and that encompasses the elimination or reduction of
intolerance, injustice and poverty, and the promotion of
democracy and respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms.

