Mr. Arreaza (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to respond to some
things that have been said this afternoon.

First of all, we made it clear in our first statement
that the reason we referred to President Trump's
statement to the General Assembly in 2018 (see A/73/ PV.6) was to denounce the fact that President Trump,
from the rostrum that embodies multilateralism and
international law, again validated the Monroe Doctrine,
which considers our Latin America to be the backyard
and exclusive zone of influence of the United States.
In outlining the United States new national security
doctrine, he reiterated that fact, which, in that context,
represents a military threat against the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela. If the United Nations, through
its Security Council and General Assembly, cannot
condemn that, then I do not understand what can be
condemned in this institution.

Venezuela has three satellites - one for telecom-
munications and two for ground observation - thanks
to its cooperation with the People's Republic of China.
Venezuela thanks Cuba wholeheartedly for committing
its personnel to provide the Venezuelan people with
health care, education and life at a time when we
did not have, as we do today, an army of doctors and
professionals. Thanks to the Cuban revolution and
Commander Fidel Castro, Raul Castro and, today,
Miguel Diaz-Canel Bermudez, we have been able to
offer well-being and happiness to our people.

A few months ago, on 4 August, there was an attempt
to assassinate President Maduro Moros at a public
event. Individuals from Colombia and Miami took part
in that failed attempt. Among them was a Peruvian
journalist living in the United States who claims that
he had attended meetings and that he had wanted to buy
more drones to assassinate President Maduro, the entire
political and military leadership and Venezuelan public
authorities at an event commemorating the anniversary
of the National Guard.

We requested both Colombia and the United
States to extradite the individuals responsible for that
attempted assassination. We gave them indications of
where the individuals were located: for example, the
municipality of Chinacota in Colombia, and the city
of Atlanta in the United States. We gave them names,
including those of the immigration agents who allowed
the individuals, drones and explosives to pass through.
We gave them everything, but we have received no
response. Instead, they offered refugee status to the
masterminds behind the attack, who were revealed
in the confessions of those who carried it out. None
of what I have just mentioned has been discussed or
condemned here.

We also want to tell the people and authorities of
Colombia that although they insult us, ignore us and
refuse to communicate with us, the Bolivarian revolution
of President Maduro will always be available to the
people and institutions of Colombia to achieve peace in
that country - the site of the last armed conflict on our
continent, and one with direct links to the production
and export of cocaine, among other drugs. We are ready
to assist Colombia to achieve a lasting peace in all its
processes of negotiation.

The United States has over 800 military bases around
the world. It has 70 military bases in Latin America.
We do not have a single one. Our Constitution 4 to

which everyone here has referred with a view to the
illegal undermining of our President 4 prevents us
from having foreign military bases. What we have is
military cooperation. The United States cut off military
cooperation with us 15 or 16 years ago, but Russia,
China and others have offered us military cooperation,
and it is our sovereign right to protect our territorial
integrity, our people and our sovereignty. We do not
seek to attack anyone or to ever put anyone at risk.

We have had 25 elections in Venezuela in 20 years.
The Bolivarian revolution won 23 elections, and in the
two that we lost, we immediately recognized the loss.
With respect to the electoral system used, the electoral
authorities that organized the election of the National
Assembly in December 2015 have not changed. There
are even greater guarantees because, at the request of
the Dominican Republic, we created more security
guarantees in the electoral system that elected President
Maduro last year.

The Venezuelan opposition could not agree on
a single candidate. They pressured candidates not
to participate, although some did. There was a legal
constitutional election that led to a popular outcome
that we cannot simply disregard. It is in line with our
Constitution, and overturning it would mean scoffing
at the wish of some 10 million voters.

Venezuelan migration has been mentioned several
times. As I have said previously, there is indeed
migration, but not of the magnitude and scale that we
have been led to believe. I thank those countries who
have received Venezuelan migrants and would ask them
to share information with us so that we can effectively
corroborate their number, where they are, how to help
them and how to implement our plan of return so that
they can come back to the country. However, refugee
status is being given orally to millions of them. How
can that be? Who says they are refugees? We must be
more rigorous in our use of terminology.

There is economic migration that is largely the
result of the blockade and economic persecution of
the United States against Venezuela. Perhaps it would
be a good idea to invite Mr. Jose Luis Rodriguez
Zapatero, former Prime Minister of Spain, to testify as
to the process of dialogue in Venezuela, the electoral
guarantees that were provided and why the commitment
among the parties that would have guaranteed peace
was not signed. Perhaps we could also learn why those
who did not sign it are now at the head of a coup d'etat
in Venezuela.

It is a heavy responsibility to recognize
Governments that have not been constitutionally
elected. Harm is being done. A mistake is being made.
States are entering a new stage of international law, and
we invite them to reflect. We invite Europe to reflect.
Europe should take the eight-day ultimatum it imposed
on us to reflect. Perhaps in eight days Europe can learn
to respect the Constitution of Venezuela and support an
egalitarian dialogue in a framework of respect for the
sovereignty of Venezuela, as it should be and as we all
would like to see.

There were 300 observers. I ask that we be
provided with any report from the electoral observers
in Venezuela stating that the elections were not honest
or that the voting machines had problems. Let us have
a fact-based dialogue. Let us be diligent. It seems that
speakers here are following the same script. Some seem
forced to read what has been dictated to them, and that
is painful. The sovereignty of our brethren States on the
continent is being undermined.

As I said about two hours ago, I think we also need
to acknowledge that the Government of Ecuador denied
us the flight authorization necessary for the return of
Venezuelan immigrants who, fleeing the persecution
promoted by President Lenin Moreno Garces against
Venezuelans, had taken refuge in our Embassy and
diplomatic missions in Ecuador. Although it was
not granted yesterday, as would have been right, or
this morning, the Ecuadorian Ombudsman's Office
intervened. Finally, the Ecuadorian Ministry for
Foreign Affairs granted authorization, and we can
retrieve our compatriots.

Venezuela is at peace. Attempts to provoke a war
in Venezuela have not been successful. Venezuela is a
country that will defend its sovereignty and will always
use dialogue. In Venezuela, the people, the workers, the
trade unions, the farmers, the local councils and the
businessmen are in favour of sovereignty and peace. We
will not allow any Government or country to violate our
sovereignty or to promote war. Nor will we give Donald
Trump the pretext he seems to need to start a war.

