Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to join others in thanking Judge Theodor
Meron and Judge Khalida Rachid Khan for their
presentations and assessments of the work of the
Tribunals. We also appreciate very much the briefings
by the Prosecutors of the two Tribunals.

India welcomes the progress made by the two
Tribunals in expediting their work on the completion
strategies. We have noted various measures adopted by
the Tribunals to ensure a smooth transition to the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. We also welcome the cooperation extended
by Member States to the two Tribunals. The arrest of
Ratko Mladie and Goran Hadzie is an important
example of effective international cooperation. Now no
outstanding fugitive remains of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia since
(ICTY). However, nine of the accused of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
remain at large and need to be apprehended and
transferred to the ICTR.

It is critical that the Tribunals finish their work
on time. We have listened carefully to the concerns
expressed by Judge Meron and Judge Khan in relation
to their ability to keep pace with their work while
adhering to the projected timelines. The Judges have
pointed out that the Tribunals' trials and appeals
continue to be affected by rules relating to the
assignment of contempt proceedings, the loss of highly
efficient staff members and the employment of interns.
We fully share those concerns. The retention of
adequate and experienced staff is necessary to enable
the Tribunals to complete their work in accordance
with the completion strategy.

In that context, there is a need for flexibility in
the existing rules, including on the retention of interns,
especially when the Tribunals are winding up their
work and experienced people are unavailable for short
periods. We support the suggestion made by Judge
Meron and Judge Khan in that connection. The issue
raised by Judge Khan on the relocation of convicted
persons is also important and needs to be addressed.

We have noted with satisfaction that both the
ICTY and the ICTR have been working closely in
coordination with the Office of Legal Affairs to
implement the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, established by resolution 1966
(2010). Enhanced cooperation among the ICTY, the
ICTR, the Office of Legal Affairs and the Council's
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
will further streamline the implementation of the
Residual Mechanism. The Council should stand ready
to address any functional, operational or institutional
issue that may arise in relation to the completion
strategy or the Residual Mechanism.

In conclusion, we believe that the two Tribunals
have admirably implemented their mandates. We
consider that the continued support of the Security
Council is crucial at this juncture, as the Tribunals are
taking all necessary steps to keep the trial and appeal
schedules on track. That will pave the way for the
successful trials of the remaining accused and a smooth
transition to an efficient Residual Mechanism.

