Ms. Coleman (United States of America): Since
we last met to discuss Afghanistan in September
(see S/PV.7771), we have been encouraged by
notable progress on a number of fronts. Perhaps most
significantly, President Ghani and Chief Executive
Abdullah are working together to strengthen the
cohesion of the National Unity Government. The
transparent and consultative process to select the
members of the Independent Election Commission,
who were sworn into office on 22 November,
demonstrates the commitment of both leaders to build
a merit-based, ethnically inclusive Government that is
committed to promoting peace, stability and prosperity
in Afghanistan.

In spite of the escalating attacks against the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces, Government
officials and civilians, which were highlighted in Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Yamamoto's
briefing, we commend the Afghan Government for
its continued commitment to an inclusive, Afghan-led
peace process. The agreement signed on 29 September
between the Afghan Government and Hizb-i Islami
establishes a precedent for the Government to negotiate
a political settlement with armed groups in the interests
of Afghans.

We continue to call upon the Taliban to enter into
negotiations with the Government. Our message to the
Taliban and armed groups is that they will not be able
to derail Afghanistan's future through terrorist attacks.

However, they are welcome to lay down their arms,
negotiate peace and choose to contribute to the future of
their country. Meanwhile, recent strong commitments
made by the international community are encouraging.
The $15.2 billion in development assistance through
2020 that was pledged at the Brussels Conference on
Afghanistan in October is an important example. Also
at the Brussels Conference, President Ghani and Chief
Executive Abdullah underscored their commitment
to establishing a functional, accountable and
sustainable Government through the implementation
of the Afghanistan National Peace and Development
Framework and the Self-Reliance through Mutual
Accountability Framework. We support them in those
efforts. Of course, difficult challenges remain.

We are concerned that continued attacks by the
Taliban, affiliates of the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant and other armed groups are undermining security
and hindering the development that Afghanistan so
desperately needs. As we have seen since the beginning
of the conflict, the vast majority of victims in those
attacks are civilians. In the first nine months of 2016,
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) documented 2,562 civilian deaths and 5,835
injuries. Those are tragic additions to a needless toll
of death and suffering that includes many Government
workers and members of security forces. Since
mid-July, Afghanistan has experienced a spike in the
number of Afghan refugees and undocumented Afghan
migrants returning from Pakistan. To date, 372,000
Afghan refugees have returned from Pakistan and
662,000 undocumented Afghans have returned from
Iran and Pakistan. The number of persons internally
displaced by the conflict in Afghanistan also continues
to increase significantly. We remain concerned by
those numbers and the possibility of a humanitarian
emergency as winter sets in.

We are also aware that returns to Afghanistan may
increase again in the spring, which could potentially
overtax an already stressed humanitarian response
system. In order to avoid a humanitarian emergency,
the return of refugees and migrants to Afghanistan
should be voluntary, humane and in line with applicable
international law. Amid those clear challenges, some
specific steps could help Afghanistan make progress.
The National Unity Government needs to institutionalize
clear, consultative, multi-ethnic selection processes
for ministers and senior officials. Anti-corruption
initiatives must demonstrate the ability to hold officials
accountable regardless of rank, in order to ensure that
Afghanistan's resources are used for development,
security and public services.

After the promising progress made in naming an
Independent Election Commission, we look forward
to the completion of key election reforms and credible
parliamentary elections at the appropriate time. Against
that backdrop, UNAMA has played a critical role in
helping Afghanistan build its future. In upcoming
months, we also encourage UNAMA to help prepare
Afghan women to run as political candidates and serve
as community leaders.

My last point is that my delegation would like to
thank Ambassador Van Bohemen and the delegation of
New Zealand for its able stewardship of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999)
concerning Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities over the past two years. We
consider that Committee an important tool, not just
for countering the threat of the Taliban, but also for
promoting peace and reconciliation in Afghanistan.

