Mr. Ramirez Carrefio (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I should like to thank
Mr. Jeffrey Feltman and Mr. Stephen O'Brien for their
briefings this morning regarding the humanitarian and
security situation in the Lake Chad Basin.

We remain concerned about the security situation
there as well as the humanitarian crisis that has engulfed
that region for several years now and which, despite the
progress made by the countries of the region in recent
months, continues to affect millions of people, owing
both to the impact of extremists, who use appalling
tactics to sow fear among the population, and to all
of the socioeconomic factors that have historically
affected the countries of the region. Food insecurity,
poverty, exclusion, drought, transnational organized
crime and the clashes between local communities, in
addition to the threat posed by the terrorist group Boko
Haram, responsible for forced displacement and great
instability, have undermined the normal development
of a region with great human and economic potential.

In that connection, the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela once again emphatically condemns the acts
carried out by the terrorist group Boko Haram in the
Lake Chad region, which represent grave attacks against
the peace and security of the people of Cameroon,
Chad, Nigeria and the Niger in recent years, and which
exacerbate the already fragile situation, particularly the
humanitarian aspect.

It is absolutely reprehensible that the actions of
that terrorist group include the abduction of children,
young people and women, and the destruction of
educational facilities and other civilian infrastructure.
In that regard, we have been and will continue to be
unwavering in our support of all Council initiatives to
promote a sustainable solution to this terrorist threat.
The most recent initiative was presidential statement
S/PRST/2016/7, of 13 May, which reaffirmed the
commitment to decisively fight terrorism in all of its
forms and manifestations.

We wish to express our solidarity with the victims
of Boko Haram's criminal actions, and we demand the
immediate and unconditional freeing of all abducted
people that are still captive, including those who are
victims of forced recruitment.

The humanitarian calamity affecting the region
should be the cause of great concern and immediate
attention, especially considering the massive numbers
of internally displaced persons and refugees who
have fled their homes to save their lives. According
to the latest reports from United Nations specialized
agencies, the number of persons internally displaced
over the past year exceeds 70,000, with almost 7,000
refugees. As can be expected, the situation does not
allow the victims to lead a full and peaceful life, and
they are deprived of their most fundamental rights to
basic services, education and culture. Moreover, this
undermines at all levels the ability of the subregion and
the countries concerned to respond.

At a time when humankind faces significant
humanitarian challenges, crises such as the one in the
Lake Chad subregion, which in some cases have less
media coverage, fall squarely on this Organization and
the international community, and they must receive
increased attention. It is crucial for the various sectors
of the international community that have pledged
financial resources to this issue to fully keep their
commitments with a view to addressing and solving the
humanitarian and development challenges.

The efforts spearheaded by countries in the region
in order to effectively address the situation and facilitate
humanitarian access in this risky environment are
laudable, as are the efforts of various United Nations
entities and international organizations to provide
assistance and relief to the victims of these crises.
Similarly, we welcome the efforts of Nigeria, Chad, the
Niger and Cameroon, through the Multinational Joint
Task Force, to fight Boko Haram. We commend their
achievements in recent months, which has resulted in
greater stability in the region. We wish them continued
success in their coordinated efforts in all areas to
combat the security threat.

The regional security summit held in Abuja on
14 May was an appropriate forum to reaffirm the political
commitment of regional and international players to
strengthening their joint security strategy aimed at
curbing the spread of terrorism. We hope that its results
are duplicated and lead to concrete improvements.

In that connection, all solutions to the scourge of
terrorism must be consistent with the purposes and
principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations,
including the sovereignty and self-determination of
peoples. As part of the effort in addressing the terrorist
threat to international peace and security, we consider
the role of public policy to be essential as an engine
of social stability. Consequently, we encourage the
countries in the Lake Chad region to continue making
efforts to promote inclusive educational, economic
and political Government strategies for sustainable
development. That is why it is urgent to strengthen
State capacities at all levels, including regional and
local levels, in order to prevent and combat the causes
of the security threats. The efforts of the countries in
the subregion must be accompanied by the decisive
support of the United Nations and its agencies.

The work of the Lake Chad Basin Commission in
various areas to counter the actions of Boko Haram
have been of great value, and we believe that, with the
leadership of affected countries and the support of the
international community, there should be coordinated
strategies to prevent, combat and eliminate this threat
to international peace and security.

Finally, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
reaffirms that the ultimate defeat of terrorism cannot be
based solely on military action. We must make progress
in addressing the structural elements of poverty that
drive the emergence and spread of violence. Otherwise,
military victories on the battlefield will not guarantee
sustained peace.

