Mr. Mabilangan (Philippines): I wish to join others
who have earlier expressed their gratitude to you, Sir, for
convening this meeting. It is opportune at this time for all
of us here, as we are about to enter the next millennium, to
renew our commitment to the continued welfare and
protection of all children in the world.

Children's welfare has always figured prominently in
many of the world's conventions and legal instruments. The
Geneva Conventions and their protocols, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child and, more recently, the convention
regarding the elimination of the worst forms of child labour
are concerted efforts by all of us to further provide the
children of the Earth the necessary protection and
requirements to develop themselves and grow into
productive and happy individuals. It is because we know
that the children of today will be our leaders tomorrow that
we all try to give them the best of what we have and what
we know, and of our know-how.

As we approach the year 2000, it is only timely to
find out how mankind's children have fared and how we
ourselves have fared in fulfilling our responsibilities in
the promotion of their welfare.

What we see is not encouraging. The United Nations
Development Programme's Human Development Report
tells us that there are more than 1 billion women and
children living in abject poverty. According to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and
Armed Conflict - and I pay tribute to him - 2 million
children have died in situations of armed conflict since
1987, and three times that number have been seriously
injured or permanently disabled. The latest research
indicates that more than 300,000 children under 18 years
of age are fighting in 36 armed conflicts around the
world. Many of these children were unlawfully recruited,
others kidnapped or coerced into service. Nearly 90 per
cent of the casualties of wars in this century have been
civilians, mostly women and children. At least half of all
refugees and displaced persons are children.

I could probably go on and give figures on how
many children have been left orphans by conflicts, or
become refugees or displaced persons within their
countries. I could also go on giving figures regarding
numbers of children physically maimed and
psychologically and emotionally scarred for life by war.
Figures will not be hard to find and examples will be
readily available; many previous speakers have already
cited them.

The subject of children and armed conflict is
familiar to us all, a subject we have tried so many times
to address and that we continue to address, individually
and collectively.

We in the Philippines, which was one of the first
countries to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child, have established legislative and administrative
foundations to uphold children's rights and their well-
being. A child-rights centre, under the Philippine
Commission on Human Rights, continues to effectively
operate, investigating and initiating legal action on behalf
of child victims of human rights Violations. Philippine
interest and active participation in the working groups on
the optional protocol on the involvement of children in
armed conflict are indicative of the Philippine
commitment to the fulfilment of the rights of the child,
particularly the right to life. The child's health, nutrition,
education and welfare remain priority concerns of the
Philippine Government.

 

We know that armed conflicts and wars violate every
right of a child - the right to life, the right to be with
family and community, the right to health, the right to the
development of the personality and the right to be nurtured
and protected. We also know that children are among the
first victims in armed conflicts. They are tortured, raped
and often killed. Those who survive suffer immeasurable
damage to their moral and psychological development.

As long as there remain conflicts and wars in the
world, all of us should persist in our determination to
provide children adequate protection. There should be no
let-up in disseminating information on the atrocities
experienced by these children. We should continue to
persevere in finding ways and measures to protect the
child's inviolability. I wish to reiterate Philippine support
for the idea of the child as a zone of peace, as proposed by
the expert of the Secretary-General who undertook a study
on the impact of armed conflict on children. The
Philippines also supports the expert's many
recommendations on concerted action by the international
community and civil society to ameliorate the sufferings of
child victims of armed conflict.

The Secretary-General's report on the progress in the
implementation of the World Declaration and Plan of
Action from the World Summit for Children - which
established goals for reducing the child-mortality rate,
maternal mortality, malnutrition, and for increasing
provisions of water and sanitation, of basic education and
of special protection for children by the year 2000 - has
stated that the cost of meeting these goals is estimated to
represent less than one per cent of global output. In its
entirety, the cost represents a very small investment to build
a better, brighter future for our children, for ourselves and
for all the world.

