Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Rwanda joins other delegations in
conveying its heartfelt condolences and those of our
Government to the Government and the people of the
United States of America on the passing of President
George H. W. Bush. His memory and exemplary
qualities have been extolled here by several delegations
and we align ourselves with their remarks.

(spoke in English)

It is my distinct honour to convey the congratulations
of His Excellency Mr. Paul Kagame, President of
Rwanda and Chairperson of the African Union, to C6te
d'Ivoire and to you, President Ouattara, for presiding
over the Security Council for the month of December.
We also thank you for presiding over today's debate.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General and
Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat, Chairperson of the African
Union Commission, for their briefings.

Rwanda fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by Mr. Faki Mahamat.

As many have said today, the theme of today's
debate is of central importance to our continent.
Your country, Mr. President, serves as an example
of a nation successfully rising out of conflict. Africa
and Rwanda are very proud of what Cote d'lvoire has
achieved within a very short period. The theme for
this debate 4 "Post-conflict reconstruction and peace,
security, and stability" 4 reflects a reality of what is
taking place not only in your country, but also in several
African countries. It is therefore worth taking stock of
lessons learned from your own experience.

While the balance sheet of Africa's peace and
security dividend is not where we, as Africans, would
like it to be, there are major positive developments that
point to a bright future for the continent. Let me touch
on a few continental issues before turning to a few
observations based on Rwanda's experience.

The economic and political consequences ofviolent

conflicts are enormous. They outweigh by far any
conceivable investment in post-conflict reconstruction.
Those consequences include the loss of life, property
and infrastructure; the collapse of State institutions;
insecurity; and often, a completely fractured social
fabric. That is what we are dealing with when we look
into what is needed to ensure that countries emerging
from conflict do not relapse into conflict. We have
observed that nations that have been successful in post-
conflict reconstruction efforts share four pillars.

The first is leadership - leadership that is ready
to make difficult decisions to help people live and work
together again, side by side, as mentioned by another
delegation. Leadership is central in making sure that
post-conflict reconstruction will hold. It must be able
to convince people that even if they can exact revenge,
it is the worst idea ever for post- conflict reconstruction.

The second pillar is ownership. Post-conflict
reconstruction processes can be sustained only if they
are owned and led by people, local communities and
Governments that concretely and tangibly express the
will to truly rebuild and bring people together.

The third pillar is institutions. We cannot
overemphasize the centrality of strengthening State
institutions to make them inclusive and accountable.

The fourth pillar is partnerships, as has been
emphasized by many speakers. It is in the fragile phase
of the few years after the end of armed conflict that the
support of the international community is needed more
than ever. However, that support should be informed by
national efforts and support national priorities.

I would now like to share a few observations
regarding Rwanda's post-genocide reconstruction
experience that, we believe, could also be useful to other
nations. In the early reconstruction phase, we focused
our efforts on three pillars. The first 4 security, peace
and stability 4 is the foundation for any possible
reconstruction effort. The second pillar is building our
institutions, which were completely destroyed. The
third pillar is ensuring that people will feel and soon
enjoy the development dividend.

The ultimate aim of any post-conflict reform is to
create conditions conducive to self-sustaining economic
growth and human development while addressing the
major risk factors for conflict relapse. One of the key
concerns must be ensuring inclusive processes. Very
early on, we ensured that women and youth were fully
included in the reconstruction process.

The linchpin for post-conflict reconstruction is
ensuring the restoration of security for all citizens and
the stability of the nation. In the early years, we were
able to demobilize and reintegrate more than 10,000 ex-
combatants into our communities. Those ex-combatants
had been involved in truly damaging conflict, such as
killings. Re-engaging them and reintegrating them into
our communities was not an easy undertaking because
it also required the Government to ensure the security
of local communities. However, those are the kinds
of decisions that I was alluding to when speaking of
leadership that is courageous enough to make some very
difficult decisions and choices. You have demonstrated,
Mr. President, that you are ready to make those difficult
choices and decisions.

The second priority for Rwanda in post-conflict
reconstruction was to rebuild our institutions in such
a way that they would deliver services to all citizens.
In order to achieve that, the rule of law had to take
root, the fight against impunity and corruption had to
succeed, and we needed to ensure that all people were
served equally.

The reconstruction process must be inclusive if it
is to take hold. We know that bringing women to peace
processes adds value to the agreements reached. It is
equally important to bring women on board and ensure
that they are involved from very early on in post-
conflict reconstruction efforts.

Finally, people have to enjoy the development
dividends of security and stability, which must bring
changes to people's living standards if they are to
really support the Government's efforts. In that sense,
supporting countries that are emerging from conflict
situations by investing in their development efforts is
really an investment in maintaining peace and security,
not only in those countries but in the regions to which
they belong. Through the investments made in Rwanda,
we have been able to lift millions ofpeople out ofpoverty.
Within a very short period, we have been able to double
the country's life expectancy. Those investments must
therefore be concrete and very tangible.

All the elements that I have briefly mentioned are
complementary, not sequential. They must all be put
in place and they cannot be put in place by countries
alone. While they of course require the ownership
and leadership of countries, they also require support,
including the support of this institution. Rwanda's
experience shows that when we invest in people,
inclusive and accountable institutions and sustainable
development, peace, security and stability can become
an irreversible reality.

