Mr. Mohd Radzi (Malaysia): Let me first thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this open meeting to
allow the larger membership of the United Nations to
participate in this debate. This meeting is particularly
important, as Israel's assassination of the Palestinian
spiritual leader of the Hamas group, Sheikh Ahmed
Yassin, has outraged the international community and
dampened the prospects for peace in the Middle East.

The extrajudicial killing of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin
has sparked widespread international condemnation.
The Secretary-General himself has strongly condemned
the assassination. He shares the international
community's sentiment that such an action could lead
to further bloodshed and violence and to acts of
revenge and retaliation. Reiterating that extrajudicial
killings were against international law, he has urged
Israel to immediately end that practice.

Malaysia strongly condemns that assassination
and other blatant assassinations perpetrated by Israel
against the Palestinian people. The assassination of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin was a despicable, provocative
action and will only serve to worsen the situation and
invite a greater cycle of violence. The international
community and the Security Council must not stand
idle in the face of that extrajudicial killing. The
Council must take concrete action to prevent Israel
from committing further criminal acts against the
Palestinian people and to uphold respect for
international law.

As the country holding the current chairmanship
of the Non-Aligned Movement, Malaysia would like to
draw the attention of the Council to the fact that the
heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned
Movement, at their Summit meeting at Kuala Lumpur
in February last year, expressed their deep concern
about the tragic situation prevailing in the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem. The
leaders of the countries members of the Non-Aligned
Movement strongly condemned the systematic human
rights violations and reported war crimes that have
been committed by the Israeli occupying forces against
the Palestinian people. They condemned, in particular,
the wilful killing by Israel of Palestinian civilians,
including extrajudicial executions.

The Movement also condemned the wanton
destruction of homes, infrastructure and agricultural
lands, the detention and imprisonment of thousands of
Palestinians and the imposition of collective
punishment on the entire Palestinian population,
including severe restrictions on the movement of
persons and goods and prolonged curfews, resulting in
socio-economic hardship for the Palestinian people,
amounting to a dire humanitarian crisis.

Malaysia calls upon the international community,
and the Security Council in particular, to urge Israel to
stop carrying out air strikes against the Palestinian
people, and seek a just, comprehensive and durable
solution to the Palestinian question, including the
implementation of the road map. Malaysia is
committed to a peaceful settlement of the Palestinian-
Israeli conflict and supports a two-State solution based
on the 1967 line. We believe that peace in the Middle
East can be achieved only through the realization of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including
their right to self-determination and national
independence and the exercise of sovereignty in the
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital.

We believe that the Security Council has a
responsibility to put a stop to Israel's heinous policies
and practices, which dehumanize the Palestinian people
and stand in the way of peace. The Council surely
cannot simply stand helpless while Israel's unlawful
occupation, domination and - now - assassinations
of the Palestinian people continue unabated.

We therefore once again urge the Security
Council to take clear and decisive action to condemn
and to stop the extrajudicial executions carried out by
Israel against the Palestinians, which have proved to be
detrimental to efforts to achieve a peaceful solution in
the Middle East.

