Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
wishes to thank Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for
his briefing. We have listened to the remarks made by
Ms. Bandu Bahati and Mr. Nshole.

Located in the heart of the African continent, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo is an important
African country. Peace and stability there affect the
overall peace ofthe African continent. Over the past few
years, the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has remained complex and grave, characterized
in particular by security and humanitarian challenges
resulting from ongoing conflicts in some parts of
the country, including in the east. In our View, the
international community should focus its support and
assistance on the following three aspects.

First, it must ensure that the ownership of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
in addressing its domestic problems fully respects the
country's sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity. The Government shoulders the primary
responsibility for protecting civilians. The international
community should support the Government in beefing
up its security capacity. The Security Council is now
reviewing the mandate renewal for the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). China supports
MONUSCO in continuing to discharge its mandate, but
also hopes that it will step up its communication and
coordination with the Government and see its relevant
mandate reinforced.

Secondly, the international community must
steadily advance the domestic political process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. It should continue
to engage all parties in the country, pushing for the
peaceful settlement of differences through political
consultation, dialogue and mediation. The African
Union, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region and other regional and subregional
organizations play a major role in mediating the peace
process in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and merit necessary and continued support from the
international community.

Thirdly, the international community should
continue to provide the country with humanitarian
assistance, helping it to overcome urgent challenges,
including food insecurity and internally displaced
persons issues.

Having said that, more attention should be paid
to helping the country to address economic and social
issues by scaling up input in agriculture, education and
infrastructure, among other areas, so as to effectively
improve the local economic and social development
conditions and provide guarantees for the rule of law
and lasting peace and stability in the country.

China has all along been steadfast in supporting the
peace process in the Democratic Republic ofthe Congo.
We have been actively engaged in the United Nations
peacekeeping mission in the country and have provided
the country with humanitarian assistance, including
medical supplies and food. We have also assumed an
active part in its economic and social development.
Alongside the international community, China stands
ready to continue playing a constructive role in the
achievement of peace, stability and development in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

