Lord Ashdown: Thank you, Mr. President, for
allowing me once again to address the Security
Council. I hope you will not think it an abuse of that
privilege if I draw very brief attention to the sombre
thought that, soon before this meeting, the mortal
remains of President Trajkovski of the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and his delegation left Sarajevo
on their last journey home to Macedonia. I wish to take
this opportunity, on behalf of the international
community - and perhaps my Bosnian friends in
Bosnia and Herzegovina as well - to mark that
sombre occasion, and to pass on our condolences and
our prayers to his family and to the people of
Macedonia on this terrible loss.

I am pleased once again to have the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I am particularly pleased to
be doing so alongside my colleague the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers, the Prime Minister, Adnan
Terzic. I think the innovation of the pair of us
appearing before the Council exemplifies the stage
which Bosnia and Herzegovina has now reached, in
which the international community's presence in the
country needs to work in increasingly close partnership
with Bosnia and Herzegovina's elected authorities. I
am happy to confirm that that partnership - both
professional and personal - between myself and Prime
Minister Terzic is close and, in my view, very
constructive. It is therefore a pleasure to see him here
today.

It is almost six months since I last spoke to the
Council. It has been a busy period, and I apologize if
my report to the Secretary-General is a little more
lengthy than I might have wished it to be. But the
period has been extremely busy. In partnership with the
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities, we have notched
up some real achievements, above all in the fields of
defence, intelligence reform, customs and indirect tax
reform, to which I shall return in a moment.

Crucially, Bosnia and Herzegovina now has two
clear goals to aim for: two clear goals that are within
sight, if it keeps up and indeed steps up the pace of
reform. In the past six months, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) has made it clear that
Bosnia and Herzegovina will be eligible to join the
Partnership for Peace (PFP) if a number of clear
conditions relating both to defence reform and to
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) are met. Also in the
last six months, the European Commission has, in its
feasibility study published last November, set 16 clear
and practical areas in which progress needs to be made
in order for Bosnia and Herzegovina to take the next
historic step towards Europe and begin negotiations for
a Stabilization and Association Agreement.

Together, these twin objectives - the PFP and
the start of negotiations on stabilization and
association - provide a key context in which reform
can take place and an incentive for authorities at every
level to make progress.

The key point, of course, is that both the
European Union and NATO want to see clear, hard
evidence that Bosnia and Herzegovina is making the
necessary reforms to integrate into Euro-Atlantic
structures of its own accord. These reforms cannot
simply be imposed by me using my Bonn powers; they
cannot be imposed by outsiders. Bosnia and
Herzegovina cannot join the European Union or NATO
by fiat of the High Representative; if it could, that
might make life simpler for both the Prime Minister
and myself, but it cannot, and that is only proper. If it
is to join those two structures, it must do so by its own
decision and through its own actions, not through mine.

Time is very short for Bosnia and Herzegovina to
meet the conditions set for membership in the PFP and
to qualify for the launch of a Stabilization and
Association Agreement. NATO has made it clear that it
hopes Bosnia and Herzegovina will be ready for PFP
membership in time for NATO's summit in Istanbul in
June this year. If that were to happen, nothing would be
more certain to assure every citizen in Bosnia and
Herzegovina that there would be no future war. The
Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities have set
themselves the target of making sufficient progress on
the European Commission's parallel 16 key points by
the end of June. Indeed, Prime Minister Terzic has said
that he hopes to do so by the end of May.

Now, these are extremely ambitious targets, but
Bosnia and Herzegovina needs ambitious targets. I
commend the Prime Minister for having set them, and I
especially commend the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Government for having, entirely on its own behalf,
negotiated with the European Union 45 key actions that
take them through those gates into the negotiation
process. These constitute our joint action programme.
Let me underline the fact that they were initiated not by
the High Representative but by the Council of
Ministers, under Adnan Terzic's leadership.

I very much hope these can be met. However, I
must say, since it is my duty to report frankly, that the
rate of reform so far this year is too slow to achieve
those targets. That is not to say that they will not be
achieved, but it is to say that we will need to accelerate
considerably if Bosnia and Herzegovina is to clear
these two crucial historic hurdles. In saying that, I do
not doubt the personal commitment of Prime Minister
Terzic and that of - at least - most of his colleagues
on the Council of Ministers. I believe that they are
genuinely and powerfully committed to the prospect of
PFP membership and the next stage of European Union
integration this year.

There has also been a change, which I would wish
to mark: the new collegial atmosphere that exists
within the Council of Ministers is a personal
achievement of Prime Minister Terzic, and one for
which I pay him tribute. This has helped enormously in
dealing with the more thorny and difficult issues
through the Bosnia and Herzegovina domestic
institutions rather than at the hands of outsiders. Those
issues, which held up many of his predecessors, have
now been pushed forward.

Nevertheless, the reform process remains
hamstrung, in part by an overburdened agenda, and
sometimes by residual obstructionism or, at best,
lethargy on the part of the entities - as well as, let us
recognize, by the dysfunctional aspects of the Dayton
structures.

These burdens can be overcome and I hope they
will be overcome; but they can only be overcome by a
ruthless focus on the reform agenda. All too often,
recently, this has been subject to the distractions of
inter-coalition or intra-party tensions within Bosnia
and Herzegovina. Bosnia and Herzegovina, at this
crucial and historic moment, simply does not have time
to waste on that kind of activity.

I fear, however, that the process is likely to be
somewhat exacerbated in the coming months, as
Bosnia and Herzegovina slips into election mode prior
to the municipal elections of October 2004. There is
already some evidence that this period will not be
characterized by a renewed focus on reforms, but by a
return to the old practices of competitive claims of
victimization, which offer the nationalist parties in
particular the best opportunity for filling their ballot
box.

These are only worries. Let me sum up simply by
saying that, thanks in very large measure to the high
degree of statesmanship and leadership evidenced
within the Bosnia and Herzegovina political
community, 2003 was a remarkable year of progress in
the reforms that Bosnia and Herzegovina needs. It
remains to be seen whether the same pace can be
matched in the year ahead. I hope so. We stand ready to
assist to make it so, and I remain convinced that the
Prime Minister is committed to ensuring that it will be
so.

Allow me now, if I may, to briefly recap some of
the main developments in the period covered by my
latest report to the Secretary-General, that is, from 1
September to 31 December 2003. This will be the basis
for my introduction, before giving my assessment of
prospects for the months ahead.
Our overarching objective, of course, remains
exactly as it was when I took up my post 18 months
ago: to ensure that Bosnia and Herzegovina is a
peaceful, viable State on course to European
integration. Since I was here last, in October,
substantial progress has been made in several key
areas, based on the work of the four reform
commissions launched last year.

As members may recall, the first commission I
established focused on indirect taxation and customs
reform. The process of setting up and establishing the
State-level indirect tax authority and establishing a
value added tax has already begun. That organization is
far from fully operational at this point, but once it is, it
will go a long way towards providing Bosnia and
Herzegovina with a reliable revenue stream and an
instrument with which to crack down on the fraud and
corruption to which the current fractured and
dysfunctional arrangements are very prone. Once this
is fully established, Bosnia will have, for the first time
in its post-war history, a guaranteed source of income
to the State treasury, based on a value added tax that is
levied nationally.

As the Council knows, a major breakthrough was
achieved last September in the area of defence. I again
pay tribute to the statesmanship of the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities who enabled that
breakthrough. The Defence Reform Commission,
chaired by former United States Assistant Secretary of
Defense James Locher, reached agreement on the
establishment of State-level command and control over
Bosnia's armed forces, thus using Dayton to amend
Dayton. This includes the creation of a single State-
level defence ministry, a joint chief of staff, and
collective - not individual - command authority
vested at the State level in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency. These are huge steps forward that, when
implemented, will go a long way towards helping
Bosnia and Herzegovina qualify for the PFP. Progress
on this scale simply would not have been conceivable a
few years ago.

But alongside the defence reform, let me bring to
the Council's attention the fact that for the very first
time, article III, paragraph 5 (a) of annex 4 of the
Dayton Agreement, which allows entities to pass
competencies to the State, has been used. For the first
time, Dayton is being reformed by the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina within the construct of Dayton itself.

Likewise, on intelligence reform, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has taken a difficult yet decisive step
towards creating a unified State-level intelligence and
security agency, in place of the dysfunctional, corrupt,
fractured and deeply scandalous entity-based
intelligence services. I had to submit a draft law
developed by our expert Commission directly to the
Bosnian and Herzegovina Parliament. But I am pleased
to announce that just last week the lower house of the
Parliament adopted in full a bill establishing that
agency. And we expect the upper house to complete the
process tomorrow.

Another key challenge for us has been the so far
intractable issue of the divided and tragic city of
Mostar and the attempt to provide that city with a
single, permanent statute that will serve the interests of
all its citizens. Divided cities breed resentment and
tension. There were spreading far wider than the city of
Mostar itself. We were clear - as were my colleagues
on the Steering Board of the Peace Implementation
Council - that we could not just allow the issue of
Mostar to sit there and fester. Intractable though the
problems of that city have proved, it was important for
the sake of the future stability and security of Bosnia
and Herzegovina that this most intractable of all the
country's problems should be tackled and solved.

Last year, a commission was formed by the local
authorities to reform the city of Mostar. Unfortunately,
it failed to make anything but the most minimal
progress. I therefore decided to establish a further
commission in the latter part of last year; it is chaired
very skilfully by Mr. Norbert Winterstein, a former
German mayor, and comprises representatives of the
citizens of Mostar themselves. Mostar citizens made up
99 per cent of the Mostar Commission, and that is as it
should be. The Commission reached agreement on a
wide range of issues - perhaps 90 per cent of the key
issues confronting the reunification of Mostar. But
agreement on a couple of important outstanding
questions, such as the election system and the future of
city municipalities, proved elusive.

At the end of January - something like a year
after the process started - I therefore decided that it
would be appropriate to use my powers to impose, as it
were the keystone in the bridge of the draft statute. My
Senior Deputy, Mr. Werner Wnendt, was appointed as
my Special Envoy to Mostar, and we have established a
small implementation team down in Mostar. I am
happy to report to the Council that, thus far, the new
statute is proceeding on track, and the process of
reunifying at last the great city of Mostar is a reality.
The next key step will be taken on 15 March.

The work of the key reform commissions - on
indirect tax policy, defence, intelligence and Mostar -
has gone well. The commissions are a means to bring
the key players together, under international
community chairmanship, in a relatively non-political,
low-key way. They have more than proved their worth
as a way of finding middle ground among the key
parties and achieving agreements in areas many had
thought impossible.

In the meantime, of course, reform continues in
other areas. The rule of law remains right at the top of
our list of priorities. We are working hard to ensure
that a single, State-level High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council is in place by the end of this
month. It will serve as the foundation for a new
Bosnian and Herzegovina judiciary that is entirely
independent and capable of meeting the highest
European and international standards.

At this point, I must tell the Council that I am
worried about certain moves in Bosnia and
Herzegovina at the moment - partly political and
partly from newspapers - whose aim, it seems to me,
is to undermine the independence of the judiciary. It is
important that we make it clear that that is an issue
upon which there can be no compromise.

The Office of the High Representative has also
continued to oversee the creation of a State information
and protection agency with enforcement powers and
abilities to address money-laundering and other
organized crime. Five of the six main laws on the
agency have now been passed by the Council of
Ministers and sent to Parliament - a welcome sign,
again, of local ownership.

I am happy to report that since I was last at the
Council, we have seen real, practical progress in
tackling the networks of organized crime that have for
far too long held Bosnia and Herzegovina to ransom.
Almost as we speak, the main defendant in what is
probably the biggest single human trafficking case in
the country's history has been pleading guilty before
the newly established State Court. More recently, the
one-time Croat member of the Presidency of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Ante Jelavic, who was removed by
one of my predecessors, is now in a Sarajevo jail
awaiting trial before the State Court on serious
corruption charges. We are beginning to show that even
the highest in the land must be subject to the rule of
law and may be brought to account before the courts
for crimes that may have been committed in the past.

At the same time, we are continuing our efforts to
crack down on the support networks of indicted war
criminals. On 9 February, in liaison with the
Stabilization Force in Bosnia and Herzegovina (SFOR)
and the United States Government, I enacted the
necessary legal orders to freeze the bank accounts of
10 individuals supporting Mr. Karadzic and removed
several of them from office, including the Vice-
President of the ruling party in the Republika Srpska,
the Serb Democratic Party. That followed similar steps
which we took in March and July last year. I am
determined to make life as difficult as possible for the
indictees who are on the run and for those who support
them, including by tackling the networks that support
those indictees and keep them from justice.

We are also paving the way towards establishing
a domestic capacity to try and prosecute war criminals.
As the Council knows, shortly after I last addressed the
Security Council with Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, we organized a donors conference hosted
with the ICTY in The Hague, which resulted in pledges
amounting to some €16 million to set up a domestic
capacity to try war criminals. My Senior Deputy High
Representative, Bernard Fassier, is now working on the
practical details of establishing a chamber as rapidly as
possible. We hope that chamber will be fully
established by no later than the end of this year.

At the same time, we continue to press the
Republika Srpska authorities to do their part in
establishing exactly what happened at Srebrenica. Last
week, the Srebrenica Commission, created by the
Republika Srpska Government in December upon our
urging, was in the process of gathering information on
the massacres committed there in 1995, it is committed
to providing a final report. The Republika Srpska
Government recently paid the first half of its 4 million
konvertibilna marka commitment to the Srebrenica-
Potocari Foundation to compensate the families of the
missing persons there for having denied them
information about what happened to their loved ones.

In December, I wrote to the Republika Srpska
President and Prime Minister, stating that any attempt
to obstruct the work of the established Commission
would be regarded as a clear effort to obstruct the rule
of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Republika
Srpska authorities owe it to the families of those who
died in Srebrenica to do all in their power to ensure
that the facts are brought to light and that the guilty are
brought to justice. We intend to ensure that they are
held to that.

My main worry - if you like, the source of my
nightmares - remains the economy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Frankly, I have little fear of a return to
ethnic conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I do not
think that is the mood of the people. But I worry that if
Bosnia and Herzegovina - a country where in the
region of 50 per cent of citizens live close to or below
the official threshold of poverty - continues in a
parlous economic state or deteriorates further, that
could have implications for the social stability of the
country. The bottom line is that Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to wrestle not just with the
bitter legacy of wartime intolerance but also with its
communist past and its cumbersome Dayton structures
as well. Those three factors combine to make a very
heavy burden on those who wish to see reform,
especially on the economic front.

All that said, some truly significant successes on
the economic front have been achieved over the last six
months, which provide optimism that a brighter
economic future stands within Bosnia and
Herzegovina's reach, if not yet within its grasp.

As I described, we are concentrating on getting
the indirect taxation authority up and running and the
introduction of a value added tax. Here, I think, things
are moving, but not yet fast enough. A key objective in
stimulating much-needed job creation is to improve the
business environment by introducing a legal and
administrative framework that encourages foreign and
domestic entrepreneurs to invest in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Closely aligned to a number of the
European Commission feasibility study requirements,
this process involves the close cooperation of the
Government, the legislative bodies and the
international community in such areas as business
registration, accounting, corporate governance,
auditing standards and uniform contracts for law, to
mention just a few.

The second phase of the so-called bulldozer
initiative to sweep away some of the restraints to
business has been launched. The innovative programme
is designed to help Bosnia and Herzegovina's business
community tear down roadblocks and cut through as
much red tape as possible so as to free up the economy
for growth and job creation. It also represents the first
real example of civil society - in this case the
business community - finding its voice in a direct
dialogue with Government.

In the second stage of the bulldozer reform, 50
further reforms have been proposed, with local
entrepreneurs doing the lion's share of the work
lobbying the Government for their acceptance. We
hope to help launch a third and final stage next month,
under full local ownership.

We are also launching a major drive to coordinate
efforts to resolve the problem of internal debt, which
represents a serious threat to the economy and will, I
think, occupy much of our attention in the months
ahead. Taken together, Bosnia and Herzegovina's

wartime debts - including frozen hard currency
deposits, budgetary arrears and legitimate claims for
war damages - amount to, approximately, a massive

€4 billion. The last country that had to cope with
wartime debts of that order was probably the Weimar
Republic, Germany.

We, together with the International Monetary
Fund and local government agencies, are preparing a
strategy to reduce obligations to sustainable levels,
while at the same time respecting the basic rights of
war restitution claimants. I should underline to the
Council, however, that this process is likely to prove
exceptionally painful, very difficult and, politically,
highly contentious in the months ahead.

Other necessary actions include identifying and
removing obstacles to the privatization process -
which came to a virtual standstill earlier this year - as
well as stimulating inward investment and further job
creation.

The lack ofjobs is regularly cited as a reason why
many refugees still have not returned to Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Despite that situation, however, on the
whole the story of refugee return in Bosnia and
Herzegovina has been a remarkably positive one.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the total number of
registered returns had risen to nearly 1 million people
by the end of last year - a miraculous total, following
such a terrible war. Included in that figure were some
430,000 - almost half a million - so-called minority
returns. Meanwhile, the countrywide property
repossession rate rose to more than 90 per cent.

While a few municipalities fell short, those
failures were due, in our view, more to bureaucratic
difficulties than to political or ethnic obstruction -
which is in itself another promising sign. The
finalization of the property law implementation process
in all Bosnia and Herzegovina municipalities is
expected in the next few months. These are clearly
encouraging developments, beyond what many would
have thought possible only a few years ago.

The main benchmarks for the transfer to domestic
authorities of all annex VII responsibilities have now
been met. At the end of last year, therefore, I was able
to close down the High Representative's Refugee and
Return Task Force - a major department of the
Office - on schedule, with a complete handover of
duties to the Bosnia and Herzegovina Ministry of
Human Rights and Refugees. We have retained a small
annex VII Verification Unit to monitor and assist the
transfer process, as necessary.

That said, however, the story of refugee returns is
as yet far from finished. An estimated 350,000 refugees
and displaced persons have not yet returned to their
pre-war homes, although many among them still
express the desire to do so. While the role of the Office
of the High Representative in this process has thus
altered from one of driving forward refugee return to
one of monitoring the local authorities" efforts, I must
make clear to the Council that this is not an area which
the international community can afford to ignore. We
need to keep a close eye on it and to be ready to
intervene as necessary - particularly since there are
some early signs that some of the things that should
have been done since the handover remain, as yet,
uncompleted.

In Bosnia and Herzegovina, cooperation within
the international community remains close and
effective. We are operating together well as a team. But
I repeat that the pace of reform must be accelerated.

It was therefore a particular shock to us all to
when our colleague and my close friend, Sven
Frederiksen, the first European Union Police Mission
(EUPM) Police Commissioner, died suddenly in
Sarajevo earlier this year. Sven was a dedicated
policeman in the finest international tradition, and a
fine public servant. He was well known, of course, to
the United Nations, which he served so effectively in a
number of capacities. He will be - he is being -
sorely missed, and I know the Council will join with
me in paying him tribute today.

The work of the EUPM, however, goes on, just as
I know Sven would have wanted it to. The new
Commissioner, Kevin Carty from Ireland, will take up
his post in the next few weeks, and we look forward to
welcoming him, and he and his mission will continue
to have my full and total support.

One of the more worrying problems in the past
six months relevant to policing issues - one that will
command the new Commissioner's attention, as it is,
indeed, commanding mine - is the growing number of
challenges to the United Nations-led police
certification processes within the courts of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
For over a year now I have been in contact with
the United Nations Department of Peacekeeping
Operations (DPKO) and Mr. Guehenno in order to try
to identify a solution to the challenges of police
officers to the decisions of the United Nations
International Police Task Force (IPTF) in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, which wound up at the end of 2002.
There are currently more than 150 non-certified police
officers who have asked the courts to assess the
legality of their employer's decision to dismiss them on
the grounds that they had not been certified under the
IPTF process.

Even though most of those proceedings are
pending, in January the first non-certified police officer
dismissed under ITPF was reinstated following an
order from a domestic court. The situation is
continuing to deteriorate, as the Human Rights
Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina has now decided
that it is competent to examine whether such dismissals
were carried out in accordance with the provisions of
the European Convention on Human Rights.

Needless to say, this is a serious matter. The
United Nations will want to protect the Organization's
valuable legacy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
United Nations de-certification process weeded out
police officers whose past, particularly during the war,
disqualified them from remaining in the police. If we
are to ensure that the past does not return to that tragic
country, that process cannot be allowed to unravel, and
United Nations decisions in this matter must prevail
and continue to stand.

This is a complex legal issue. The problem stems
mainly from the fact that there was a failure to
transpose Security Council resolutions into local law.
The laws of Bosnia and Herzegovina regulating the
dismissal of police officers need to be amended.

We will need the assistance of the members of the
Security Council to make this happen and to ensure
that the legacy of the United Nations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is preserved. I am happy to report to the
Council that during my meeting with DPKO yesterday,
officials recognized the seriousness of this matter and
made proposals to resolve it. They believe these will
help clarify that complex, but potentially very
damaging matter, and ensure that domestic courts, as
well as other authorities involved, are left in no doubt
as to the scope and the nature of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's international obligations to implement
IPTF decisions.
I would like to make a few remarks in closing. I
hope it is clear from what I have said that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is continuing steadily but surely to make
progress - towards a return to normality, towards
becoming a modern European country and towards
taking the governance of its affairs into its own hands.

It is now more than eight years since the war
ended. Bosnia and Herzegovina has long since slipped
from the headlines. But in its own small way, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is, I believe, on the threshold of
becoming a genuine success story: an example of how
it is possible to pick up the pieces, even after such a
terrible war, and to work together - the international
community and the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities - towards a brighter future.

Bosnia and Herzegovina is, I believe, on its way
to becoming one of the modern world's more
successful exercises in peace stabilization, thanks to
the steady, generous commitment of the international
community and, above all, to the ordinary people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, who just want to return to
peaceful lives and a decent future for their children.
They, in my view, are the real heroes of this.

The biggest danger now to that future, it seems to
me, is a lack of confidence - a lack of confidence on
the part of some of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
authorities that they really can make their country, one
day, a member of NATO and of the EU. That lack of
confidence does not extend to the Prime Minister or the
Council of Ministers, but it does to others, and perhaps,
if I may say it, there is also a lack of confidence on the
part of some in the international community that this
sort of lasting success can be achieved in a country
with such a history.

My appeal to the Council today is a simple one:
stick with the job and finish it. Maintain that support,
maintain the Council's commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina, even in the face of competing issues
elsewhere in the world. If the Council does so, then I
have every confidence that a much brighter future
awaits that small but important European country than
its tragic past might a few years ago have allowed us to
imagine was even possible.

