Mr. Guehenno: I am pleased and honoured to
introduce the special report of the Secretary-General on
the United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET) (S/2004/ll7), in the presence of His
Excellency Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Foreign Minister of
Timor-Leste.

The report presents, as promised, proposals for
continued support to Timor-Leste after the conclusion
of the current mandate on 20 May 2004. We welcome
this opportunity to share with Council members the
thinking behind our proposals, and hope that this may
support a fruitful debate.

Before discussing the report itself, I would like to
bring to the attention of the Security Council two
recent developments in Timor-Leste that are not
reflected in the text. First, I would like to note that,
some days ago, President Gusmao approved the law on
village elections. This is an important advance in terms
of reinforcing the role of electoral processes in Timor-
Leste and in fostering local engagement in governance.
It is expected that further steps will be taken to clarify
the roles and responsibilities of village chiefs and
village councils. These will be the first elections in
independent Timor-Leste, and will be the basis on
which broader electoral laws can be developed for
national elections.

Secondly, I wish to inform members of the
Security Council of a recent incident that suggests the
continuing fragility of the situation on the ground,
particularly in the area near the border. While this
incident took place before the issuance of the present
report, it could not be included in the text because of
the incomplete level of information at that time.

On 29 January, a group of villagers from West
Timor entered Timor-Leste and, possibly in a
continuation of a local feud, burned some structures in
a village in the area and may have stolen some
livestock. Timorese officials, supported by UNMISET,
continue to investigate the incident and discuss it with
Indonesian counterparts. This incident was also
reviewed at the inter-command meeting, held in Bali
earlier this week, which was attended not only by
Indonesian and UNMISET military commanders, but
also by the Commander of the Timor-Leste armed
forces, Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak.

I would now like to turn to the report before the
members of the Security Council.

An appeal for additional support for Timor-Leste
after 20 May 2004 faces a paradoxical challenge
because of the remarkable progress that has already
occurred. It is, indeed, easy to forget that Timor-Leste
has taken shape in less than five years. But the reality
is that there is a limit to how much can be achieved in
so short a period of time, and Timor-Leste, the poorest
country in South-East Asia, continues to face
significant challenges, for which it will continue to
require international assistance.

When the Security Council established
UNMISET on 20 May 2002, it acknowledged that the
Mission's assistance would be crucial even after the
country crossed the symbolic threshold of
independence. The mission was mandated to support
the continued development of an independent Timor-
Leste and to build upon what had been achieved until
then. That decision testified to the Council's
determination that, as noted by the Deputy Secretary-
General, there should be no exit without strategy.
Remarkable progress has occurred since then, based on
close partnership between the international community
and the Timorese leadership and people. But as the
conclusion of UNMISET'S original two-year mandate
approaches, it is clear that the line of true self-
sufficiency has not yet been crossed.

As reflected in the Secretary-General's report, the
Secretariat has concluded that the continued presence
of a small peacekeeping operation for an additional
one-year consolidation phase is essential to reinforce
and strengthen what has been achieved to date. The
Secretariat's recommendations were based upon an
extensive analysis, including by UNMISET, of needs
on the ground, and drew upon valuable input from
Member States. They also seek to take full account of
the vision of the Timorese leadership for their
country's progress.

The recommendations were derived through a
two-step process. The first step was to determine tasks
in the most concrete terms, reflecting crucial gaps in
Timorese capacity that could threaten the country's
stability and security and where no viable alternative
form of support exists. Secondly, in those cases where
we concluded that United Nations assistance was
crucial, we sought to identify the best means through
which UNMISET could contribute. In most cases,
those recommendations have emphasized an advisory
rather than operational approach since that is more
compatible with Timor-Leste's progress towards self-
sufficiency. Where an operational role was under
consideration, we gave particular attention to assuming
responsibilities that we were confident we could
discharge effectively.

I would now like briefly to summarize the
recommendations that resulted from that analysis and
discuss the logic behind them. The provision of
assistance to the public administration has been one of
the most challenging tasks undertaken by the United
Nations in Timor-Leste. The speed of progress is
limited both by the complexity of the skills that are
being imparted and by the close linkage between a
country's institutional development and a process of
political evolution that cannot be artificially
accelerated.

When UNMISET began, Timor-Leste's
administration included about 8,700 Timorese civil
servants out of a total of approximately 13,190. Today,
that number has increased to 11,000, and significant
headway has been made in strengthening institutions of
State. Skills have increased steadily, and civil servants
are effectively discharging many functions on a daily
basis. But as recognized in the Secretary-General's
report, further assistance is crucial for two broad
reasons.

First, it is necessary to support the continued
development of Timorese capacities and to ensure the
country's functioning during that process. This is
particularly urgent in those areas that are critical to
long- and short-term stability, such as the Ministries of
Finance and the Interior, the Office of the Secretary for
Defence and the justice system.

Secondly, preparation of civil service legislation
has barely begun. International assistance is crucial for
the formulation of the policy and legislative
frameworks that will provide secure foundations for the
country's future development.

We believe that this additional year of support
would make a meaningful difference in enabling the
country to reach the threshold of self-sufficiency.
However, for the reasons that I mentioned, there are
real limits to what can be achieved, and some further
long-term assistance may be required even after this
period. For that reason, the responsibilities of civilian
advisers will include the identification of alternative
solutions by which to continue support, if that remains
necessary after this year has ended. Already, since the
report was issued, the Government has convened a
workshop with UNMISET and development partners
where it presented plans based on the clear
understanding that those advisers, if approved, would
conclude their assignment in May 2005. The
Government has launched an intensive discussion on
means to ensure a smooth transition after that
assistance ended.

The recommendations to the Security Council in
support of the conduct of serious crimes investigations
and proceedings would allow progress in an area where
much has already been done. As reflected in the
Secretary-General's report, 81 indictments have now
been issued, with 369 indictees. A total of 48
convictions have resulted - two having been issued in
the past two weeks - as well as one acquittal. Thirteen
of these were related to the 10 priority cases, while
trials with regard to two further priority cases are
ongoing and are expected to conclude by May 2004.

However, as indicated in the Secretary-General's
report, a number of trials will remain pending by 20
May 2004 and further indictments are in the process of
preparation, including those related to the killing of
two local United Nations staff. Continued international
assistance is crucial for this process, which gives
expression to the Security Council's determination that
such crimes will not be perpetrated with impunity and
helps to reduce the risk of tensions among the
Timorese population, while strengthening confidence
in the justice system. The support we have proposed
will permit completion of serious crimes cases at the
trial level and progress at the appellate level, in
particular with relation to the 10 priority cases.

I would like also to note that, as indicated in the
Secretary-General's report, the great majority of those
who have been indicted remain outside the country.
Close cooperation among Member States will be
essential to ensure that all those who are responsible
are brought to justice.

Turning to UNMISET's programme in support of
internal security and law enforcement, the
establishment of an effective and professional police
force has been, and remains, a core objective of the
United Nations involvement in Timor-Leste. It is also
an area where, despite inevitable frustrations at the
complexity of the task, notable progress has been
achieved. When UNMISET began, approximately
1,800 Timorese police officers had been trained and
deployed, and the contingent of 1,250 United Nations
police had responsibility for all executive policing
functions. Today - just 21 months later - the
Timorese police force, now numbering 3,024, has
assumed responsibility for all daily, routine patrolling
throughout the country. That includes the assumption
of responsibilities along the border area, where they are
playing a key role under difficult circumstances. The
United Nations has retained daily operational
responsibilities only in the area of crowd control, in
order to afford the Timorese riot unit the time it
requires to undergo additional intensive training before
20 May 2004. As reflected in the report, the
international police contingent now includes only this
125-officer formed police unit and approximately 200
officers who are advising and discharging residual
headquarters functions.

For all the progress that has been achieved, the
creation of law enforcement agencies takes time.
International assistance will remain crucial for a further
12 months after 20 May 2004 to ensure the police
service's effective functioning and to reinforce
professional values and skills.
As reflected, this would be based upon the
continued deployment of 157 civilian police advisers
after May - down from the current figure of 200 -
with staffing requirements to be reviewed by the end of
the year. Further adjustments should also be possible to
accommodate bilateral assistance that materializes on
the ground before the end of April, when our proposals
will be finalized.

We also gave extensive consideration to the
possibility of UNMISET's retaining an operational role
in responding to civil disturbance. We share the
analysis of some Member States that such problems
could indeed occur. However, the Timorese leadership
has indicated its strong preference for the exercise of
full executive authority in policing after May 2004, and
it would be logical that operational responsibilities in
this area, as in others, be undertaken by Timorese
forces, in order to preserve a single line of command.
We undertook an extensive review of the capacity of
the Timorese anti-riot unit and concluded that its
preparation should be adequate by 20 May 2004.

For those reasons, we concluded that the better
course would be to redouble our training efforts
through the end of the current mandate and to retain an
advisory presence after that date. At the same time, it is
urgent that the leadership of Timor-Leste develop the
necessary legislative and policy frameworks, which
will clarify the basis for cooperation between the
armed forces and the police, in particular with regard to
back-up in the case of civil disturbance.

Finally, progress in the area of external security
and border control has benefited greatly from the
statesmanlike commitment that has been shown by the
Indonesian and Timorese leadership. However,
agreement on the border and on practical arrangements
for its management has not yet been reached, and the
potential for tensions or destabilizing actions remains
within communities in the western districts. At the
same time, the creation of structures and relationships
on the ground requires further time. While the Border
Patrol Unit has assumed its responsibilities, and while
the Timorese armed forces (F-FDTL) have continued to
develop, both institutions remain thinly stretched, and
further clarification of their responsibilities is essential.
In addition, the establishment of the Rapid Deployment
Service remains considerably behind schedule.

In this context, an essential role continues to be
played by military observers, who are monitoring
developments within a potentially volatile area and are
supporting close relationships between Timorese and
Indonesian border personnel. It is therefore
recommended that a small group of 42 military liaison
officers could be retained along the border to discharge
similar functions for a further year after 20 May 2004.
The requirement for their presence could be reviewed
in December, against progress in border arrangements
and the development of necessary Timorese capacity.

This proposal brings an additional requirement -
the need to incorporate a realistic strategy for the
protection of those officers who will deploy, unarmed,
in an uncertain environment in which local response
capacity is still limited. It is our responsibility as
managers to measure very carefully the risks faced by
the men and women provided by our Member States;
the importance of appropriate precautions has been all
too clearly demonstrated over the past year.

In this context, it is proposed that a small formed
military presence, with aviation and support, be
retained after May 2004; this component would number
308 personnel in total. Its primary role would be to
provide security, protection and extraction for United
Nations personnel - in particular our military liaison
officers, but also police and civilians.

At the same time, that presence would help
respond to the priority goal of the Timorese leadership,
as conveyed in Prime Minister Alkatiri's letter to the
Secretary-General, that a continued international
military presence be provided to promote calm at a
time of potential volatility. By maintaining a high level
of visibility through regular patrols and civil-military
cooperation, that component could help limit the
destabilizing effect of too abrupt a downsizing
exercise. In extremis, it could help Timorese security
agencies to respond to security threats by providing
support in such areas as logistics, transportation,
communications and information, in regard to which
they will certainly require assistance for the next 12
months.

(spoke in French)

Member States have shown their keen and shared
desire to continue to provide effective assistance to
Timor-Leste. However, there are a number of different
ideas on how best to do so. That is why we have
submitted this report well in advance of the time when
the Security Council must take its decision, on 20 May
2004. It is our hope that the proposals put forward
today will assist in achieving consensus on those tasks
which the United Nations Mission will be able
effectively to carry out after 20 May 2004, and on the
best way to do so, on the basis of the report and in a
manner that meets with the full support of the host
country.

The Security Council's ultimate decisions on
support to Timor-Leste after 20 May 2004 will need to
take into account developments on the ground between
now - that is, mid-February - and May. There may
be changes in the security situation, progress in the
development of Timorese capability, and additional
provisions relating to bilateral assistance from which
Timor-Leste could benefit. In a number of areas, the
decisions and actions taken by the Timorese political
leadership will be crucial to the validity of these
proposals, as is noted in the report. The Secretariat
therefore intends to provide an additional report before
the end of the present mandate that will update and
fully inform the Council so that it can take its decisions
accordingly.

It is doubtful whether any nation has ever
advanced as rapidly as Timor-Leste along the path to
self-sufficiency. This has permitted a swift downsizing
in the international presence, as reflected in the charts
attached to the Secretary-General's report. Clearly this
illustrates the dynamic which underlies the transfer of
responsibility to the authorities of Timor-Leste.

Nonetheless, there are always limits to what can
be achieved in so short a period of time. It is our hope
that the Security Council will give the fullest
consideration to the proposals outlined in the
Secretary-General's report. Those proposals represent a
modest additional effort as compared to what has
already been done, but we believe that they could play
a decisive role in consolidating all that has been
achieved so far.

