Mr. Kumalo (South Africa): My delegation
commends you, Mr. President, for convening this
urgent Security Council meeting on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question, based
on the letter dated 21 January 2008 from the Charge
d'affaires of the Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2008/31).

My delegation aligns itself with the statement to
be delivered later today by the Permanent
Representative of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. We also thank Mr. Lynn Pascoe, Under-
Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for his briefing
to the Council.

The situation in occupied Palestinian territories, in
particular in Gaza, cannot be ignored any longer. In
particular, the Security Council cannot remain silent
and hope that the situation will change as time goes by.
The recently reported easing of the situation, which has
resulted in the delivery of some fuel supplies to Gaza,
appears not to be guaranteed and could end at any time,
thereby continuing to subject the people of Gaza to
even more suffering.

The deteriorating humanitarian conditions in
Gaza, in which 1.5 million residents have been left
without water, electricity and basic sewage systems,
have drawn global condemnation. The European Union
called it the "collective punishment" of the 1.5 million
Gaza residents. Mr. Christopher Gunness, a
spokesperson of the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA), warned that food distribution to 860,000
Palestinians may have to end. The International
Committee of the Red Cross has said that hospitals
have limited fuel and medicines that can last only a
couple of days more. Amnesty International has stated
that

"This action appears calculated to make an
already dire humanitarian situation worse, one in
which the most vulnerable - the sick, the
elderly, women and children - will bear the
brunt, not the men of violence who carry out
attacks against Israel. The rocket attacks should
cease, and immediately, but the entire population
of Gaza should not be put at risk to bring this
about".
My delegation believes that the Security Council
should call on Israel to permanently lift the blockade
on Gaza, including by restoring the electricity supply.
The border crossings must remain open to permit the
unhindered access of humanitarian supplies. The
Council must do that by adopting without delay the
draft presidential statement before us and send a
message to the people of Gaza - indeed, the people of
the entire Middle East - that the international
community cares and has not abandoned them.

During his recent visit to the Middle East, the
President of the United States called "for an end to the
Israeli occupation [of the West Bank and Gaza] that
began in 1967". My delegation wishes to reiterate that
the pursuit of peace must mean that neither side creates
conditions that would undermine possible confidence-
building measures. Any process to find a peaceful
solution should also translate into parallel progress on
the ground. The continuing occupation undermines the
credibility of the peace process.

It is for that reason that South Africa has always
condemned attacks on civilians, whether they are
Palestinian or Israeli. We call on elements within Israel
and Palestine to cease attacks on civilians. The firing
of improvised Qassam projectiles towards Israel is
unacceptable. We also reiterate that the
disproportionate use of force by the Israeli army,
including the collective punishment that is being meted
out against the Palestinian people in general, is also
unacceptable and cannot be justified on the basis of
self-defence.

For that reason, my delegation fully shares the
view of Ambassador Riyad Mansour, Permanent
Observer of Palestine, set out in his letter to the
President of the Security Council dated 15 January
2008, in which he says that

"Such illegal acts of aggression by the occupying
Power poison the atmosphere, inevitably
undermining peace efforts and fuelling the
dreaded cycle of violence that has so long
plagued our peoples". (S/2008/23)

The international community has the duty to
assist and support the parties to reach a settlement, as
well as to ensure that political progress is coupled with
a change for the better in the lives of Palestinians and
Israelis. In that regard, we commend previous regional
and international efforts to take the peace process
forward, including the Arab Peace Initiative and the

Annapolis process. The United Nations, and the
Security Council in particular, must be committed to
assist the respective parties in their quest for lasting
peace.

Two years after the Israeli withdrawal from the
Gaza Strip, the territory of Gaza remains under de facto
Israeli occupation. Israel controls Gaza's borders,
Gaza's airspace and Gaza's territorial waters. By virtue
of its illegal occupation, Israel continues to be bound
by the Fourth Geneva Convention. It is for that reason
that we call upon the Security Council to send a clear
message, through the draft presidential statement
before us, that the collective punishment of the people
living in Gaza cannot be allowed to continue, as it
threatens the peace process that must lead to the
creation of a Palestinian State, with East Jerusalem as
it capital, existing alongside the State of Israel.

