Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): I wish to first thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

We are of the view that, by bringing the Vienna
International Syria Support Group process to New
York, non-participating Security Council members are
able to substantively engage on issues concerning the
situation in Syria, on which we would have preferred to
have more time for consultations. This is an important
step in ensuring and cementing the Council's unity of
purpose and vision on the way forward for Syria. That
the international community has a strong desire to see
an end to the conflict in Syria is beyond doubt. The
cost in terms of human life and destruction of property
of the Syrian conflict to date is simply staggering.
Such suffering and misery must end now. It is for that
primary reason that Malaysia joined the consensus on
resolution 2254 (2015).

We support the aim of resolution 2254 (2015)
to build on the vision and principles of the Geneva
communique (S/2012/522, annex) and the Vienna
statements embodying the collective will of the
international community to bring about a peaceful
and sustainable solution to the Syrian conflict. In that
context, my delegation expresses its deep appreciation
to Special Envoy Steffan de Mistura for his untiring
facilitation, which we fully support.

As it moves into its fifth year, the Syrian conflict
continues to be a litany of horrific human rights
abuses and violations - most notoriously violations
of international humanitarian law through the use
of toxic chemicals as weapons, and indiscriminate
attacks against civilians perpetrated by the parties to
the conflict. The Syrian people are further tormented
by Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist
groups and violent extremists, reinforced by the
unprecedented influx of foreign terrorist fighters.
The Syrian Government must accept that it has the
primary responsibility and obligation to protect its own
people, in accordance with established international
law, international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. We reaffirm the demand on all parties
to cease all indiscriminate attacks against civilians and
to end targeted attacks on civilian infrastructure. We
reaffirm our condemnation of the continued use of
barrel bombs, aerial bombing and artillery shelling of
civilians. There can be no impunity for the perpetrators
of possible war crimes and crimes against humanity.
They must be held accountable.

At the same time, Malaysia remains deeply
concerned that, despite the clear demand for cooperation
stipulated in resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014) and
2191 (2014), the delivery of humanitarian assistance
remains a huge problem. All parties to the conflict,
particularly the Syrian authorities, must do more to
demonstrate full and effective compliance with those
resolutions.

Only through the peaceful resolution of the
conflict can the dire and deteriorating humanitarian
situation in Syria begin to be meaningfully addressed,
making it all the more urgent to do so. On that note,
Malaysia acknowledges the role of Syria's neighbours,
in particular Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, for their
steadfast resilience and for their hospitality is sheltering
and caring for the millions fleeing the humanitarian
catastrophe in Syria, despite facing enormous capacity
and resource constraints.

A fundamental element of any proposed peace
process must include the implementation of a nationwide
ceasefire. We are pleased that this requirement,
including modalities for implementation, is explicitly
outlined in resolution 2254 (2015). The preservation
of Syria's unity, independence, territorial integrity
and secular character are key factors for ensuring
acceptance of any proposed political process or plan by
the Syrian people.

No amount of encouragement, persuasion or
pressure will be effective without the political buy-in
of the Syrian people. In that connection, we call upon
Syrian Government representatives and representatives
of the opposition to spare no effort to ensure that the
proposed talks take place in early January 2016.

While noting that there are a number of contentious
issues that have yet to be addressed or agreed upon, we
nevertheless call on all parties to continue to engage
constructively in dialogue and to further narrow
differences with a view to finding mutually acceptable
solutions to end the conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation reiterates that there
can be no military solution to the Syrian conflict. The
future of Syria must be determined through an inclusive
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process. The
Syrian Government, the opposition parties and the
Syrian people cannot afford to let this opportunity
pass. We believe that the Council has an obligation
to support initiatives, such as the International Syria
Support Group or any other initiative, that seeks to
resolve the conflict in Syria through peaceful means.
In that regard, we look forward to the full and effective
implementation of resolution 2254 (2015) by all the
parties concerned.

