Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): The situation on the ground in Yemen has worsened recently. The achievement of a political settlement faces challenges and the humanitarian situation remains dire. Given that extending the Security Council's targeted sanctions against Yemen and the renewal of the mandate of the Panel of Experts on Yemen are conducive to advancing the political settlement of the Yemeni issue, China is, in principle, in favour of this and hopes that the Council will adopt a related technical rollover resolution. Over the past few days, China took an active part of the consultations on resolution 2511 (2020) and proposed many amendments to the text, in the hopes that it would reflect the broadest possible consensus of the members of the Council, avoid introducing complex factors and maintain the unity of the Council. Regrettably, the resolution just voted on failed to address China's concerns. As such, China could not but abstain in the voting, for the following reasons. First, the draft requires the Panel of Experts to study and develop a list of commercially available components used to assemble unmanned aerial vehicles. This mandate is excessively broad. The latest text has placed some limitations on the mandate but clearly states that this request should not have an adverse impact on legitimate commercial activities. The Panel of Experts should strictly abide by its mandate and ensure that its work is aimed at effectively limiting the activities of the sanctioned entities and individuals and avoiding any abuses. All parties should, first of all, engage in adequate discussions at the level of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). Secondly, the draft made some unnecessary amendments to the designation criteria. China agrees with the concern expressed over the recruitment of child soldiers and conflict-related sexual violence in the light of the actual situation. But the recruitment of child soldiers and sexual violence in conflict are already included in the existing resolution under the criteria of violations of international human rights law and international humanitarian law. The separate listing of these two acts has not been fully discussed by the Sanctions Committee and is not in accordance with the practice of the Committee. China has concerns as to the rushed amendment of the designation criteria at the level of the Security Council. Lastly, China would like to emphasize that most of the members of the Council, including China, would like to see an early launch of the political process in Yemen. We would not like to see Yemen entangled in the complex situation of the region. The sanctions measuresand the work of the Sanctions Committee should serve the overall objective of reaching a political settlement, be more constructive and prevent any further escalation of tensions.
