Lord Ashdown: Thank you, Mr. President, for
providing me this opportunity. This is my first report to
the Security Council since I took over as High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina at the end
of May from my predecessor, Wolfgang Petritsch.

I would like to set out for the Council this
morning my impressions of my first few months, my
priorities for my term of office, what the Council can
expect of us, and what we would ask of the Council
and of the Governments which support and pay for our
work. But, before I do so, let me say how pleased I am
to be able to appear here alongside my good friend and
close colleague, Jacques Paul Klein, whose last report
this is before the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) departs in a few weeks' time.

The departure of UNMIBH will mark the end of a
decade-long effort to keep the peace in a small
European country, an effort which has cost the lives of
272 United Nations personnel. It has been, I am sure all
around this table know, an intensely difficult and tough
task. But when the United Nations leaves, it will do so,
I believe, with its duty done and its head held high. In
my judgement, this is one of the unsung successes -
or too little-sung successes. I, for one, would like to
pay tribute to the work of those who have served
Bosnia and Herzegovina under the flag of the United
Nations, and - and here I know I speak for the people
of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a Whole - to the
immense and incalculable contribution that Jacques
Klein personally has made through his leadership, his
tenacity, and his sheer ability - his sometimes
frightening ability - to get things done. I would also
like to use this occasion, if I may, to thank him
personally for the wise advice and unfailing support he
has given me.

Next month it will be seven years since the
Bosnian war ended: an age ago. At the time, members
will recall, the sceptics were legion. The agreement
would not hold, they warned. Our peacekeepers would
be sucked into a guerrilla war. The refugees would
never go home; were we not stupid to even suggest
they might? Belgrade and Zagreb would exercise a
baleful influence as far ahead as anyone could
conceivably see. Bosnia, they said, like the rest of the
Balkans, was a basket case. We were doomed to fail.

Well, no one would claim the job has been done
completely. There is a lot more to do, and we have to
move a lot faster. But it is worth reminding ourselves
just how far we have come since those days when
Bosnia loomed all too large in the business of the
Council.

Within Bosnia and Herzegovina, the agreement has
held. The peace has now lasted nearly twice as long -
let me remind the Council - as the war. Come to
Sarajevo today, and you will find in many places a lively
European capital in place of the hellhole of 1992 to
1995.

As peace has taken root, the number of
Stabilization Force (SFOR) troops needed to protect it
has fallen steadily, from 60,000 then to some 18,000
today. It is about to fall still further, to around 12,000.
And let me just say that those troops continue to do a
vital job and to do it superbly. They deserve all our
gratitude. We could not have made the progress we
have on civilian peace implementation without them.

We have made progress in downsizing the local
armed forces, something I shall touch on in a moment:
430,000 men were under arms locally when the Dayton
Agreement was signed. Today that figure is in the order
of 22,000 - still too high, but a remarkable drop.

Thanks in very large measure to the work of the
United Nations, through the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),
nearly a million refugees - let me repeat this, because
it is sometimes misunderstood - nearly a million
refugees have returned to their homes, over 350,000 of
them minority returns, and around 60 per cent of
locally-registered property claims have been resolved.
It is not too much of an exaggeration to say that we
invented a new human right in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Perhaps it should be known as the
Bosnian right. Wars will never be the same again as a
result. It is the right of refugees to return home after
war.

Thousands of homes have been repaired.
Electricity generation is now at 90 per cent of the pre-
war levels. Ah, said the sceptics six years ago, but you
will never have real peace in Bosnia without
democracy in Belgrade and Zagreb, and there is little
prospect of that, they warned. But we now do indeed
have democracy in Belgrade and Zagreb. The Tudjman
regime is gone, and Croatia is making great strides
towards integration within the European Union (EU)
and is playing an increasingly constructive part in the
creation of a stable peace in Bosnia as well.

Milosevic is on trial in The Hague, and some of
us have been there to give evidence against him. It is a
great pity that Milosevic has not been joined in The
Hague by Karadzic and Mladic. Their continued
liberty, needless to say, seriously undermines our
efforts, not least to establish the rule of law in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. It is high time - it is beyond time -
seven years after Dayton, that they are caught and
brought to justice.

So don't get me wrong: the region is still fragile,
and parts of it are still prone to topple into crisis.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is still fragile. The process of
reconciliation is far from over. Healing after war, as we
know in Britain, in my own home country of Northern
Ireland, takes time.

Progress in the Balkans is often frustrating - two
steps forward, one step back. But we must not mistake
slow progress for no progress. If you could take a
snapshot of Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1996, and
compare it to now, you would see the difference; and
you would see a further improvement in the years
2003, 2004 and 2006. So we need to keep our eye on
the big picture. And we need to understand it clearly.

Which is why I, how shall we say, raised an
eyebrow at some of the commentary, much of it offered
from several thousand miles away, on the results of our
recent elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let me say
a word about those elections. First, I think it is a shame
that it was not more widely acknowledged that these
were the first elections to be run by the Bosnians
themselves. It should also be noted that they did a first-
class job, quite as good - some would argue, perhaps
even better - than was previously done by the
international community. The Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) has testified
to the way the Bosnians carried out that task, one of the
most difficult jobs any State has to do, let alone a mere
six years after a terrible war. Those elections were not
only conducted efficiently, but were also carried out
with less violence in a Bosnian election than, perhaps,
in elections in, again, my own home country of
Northern Ireland.

Secondly, I do not dispute that the turnout was
disappointing. It was, which reflected, I believe, a
widespread frustration with the political process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and - perhaps we in the
international community should look to ourselves for
this - a certain fatigue born of six major elections in
six years. I wonder what the turnout would have been
in our countries if we had had an election every two
years for the last six; perhaps it would not have reached
even 55 per cent.

As to the results, I have read many newspaper
headlines announcing a return to nationalism in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. "Back to the Future", read one;
"Forward to the Past", said another. I just do not think
that is accurate. Of the three nationalist parties, the
votes of two did not go up; they went down. And the
party that did best of all, the SNSD - the Independent
Social Democratic Party - is a validly non-nationalist
party. It was the big winner of the night.

So I appeal to the Council, just as I have appealed
to the parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not to
misread the outcome of these elections. What we
witnessed was a protest vote - or, given the low
turnout, perhaps we should call it a protest non-vote -
against politics and politicians in general and against
the slow pace of reform. Again, I would say that one
does not have to go to Bosnia and Herzegovina to find
low turnouts, because people are fed up with
politicians. I know; I was one.

I travelled the length and breadth of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in the run-up to the elections. I heard the
message from the voters myself at public meeting after
public meeting, on radio talk show after radio talk
show. First, let me tell the Council what that message
was not. It was not "Give us nationalism". It was "Give
us a future".

Unlike their counterparts in Central and Eastern
Europe, the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina did not
punish their leaders for delivering too much reform;
they punished them for delivering too little and not fast
enough. These elections were a cry for help.

Bosnia and Herzegovina's new Government,
whatever it is, needs to hear that cry very, very clearly,
and so do we in the international community. Because,
whatever the precise makeup of the new Governments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the challenges facing the
country are the same today as they were before polling
day, the same this month as they were last. We still face
the huge challenge of establishing the rule of law. We
still face the huge challenge of creating jobs. We still
face the immense challenge of delivering effective
government and stable institutions and of raising
standards in public life. In other words, we still face
the challenge of "making Bosnia and Herzegovina
work" - my slogan for the next period of my mandate.
The only thing that has changed is that those
challenges have now become even more urgent.

I said when I took up my post that my priorities
were to be "first justice, then jobs, through reform",
and they still are. They are set out in the document that
we have agreed on jointly with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities. The document is called
"Justice and Jobs", and it identifies in precise terms
what steps now need to be taken to give the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina the rule of law and a chance
for employment.

We have made a start in establishing the rule of
law. We have reorganized the international community
presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina to reflect that
priority, and we have begun to assemble the tools that
we will need to assert the rule of law. We are setting up
a new unit to tackle crime and corruption. We have
established a new legal reform unit, headed and almost
entirely staffed by Bosnians, to rewrite the Bosnian
law. We have begun, with the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the long-overdue process of restructuring
the country's court system at all levels and of ensuring
that only honest judges and prosecutors administer the
law. We had promised to have the High Judicial and
Prosecutorial Council established in the autumn, and I
am pleased to say it has been established and is now in
place. We have established a special chamber in the
State Court in Bosnia and Herzegovina and a special
department in the Bosnia and Herzegovina Prosecutor's
Office to tackle organized crime. I am determined that,
whatever happens, it will be in place, operating and
trying criminals by 31 December. That is fast progress,
but it needs to be done.

In January, the European Police Mission will take
over from the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH). Once again, I am deeply
grateful to Jacques Paul Klein and to UNMIBH for all
they are doing to make sure that that happens as
smoothly and as efficiently as possible. We have tough
times ahead. But, thanks to my predecessors and to the
immense work done by the United Nations, we have
solid foundations upon which to build.

So we are making headway. But there is much
more to do - and we must do it faster - before
Bosnia and Herzegovina has a justice system that
works. We now need to ratchet up our efforts by
establishing in law the key outstanding pieces of
legislation central to the pursuit of justice in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. But if that is to be a success - and
here comes the appeal - we need your Governments
to provide us with the practical support that we will
need to make it a success.

The centrepiece of our efforts is the new Court of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will have to have the tools
it needs to do the job, such as a new State criminal
code and criminal procedure code, which we are about
to present for enactment. There are other tools that the
Court will need as well, for which we will have to look
to the international community - tools such as the
experts and the resources to implement the witness
protection programmes, money-laundering programmes
and asset forfeiture programmes that we need to put
into operation, and the judges and prosecutors to
mentor and guide local judges and prosecutors as they
implement this new system of justice.

Let me remind the Council that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is now the first State in the region to have
taken the step - so essential to a modern democracy -
of separating those who make the laws from those who
administer the laws. We will also need substantial
international support if the local judges, prosecutors,
police and court officials and defence bar are to be
trained in the use of the new criminal code that we will
be introducing shortly. And that is the kind of assistance
that only the international community can provide.

But now we also need to open up a further front
of reform: economic reform. Again, time is not on
Bosnia's side. We will have to move quickly -
painfully quickly - if we are to reform Bosnia's
sclerotic economy. I shall put it another way: time is
now Bosnia and Herzegovina's enemy. Aid is tapering
off and debts are mounting, and foreign private
investment is not increasing to fill that gap. A glance at
the economic indicators shows that the patient is
hovering between the serious and the critical lists. So
we have no option but to sharply - I use the word
again, perhaps even painfully - steepen the gradient
of economic reform in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
will have to do things quickly, perhaps even roughly, to
get the economy going. At this stage, speed will matter
more than perfection. Our motto will have to be "The
best is the enemy of the good".

We are making some headway already. Some
important laws have been enacted in the past few
months, including an amendment to the State law on
civil aviation, laws on entity electricity, the Federation
law on concessions, the entity law on banks, and the
State veterinary law. But we will have to push even
faster. Among other things, we need a single-budget,
one-stop business registration system, driving a
bulldozer through the tangle of bureaucracy that
prevents businesses from being established in the legal
sector and forces them into the grey economy.

But no amount of legislation will make people
better off unless it is implemented. None of it will
make one iota of difference if the whole way in which
the Government operates destroys jobs instead of
creating them, or if the way in which the Government
collects its revenues impoverishes public services and
enriches criminals.

If the international community - and here I speak
to my Bosnian colleagues - is to be expected to
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina, and if the
world's taxpayers are to continue to build new hospitals
and schools, then they must know that they are
subsidizing reform, not racketeers. Present estimates -
conservative estimates, I am bound to say - are that
around 600 million convertible marks - 300 million
euros - are lost every year in customs fraud. That is
one and a half times the entire State budget lost to
corruption and smuggling. The equivalent of the entire
annual budget of the State Border Service, around 30
million euros, is lost in just over a month through sales
tax evasion. If the international community is to
maintain its commitment to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
that simply cannot continue.

That is why we have proposed replacing the
corruption-prone sales taxes with a modern value-
added tax system, operated, as it must be, at the State
level. And that is why we have asked the European
Commission to recommend how we must work with
the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities to reform the
customs system to cut fraud and to boost revenue yield.

But there is no point giving more funds to weak
central institutions, which is why we are also proposing
changes to Bosnia's central Government, the Council
of Ministers, to end the system of ethnic rotation,
which produces a bizarre ministerial merry-go-round
and institutionalizes instability where we can least
afford it. We also propose giving the Chair - let us
call him or her the Prime Minister, for the moment - a
professional civil service to support the work that he or
she does to complete that vital job. Here again, we will
have to ask the international community to lend its
assistance. Relatively small resources here will yield
huge dividends in increasing the efficacy of the
Bosnian Government later. These structural reforms,
coupled with aggressive economic reforms, are the key
steps to answering the question of how to make Bosnia
and Herzegovina work. Whatever the makeup of the
new Government, which is yet to be decided, my
message will be the same: we will judge you not by
what you said on the campaign trail, but by what you
do in office. If you are serious about reform, as you say
you are, now you have a chance to prove it.

Seven years after Dayton, Bosnia and
Herzegovina is entering a crucial phase. The job we are
trying to do can be done, but only if we remain
committed and stay fiercely - and maybe even
uncomfortably - focused. My approach as the High
Representative will be to distinguish ruthlessly
between those things that are truly essential and those
that are simply desirable. The Office of the High
Representative, with the executive power it wields,
should focus on the first, and not the second. Our job
now is to complete what we have set our hand to and to
focus on the core remaining tasks. Justice, jobs and
making Bosnia and Herzegovina work will be the core
agenda, as I have described.
We will also need to press ahead with downsizing
and reorganizing the armed forces to ensure that they
become a force for stability, not for instability. As I
have said, there has been progress in the last year; but
we need to go further and faster if Bosnia and
Herzegovina is to have the armed forces it can afford
and if it is to develop the State-level dimension of
security in defence matters so that the country can
fulfil its commitments as a sovereign State and play its
part in regional security, particularly within the context
of Atlantic structures.

On refugee return the story is one, I believe, of
quite remarkable, if unsung, success. We have to keep
up those efforts through, and during, the course of 2003
if we are to be in a position, as I am determined that we
shall be, successfully to hand this burden over to the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina as the end of
next year. We need continued support and funding in
the coming year to make that happen. In particular, we
need to build the capacity of local institutions as they
prepare to take over the main responsibilities for
managing return.

I therefore cannot hide from the Council that it
worries me that some countries, including some that
have been our largest contributors in the past, are, in
my view, prematurely scaling back their funding for
refugee return next year, just as sustainable success is
in sight. Let us be careful not to snatch defeat from the
jaws of victory. I am determined, however, that we in
the Office of the High Representative move towards
handing over tasks to the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina at a much faster pace.

In order to provide the necessary focus and
discipline to the efforts of the Office of the High
Representative, I have instructed my staff to draw up a
mandate implementation plan - the author of which,
in terms of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH), was Jacques Klein, whose
lead we are following. The purpose ofthat plan will be
to set out clearly and concisely, in language everybody
can understand and with measurable benchmarks, what
the core tasks of the Office of the High Representative
are and how we propose to accomplish them. That
document will be ready in time for the Peace
Implementation Committee Steering Board meeting on
21 November. It will also drive not only our actions but
also our internal structures.

We have to remember - and I think that
sometimes some of my international colleagues in
Bosnia and Herzegovina do not remember - that our
task is not to create a first-world country in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, but to bring the country to the point at
which its peace rests on firm foundations; it no longer
poses a threat to itself or its neighbours; and it becomes
a dependable international and regional partner
operating within the structures of a modern European
State and firmly on course for integration, over time,
into the European Union. Once we have achieved that
it will be time for us to hand over that task to the
people who should be doing it and who, I believe, have
more than the capacity to do so, the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina themselves.

I very much welcome the fact that the European
Union is taking on a steadily greater share of the
burden within Bosnia and Herzegovina, as in the rest of
the Balkan region. That is an important fact, and one
that is perhaps best illustrated by the fact that I am, so-
called, "double-batted" to both the European Union and
to the Security Council. But Bosnia and Herzegovina
remains a team effort in which the entire international
community is engaged and must stay engaged if we are
to see it through, as I believe we now can, to success.
That, if I may say, places a special obligation on
Bosnia and Herzegovina's neighbours - especially on
Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia - to
work actively for stability and reconciliation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and to show that full respect that
Croatia has certainly shown, and that Belgrade
increasingly does as well, to Bosnia and Herzegovina's
sovereignty and territorial integrity.

In conclusion, even before 11 September 2001 the
recent tragic history of the Balkans had reminded us of
the dangers that failed, or failing, States could pose to
the wider international community; how instability
could be contagious; and how quickly someone else's
problems could become everyone else's problems. We
learned that lesson in the Balkans, and we must
continue to show, in the Balkans and in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, that we have not forgotten it.

But we have learned something else too from
elsewhere on our European continent. In Central and
Eastern Europe countries have remarkably transformed
their prospects, by their own efforts, and with very
considerable international support and involvement.
Those countries now stand on the very threshold of
joining the European Union.

We, together with the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, have the chance to set Bosnia and
Herzegovina firmly onto that same road and to give its
people a second chance at the brighter future that they
so cruelly missed a decade ago. Ultimately, of course,
it will be up to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina
to seize that chance, to make the transition onto the
path to Europe and to reach the point of no return. To
do all those things will require continued funding; it
will require a continued, though diminishing, military
presence for some time; and it will require the
continued commitment of qualified and dedicated
people from the international community. It will
require, above all, one other commodity: political will.
That political will will be necessary to see this job
through to success, success that is now, I believe, in
our grasp, but only if we can find the measures and the
political will, in the face of other crises in the world, to
stay the course.

