Mr. Mpanyane (South Africa): South Africa
wishes to thank Deputy Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Raisedon Zenenga, Special
Representative of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission for Somalia Francisco Madeira and
Assistant Secretary-General Ursula Mueller for their
briefings, as well as the Secretary-General Antonio for
his report (S/2019/393).

My delegation commends Secretary-General
Guterres and the role that the United Nations
Assistance Mission in Somalia (UNSOM) and the
United Nations Support Office in Somalia (UNSOS)
have been playing in facilitating State-building and
peacebuilding processes in Somalia, in line with the
mandate provided by the Security Council. It is without
a doubt that UNSOM. and UNSOS, as well as the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM), have
contributed positively to the prevailing development
trajectory in Somalia.

South Africa welcomes the comprehensive reform
agenda of the Federal Government of Somalia, which
includes four road maps aimed at maintaining progress
on inclusive politics, security and justice, economic
recovery and social and human development.

Despite the efforts of AMISOM, UNSOM. and
UNSOS, together with the Somali security forces
and international partners in the security sector, we
note with serious concern that Al-Shabaab and other
armed groups continue to be a source of instability
in some parts of Somalia, including Mogadishu. The
continued atrocities perpetrated by Al-Shabaab against
civilians, Government facilities, Government officials,
the Somali security forces and AMISOM. personnel are
alarming and must be condemned.

While we agree that, in the long term, Somalia
needs to be able to take ownership of addressing its own
security challenges, we also realize that the Federal
Government of Somalia cannot do so on its own, given
the capacity limitations of the Somali security forces.
The area of capacity-building is one that requires
sustained and coordinated international support. In
that regard, South Africa calls for the continuation of
the implementation of a comprehensive approach to
security, encompassing international coordination and
joint planning by AMISOM, the Federal Government,
the federal member states, UNSOM, UNSOS and
international partners, among others.

It is our firm View that sustained and inclusive
dialogue between the Federal Government of Somalia
and the federal member states is imperative to resolving
their differences in order to move the State-building
and peacebuilding processes forward. Equally, there
is pertinence in resolving the current stalemate
between the two houses of the Federal Parliament.
Cooperation between the two houses is important for
the processing of the legislative framework envisaged
in the implementation of the transition plan. We
encourage State-building and peacebuilding processes
to be inclusive, with the meaningful involvement of
women and youth. We commend UNSOM. for providing
assistance to the Somali authorities in promoting
women and youth participation in the processes of
State-building and peacebuilding.

South Africa is pleased with the notable progress
made in the constitutional review process. We urge
the Federal Government of Somalia to finalize the
outstanding issues pertaining to the Constitution, with
a View to adopting it before the holding of elections.
The progress made towards finalizing a national
reconciliation framework - the guiding document for
nationwide reconciliation - is a welcome development.
Furthermore, we commend the National Independent
Electoral Commission for advancing preparations for
voter registration for the 2020-2021 holding of elections.

With respect to humanitarian issues, continued
support for the humanitarian situation in Somalia
remains paramount. In that regard, we urge the
international community to support the 2019
humanitarian response plan for Somalia in order for
the humanitarian community to deliver the necessary
services to civilians in need, including to ensure their
security, issues relative to State-building and resilience,
which Ms. Mueller mentioned earlier.

In conclusion, we want to commend AMISOM. for
its role in supporting the implementation of the Somali
transition plan, as well as in training and capacitating
the Somali national security forces.

