Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like
to thank Assistant Secretary-General Keita for her
comprehensive and clear briefing. I would also like
to take this opportunity to congratulate the Canadian
delegation, its partners and the Secretariat for the
successful United Nations Peacekeeping Defence
Ministerial meeting in Vancouver last month. The
focus on innovation, training and capacity-building
that we saw in Vancouver is essential for successful and
modern peacekeeping and for bridging capacity gaps.

Allow me also to pay tribute to the men and women
of all countries who have served with United Nations
peace operations. Their commitment and dedication
have saved countless lives. Many have lost their own
lives in the service of the United Nations, and, as
others have said, we owe them a huge debt of gratitude.
The recent criminal and fatal attack on Tanzanian
peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a reminder of the dangers that peacekeepers face
everyday as they protect others. I would like to make
three points today.

First, on force generation, we look forward to
reviewing the Secretary-General's report and his
recommendations on force generation and on bridging
capacity gaps, including effective and efficient training
and capacity-building. We recognize that planning,
pledges, performance and partnerships are the right
way forward, not only to improve force generation and
mitigate capacity gaps, but also to integrate gender
perspectives and the protection of civilians, especially
women and children, in peacekeeping operations.

We appreciate the efforts of the Secretariatto improve
the strategic force generation of uniformed personnel,
not only in terms of units and numbers, but also and
equally importantly, in terms of new capabilities such
as peacekeeping intelligence, warning radar systems,
gender advisers and multinational air-assets, as well
as increasing the number of female military observers
and staff officers. We support the Secretariat's efforts
to validate pledges in the Peacekeeping Capability
Readiness System and evaluate mission headquarters,
deployed units and staff officers in order to measure
effectiveness and readiness and to meet the exceptional
challenges of peacekeeping missions.

In the light of those challenges, it is important that
all police- and troop-contributing countries live up to
their responsibility to train and equip their units so that
they can deliver on mandates, be present throughout
their areas of responsibility and minimize the risks of
casualties and wounded personnel.

Sweden will continue to take full responsibility
for its units, and ensure that they are fully trained and
equipped to meet all challenges. At the same time,
we will continue to support other police- and troop-
contributing countries with training and capacity-
building. Examples of that are: courses at the Swedish
International Training Centre and at the Nordic Centre
for Gender in Military Operations, located in Sweden;
mobile training-team support to peacekeeping centres
in Africa, including the United Nations presence in
Uganda; increasing the number of seats at courses for
those that deploy gender advisors to United Nations
peacekeeping missions; and mobile training-team
support for an infantry battalion in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali. We are ready to consider the same support to
sector headquarters in the future. Peacekeeping benefits
us all, and all contributions to peacekeeping operations
count. We would welcome an increase in the number
of contributing countries, including contributors from
a wide range of regions.

Secondly, on the peace and security architecture,
the range and nature of threats to international
peace and security are complex and interlinked. We
strongly support the Secretary-General's ambitious
reform plans for the peace and security architecture,
not least regarding an enhanced focus on prevention.
The Secretary-General's proposal seeks, among
other things, to strengthen the link between political
strategies and operations. Delivering on that vision
will require a system-wide approach to sustaining
peace and the primacy of politics, which is reflected
in how the United Nations operates. That will include
closing the gap between peacekeeping operations and
the development system.

Presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27, adopted
earlier today, is a welcome step in that regard,
further outlining the link between peacebuilding and
sustaining peace and the mandates and configuration
of peacekeeping missions. The frank and timely
analysis of information is critical for effective conflict
prevention, mediation, management and resolution.
It is also essential for the Council to play its part in
designing the mandates for peacekeeping operations.
We welcome the Secretary-General's efforts to
streamline and coordinate information and situational
awareness within the Secretariat. Joint analysis and
information-sharing need to be systematized from
the outset of a mission, and intelligence needs to be
integrated in each mission.

The Secretariat also needs to give informed, sound
and frank military and police strategic advice, based
on troop-to-task analysis, with regard to the expected
delivery of any given mandate, which should have clear
and prioritized objectives that can be measured through
operational criteria for follow-up success and can help
to sequence the campaign plan in accordance with the
troops generated by the Secretariat and made available
by Member States.

Resolution 2378 (2017) reflects and acknowledges

efforts of the African Union and subregional
organizations to strengthen their capacity in the
field of peace and security. The current momentum
around the Framework for a Renewed United Nations-
African Union Partnership on Africa's Integration and
Development Agenda 2017-2027 needs to be capitalized
on. That entails discussing concrete options for more
flexible, predictable and sustainable funding for African
Union peace operations, including access to assessed
contributions. We look forward to the next report from
the Secretary-General on strengthening the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union.

Thirdly, we need to better integrate a gender
perspective and the protection of civilians into
peacekeeping operations and their mandates, so as to
ensure that missions are deployed with appropriate
staffing and competence. In that context, it is important
to stress the need to fulfil all obligations under
resolution 1325 (2000). It is also of utmost importance
to prevent sexual exploitation and abuse, and to
investigate any incidents and hold to account those
responsible. We welcome the Secretariat's initiatives
to achieve gender parity and increase the amount of
women in peacekeeping.

We believe that the process of force generation
can benefit from greater openness and transparency,
increased frankness and better strategic military and
police advice from the Secretary-General to the Council,
as well as sequenced mandates with prioritized tasks
and the use of enhanced new capabilities that reduce
risks and enhance performance. Equally, it is vital to
look into new ways of capacity-building, training and
funding to achieve that. We will continue to contribute
and do everything we can to ensure that United Nations
peacekeeping can meet the challenges of the twenty-
first century.

