Mr. Jinga (Romania): I would like to thank the Belgian presidency of the Security Council for convening this debate on the topic of the role of transitional justice in ensuring sustainable peace. Romania aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the European Union. I will now make a few remarks in my national capacity. This important theme brings with it a conceptual and practical challenge because of its many connections and interlinkages with accountability, criminal justice, democracy and the rule of law. Therefore, our interpretation of transitional justice comprises a broader sense than just a series of tribunals or commissions and refers to the multitude of efforts to reach peaceful and legitimate governance in the aftermath of repressive regimes or widespread violence. As a country that has undergone a democratic transition that started 30 years ago, Romania represents a successful example of such a process. We believe that transitional justice can be successful only if it is rooted in a holistic approach that encompasses the root causes of conflict or repressive rule, individual prosecution, institutional reform and respect for human rights. Reforming institutions is a key component of transitional justice. In the absence of reforms, trust and reconciliation are impossible to achieve and institutionswill not be able to sustain and project peace, respect for the rule of law and human rights. Further progress in transitional justice could be achieved if more United Nations peace operations were mandated to address it. An effective way for the international community to support institutional reforms, while safeguarding the principle of national ownership, is to strengthen the rule-of-law component of peace operations. In that context, Romania has intensified its cooperation with the Justice and Corrections Service of the United Nations Department of Peace Operations and has started the process of submitting nominations for women corrections officers to be deployed in United Nations peace operations. We have also increased our participation in the activities of the Group of Friends of Corrections in Peace Operations, and we encourage other Member States to do so as well. Another important component of transitional justice is to make access to justice a reality for the most vulnerable people, in the aftermath of widespread violations, through criminal prosecution. Accountability is primarily the responsibility of States and their judicial systems; therefore, the need for capacity-building and justice sector reform is of the utmost importance. However, when the national investigative apparatus fails, the international community has a responsibility to ensure a back-up justice mechanism that can deliver justice and conduct fair trials. In that respect, the establishment of the International Criminal Court has been an incentive for adopting relevant domestic legislation and consolidating national justice mechanisms. I would like to reiterate Romania's full support for that institution and our commitment to raising awareness of the Court's mandate and defending the impartial and independent conduct of its functions. My country has also continuously called for renewed attention to supporting national proceedings, including by mainstreaming the concepts of the Rome Statute in the relevant assistance programmes dedicated to the development of the rule of law. Last but not least, I would like to emphasize the importance of partnerships. In that regard, the role of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in advising the Security Council, its focus on ensuring the peace continuum and its convening role in bringing together Member States, the United Nations system, international financial institutions, regional organizations and civil society are particularly important. In that vein, I would like to reiterate that during Romania's chairmanship of the PBC in 2018, one of our priorities was to increase synergies between the PBC, the Peacebuilding Fund and the Security Council. I believe there is a need to address the issue of transitional justice as a building block towards sustaining peace in a more comprehensive manner. We therefore stand ready to engage in future discussions on the full range of processes and mechanisms associated with the effort to ensure accountability and reconciliation in States emerging from conflicts or repressive rule.
