Mr. Tafrov (Bulgaria) (spoke in French): I wish
at the outset to thank the delegation of Mauritius for
having taken the initiative of organizing this public
meeting on the situation in Africa. My delegation is
grateful to you, Mr. Minister, for personally presiding
over this meeting.

I wish to welcome Mr. Amara Essy, Secretary-
General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU),
and to thank him for his substantial and very useful
contribution to this debate. I also welcome the
ministers participating in this meeting.

Bulgaria will listen with interest to the statement
of the European Union High Representative for
Common Foreign and Security Policy, Mr. Javier
Solana. Bulgaria is an associated member of the
European Union, and we fully share the European
Union's approach to security problems in Africa.

Africa has the sad privilege of often being on the
agenda of the Security Council; that is true for this
month as well. Over the past three decades there have
been more than 30 conflicts in Africa, claiming
countless victims and causing vast devastation. At
present, more than 15 conflicts are under way on the
continent. Statistics tell us that one fifth of Africa's
population lives in war-torn regions.

Among the main causes, let me underscore the
following. Very widespread underdevelopment, and the
structural weakness of many African States that have
been unable to develop solid institutions or a real
culture of democracy. In that context, inter-ethnic,
interregional and even interpersonal tension can easily
turn into antagonism that often escalates into armed
conflict. The fact is that one of Africa's main problems
is not conflict between sovereign States, but conflict
within States; conflicts that cut across States are a
widespread phenomenon.

In its approach to African situations the Security
Council generally takes due account of those
complexities. In its efforts to devote in-depth attention
to problems, it very often goes to the very limits of its
Charter mandate. Thanks to the efforts of the
Secretariat, coordination between the work of the
Security Council and that of other United Nations
organs is quite satisfactory. That is particularly true in
situations where peace must be made to last by
strengthening the authority of the State, of its
democratic institutions and of its economy. Here, I
wish to welcome the President of the Economic and
Social Council, the Permanent Representative of
Croatia to the United Nations, Mr. Ivan Simonovic'.

Bulgaria takes a very favourable view of the
contributions of so many non-governmental
organizations, and welcomes the good cooperation
between the United Nations and those organizations,
which ought to continue. That said, the degree to which
children are protected in armed conflict remains
unacceptably low despite the Security Council's
considerable efforts.

As for the role of Africa, my delegation endorses
the still-timely conclusions set out in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa, contained in document
S/1998/318 of 13 April 1998. First, African countries
must demonstrate the will to rely upon political rather
than military responses to problems. Secondly, African
countries must ensure respect for human rights and the
rule of law, strengthen democratization and promote
transparency in public administration. And thirdly,
Africa must enact the reforms needed to promote
economic recovery.

The Republic of Bulgaria welcomes the
cooperation taking place between the United Nations
and the Organization of African Unity (OAU). We fully
support their agreed activities and encourage efforts to
harmonize assessments and approaches regarding
conflicts in Africa; this could make it possible to
enhance the effectiveness of diplomatic and other
measures undertaken by the United Nations and the
OAU. The establishment of a real strategic partnership
between the OAU and the United Nations makes it
possible to rationalize existing initiatives on the
priority topics of conflict prevention, peacemaking,
human rights, democracy and good governance.

I stress that better coordination between United
Nations bodies on the one hand and regional and
subregional organizations on the other is important for
making their activities more effective. Obviously,
success depends on understanding among all the main
actors. Another crucial priority is that African
countries themselves should take ownership of their
future and their development. Here, let me mention the
role of subregional organizations, which now bear new
security commitments: first of all the Economic
Community of West African States, as well as the
Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of Central African States and
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development. Despite
varying degrees of integration, we have seen in
practice that they can be effective instruments for the
prevention and management of conflicts. Bulgaria feels
that improving continent-wide and regional integration
would have a positive impact on security. That is
clearly illustrated by the decisions of the OAU Lusaka
Summit, which opened a new chapter in the modern
history of the continent and which provided
unambiguous evidence of the determination of African
leaders to resolve the problems that they themselves
have identified.

There can be no pre-established all-purpose
recipes for mediation efforts. Very often, the
endeavours of special envoys make a real difference in
settling conflicts. Their ability, their personal courage
and their determination merit commendation and full
support from the Security Council. In that connection, I
note that mediation by African personalities with the
necessary political and moral standing is an invaluable
tool.

Sanctions must be better targeted and adapted to
each specific situation. We welcome the Security
Council's important work in this area, and we are
determined to participate in efforts to enhance the
effectiveness of sanctions. As Chairman of the Somalia
sanctions Committee, Bulgaria is ready to make a
strong commitment to resolving the problems of that
country.

Bulgaria is gravely concerned at the uncontrolled
production, the proliferation and the illegal trade in
small arms and light weapons; this continues to pose a
serious challenge to Africa's stability and development.
Strengthening cooperation and improving information
exchange among African countries in the sphere of
customs and border controls; legislation; and
implementing United Nations arms embargoes: these
are all elements that could create an environment less
conducive to the emergence and continuation of armed
conflicts.

The Security Council is making a considerable
effort to improve the lot of internally displaced persons
and refugees, but in Africa the large number of such
persons makes that task extremely difficult. We
welcome the work of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees and the non-
governmental organizations, which often do pioneering
work in the face of enormous difficulties.

Since the decolonization of the continent, the
Republic of Bulgaria has a long tradition of
involvement and cooperation in Africa. As a non-
permanent member of the Security Council, my
country will do all in its power to help our African
friends to improve security on their continent.

