As this is the first official meeting under your leadership, Mr. President, we would like to congratulate Saint Vincent and Grenadines on its assumption of the Security Council presidency for November and to wish you every success in your work. We also commend the presidency for organizing this timely debate on the contemporary drivers of conflict and insecurity. Today's conflicts have become more complex, protracted and fluid, spreading across borders to affect broader regions. The activities of non-State armed groups, terrorism and violent extremism, cyberthreats, intercommunal violence, internal displacement and refugee flows, the degradation of the environment, climate change and food insecurity are just some examples of our daily challenges. We need to address not only each and every one of them but also their mutually reinforcing dynamics. The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is an unprecedented test of national and international capacities to manage those compound risks. It has only deepened the pre-existing vulnerabilities of conflict-affected and fragile countries, threatening to reverse development and peacebuilding gains. Therefore, now more than ever, we need to apply an integrated and coherent approach to advance the agenda on sustaining peace. The challenge lies in developing policies that will address not only the pandemic itself but also potential collisions with other regional or global crises, such as climate change. Both the COVID-19 pandemic and climate change are likely to aggravate inequalities in human development and exacerbate existing drivers of conflict. Climate change is another of the global threats that exerts an enormous impact on people's security and livelihoods. It acts both as a contributor to and a catalyst for destabilization. Comprehensive solutions to peace and security must take into account threats such as water stress and competition over natural resources. Poland closely follows the Security Council's discussions on the impact of climate change on global security issues. We know that the consequences of climate change will mostly be felt in those countries and regions that struggle with poor governance and other socioeconomic challenges. That is why stabilization efforts and peacebuilding must be climate-sensitive and why greater emphasis must be placed on the prevention agenda. Risk-assessment and -management strategies, knowledge- and experience- sharing and capacity-building will be crucial in building resilience. We believe that, with effective early-warning systems based on reliable data on climate-security risks, we could improve forecasting in order to better prevent crises. Therefore, we are in favour of addressing this issue as part of the Security Council's work as well as peacekeeping operations' mandates. The link between development, health, the environment and peace and security is inseparable. Our economic recovery packages should therefore be designed to build back better and greener, with a special focus on sustainable development, climate change and inclusiveness, in the spirit of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Paris Agreement on Climate Change. In that vein, both women's empowerment and youth participation are crucial. Four years after the adoption of resolutions 2310 (2016), 2312 (2016) and 2331 (2016), on the maintenance of international peace and security, we can observe the progress that has been made in terms of a more holistic and cross-pillar approach towards conflict prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The peace and security pillar has become more coherent, and its capacity to support all stages of the peace continuum has improved. Nevertheless, there is still work to be done with regard to our commitment - both in spirit and in practice - to preventive policies. In order to effectively mitigate threats, it is pivotal to foster risk-assessment capacities within various United Nations bodies, including the Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and United Nations missions in the field. Reducing the risk of conflict requires resilient and accountable State institutions, good governance and social cohesion, as well as inclusive and sustainable development anchored in the protection of human rights. Finally, Poland commends the Peacebuilding Commission for its work on bringing together international, national and local stakeholders to examine and address complex peacebuilding challenges, including after the outbreak of the pandemic. We strongly support the close collaboration of the PBC with various United Nations bodies, including not only the Security Council, the General Assembly and United Nations missions in the field but also the Economic and Social Council. We also underscore the importance of mediation and the need for more consistent support from the Security Council for the mediation initiatives of the Secretary-General. Conflicts can and should be prevented or mitigated by early and well-suited political and diplomatic engagement. We firmly believe that the Security Council has a critical role to play in that regard.
