Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolutions 2213 (2015) and 2214 (2015).

We are at a critical phase in the United Nations-
facilitated talks in Libya. The international community
must unite behind Special Representative Bernardino
Leon and speak with one voice to help ensure that the
Libyan parties reach agreement on a National Unity
Government. Renewing the mandate of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) today
is therefore an important sign of our continued strong
support for Leen's work, for political mediation and for
resolving the current crisis through dialogue.

The consequences of failure are clear to see.
Instability and insecurity has allowed terrorist groups,
including those affiliated with the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida, to threaten Libyans
and others in the region. It has created a deteriorating
humanitarian situation and increased human rights
violations and abuses. It has led to the proliferation of
unsecured arms and ammunition that helps escalate
the violence and further undermines the stability and
security of Libya and its people.

We therefore welcome the refreshed focus on the
UNSMIL mandate for supporting as a priority the
political process in Libya, as well as assisting Libyan
institutions, monitoring human rights and countering
arms proliferation. We support the reaffirmation
of sanctions and arms embargo measures. We echo
the calls for an end to the violence, the need for
accountability and for more cooperation with the
International Criminal Court.

Resolution 2214 (2015) is a strong collective
Sign of our commitment to supporting Libya's fight
against terrorism. We have seen the dangerous rise
of ISIL-affiliated groups across North Africa and its
consequences for regional security. The murder of
Egyptian Coptic Christians, the Al-Quba bombings
and, most recently, the attack in the Tunisian Bardo
Museum leaves us in no doubt that concrete steps must
be taken to tackle the threat. The United Kingdom is
ready to play its part in that effort.

It is vital that counter-terrorism and political efforts
continue in parallel. The absence of a strong, united
central Government in Libya strengthens those who
wish to plunge the country and the region into chaos.
A National Unity Government is therefore critically
important for Libya's counter-terrorism efforts.

