Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands) (spoke in French): I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
your kind words for our presidency, which I will convey
with great pleasure to Ambassador Van Oosterom and
the entire team. Allow me in turn to congratulate you,
sir, on assuming the presidency for the month of April.
I wish you every success.

My thanks also go to Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for
his briefing.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement to be made by the observer of the
European Union.

The Kingdom of the Netherlands is following the
developments in Haiti with the greatest interest, as three
of our four constituent countries - Aruba, Curacao and
Saint Martin - are located in the Caribbean. Today, I
would like to address the following three points: the
current situation, the role of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti (MINUJUSTH) and the
prospects for the future.

With regard to the current situation, in recent
years Haiti has embarked on an impressive journey
towards change. The country has made major progress
in stabilizing the political situation and security
conditions. With the support of the United Nations,
including through the global focal point for police,
justice and corrections, the Haitian National Police has
been professionalized and has recruited a considerable
number of women. The terrible epidemic of cholera that
ravaged the country for more than eight years finally
seems to be under control.

However, there are still challenges to overcome.
There are worrying reports about the length of pretrial
detention, the overcrowding of prisons and insufficient
access to justice. That can be resolved only by
adopting the relevant legislation and by enhancing the
effectiveness, transparency and accountability of the
security and rule of law institutions. The unacceptable
cases of human rights violations by the Haitian National
Police underscore the need to put in place strengthened

oversight and accountability mechanisms in the
public sector.

That brings me to my second point - the role
of the Mission. Haiti cannot meet such challenges
alone. MINUJUSTH was established to support the
Government and the people of Haiti in their efforts
to build a better future. However, only through close
cooperation will the Mission and the Haitian State
succeed in building and strengthening the country's
public institutions. Priorities and efforts must be
matched. Through its good offices and its advocacy
role, the Mission is fundamental to ensuring political
ownership of the shared goals. In order to achieve
the ambitious goals of the Mission, it is necessary to
accelerate progress and to strengthen cooperation.

In that regard, it is essential to develop as soon
as possible, in close cooperation with the United
Nations country team, a comprehensive joint strategy
to lay the groundwork for the completion of the
peacekeeping phase. In that way, the progress made in
fulfilling the Mission's mandate can be measured so
as to ensure a responsible withdrawal that meets the
conditions identified.

That brings me to my third point - the prospects
for the future. In the end, we have the same objective: to
make Haiti a prosperous and safe society. Strengthening
the rule of law is rightly the cornerstone of that
objective. The rule of law is the bedrock of any just,
prosperous and peaceful society, which is an element
of trust for both the population and the investors. We
encourage Haiti to seize this opportunity and to take
full advantage of its partnership with the Mission.
Such a partnership must be based on the credibility,
legitimacy and integrity ofthe United Nations presence
in Haiti. We therefore welcome the Secretary-General's
policy of zero tolerance for sexual exploitation and
abuse. We underscore the importance of the previous
mission, the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti, being held accountable for past acts.

We look forward to the Secretary-General's report
on the new strategy to fight cholera. We emphasize the
need for the effective implementation of the strategy.
We must turn the page on cholera.

I would like to conclude by expressing the wish
that 18 months from now, the parliamentary elections
will mark the beginning of a new era in Haiti. In the
meantime, let us use this time to build a strong and
sustainable foundation for political stability, security
and inclusive development by promoting the meaningful
participation, involvement and representation of
women at all levels and to allow the people of Haiti,
with the steadfast support of the United Nations and
the international community, to take back the reins of
their future.

