Mr. Griffiths: I thank you, Mr. President, for this
opportunity to brief the Security Council. It has been
almost exactly a year since I first had such a chance (see S/PV.8235). I said then, back in April oflast year, that a
political solution was available to resolve the conflict in
Yemen, but I added that at any time war could take the
chance of peace off the table. Both those propositions
hold as true today as they did a year ago.

In addition, as I am sure Mark Lowcock will
describe, the plight of the people of Yemen has, if
anything, worsened during this period. The pursuit
of peace, which is the task to which I contribute, is
measured as much against the lives and livelihoods
daily lost across the various governorates of Yemen.
That, I hope, explains my persistence in planning,
hoping and pushing for a start of consultations leading
to that political solution.

First, I will address the situation in Al-Hudaydah.
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard has been
working without stop to secure agreement between
the parties on the operational plans for redeployments
in Al-Hudaydah, in line with what was agreed in
December in Sweden. I hope we will hear more of that
in a while.

It has been, as we all know, a long and difficult
process. I am happy to announce to you, Mr. President,
that both parties have now accepted the detailed
redeployment plan prepared by Lieutenant General
Lollesgaard for phase 1 of the redeployments in
Al-Hudaydah. I am grateful, as I am sure we all are, to
both parties and to Lieutenant General Lollesgaard for
the constructive engagement that has allowed us finally
to reach this point. We will now move with all speed
towards resolving the final outstanding issues related
to the operational plans for phase 2, redeployments
and the status of local security forces, which is to be
introduced in the coming days.

President Hadi Mansour has consistently
approached this, as I have said to the Council recently,
with the practicality of a former military man. As he
has also told me on more than one occasion, he wants
to see those redeployments happen and the city and
ports of Al-Hudaydah, Ras Isa and Saleef returned to
some kind of peace for its inhabitants. I am grateful to
President Hadi for his patience and commitment.

I was in Sana'a a week ago exactly, where
Lieutenant General Michael Lollesgaard and I met
with Abdulmalik Al-Houthi, the leader of Ansar Allah.
We were able to hear again his reconfirmation in clear
terms - in detail as well as in general terms - of his
support for the implementation of the Al-Hudaydah
agreement. Of course, that was important in the lead-
up to the announcement that we have just heard today.
I was glad to hear it confirmed so directly and I am
grateful to him for the position he has taken on this and
other issues.

Let us be clear that when these redeployments
happen - and I hope it is "when", not "if" 4 they will
be the first voluntary withdrawals of forces in this long
conflict. Making that happen is not an easy decision
for the parties to take and of course it is taking longer
than we had hoped, but the fact that it should happen
at all is extremely welcome. Al-Hudaydah is a test of
many things, the principal among which is leadership.
I like to hope that in the coming days we shall see the
people's trust in that leadership vindicated in this test.

We should also not forget - and I am sure that
Mr. Lowcock will remind us - that since the ceasefire
came into force in the very early hours of 18 December
2018, levels of violence in Al-Hudaydah governorate,
while not adequately or sufficiently reduced, have
nonetheless fallen significantly. Civilian casualties are
down and there are reports that, as our colleague in
Sana'a Lise Grande often reminds us, those displaced
by the war have begun to return to their homes. Much
needs to be done to tighten and sustain the ceasefire,
but the positive developments that we have seen and I
hope will continue to see in Al-Hudaydah have already
shown what can be achieved through dialogue and
compromise. I hope that the parties recognize this and,
with the Council's support, build on it.

Meanwhile, as I am again sure will be described by
Mr. Lowcock, the economic situation in Yemen remains
extremely fragile. Commercial ships face difficulties
accessing Al-Hudaydah and fuel prices are on the
rise. There have been some positive developments,
such as the Government of Yemen's welcome decision
to start paying public sector salaries in Al-Hudaydah
and pensions throughout the country. I do not want to
trespass on Mr. Lowcock's territory, but I mention this
because these are measures that cross the line between
the parties. Further action must be taken to reduce
prices and ensure the availability ofbasic commodities,
including fuel. I am grateful to be under the leadership
of Mark Lowcock and Lise Grande in these matters.

Ineed to say very clearly thatI accept that we all need
to see tangible progress in Al-Hudaydah before moving
to focus on the political solution. I have actually said
that to the Council before. More importantly, perhaps,
than my saying it, the leadership of both parties have
said as much to me, including within the past 10 days.
Yes, we must see progress in Al-Hudaydah. Perhaps
today will be the first in that direction. We must see
progress in Al-Hudaydah - full stop.

But I would be derelict in my duty if we were not
also preparing the ground for political consultations, not
least because the war in Yemen, again as Mr. Lowcock
will tell us, shows no signs of abating. The tragedies
of war particularly pain us all when children are the
victims, as they have been, dramatically, of late. It
should be so that this is a pain we all feel, but it is also
true that the larger battlefields should not be forgotten.
In Hajour, there have been some devastating battles
with all the human misery and civilian displacement
naturally attendant upon events of that kind. That
means that we must keep our focus, as the Council has
urged me to do before, on reaching a political solution,
and to do as fast as we can.

We all know the rough outlines of an agreement to
end the war, precisely in line with the three references
and the resolutions of the Council. None of us is
freelancing. We need to work with the parties on the
outlines of an eventual settlement in a way that fleshes
out the framework that I have discussed with members
of the Council before and that was on the table in those
days in Sweden in December last year. We need, in a
purposeful way, to seek their views on both the concepts
and the details. We need to do that now, in advance of
any formal return to process or political consultation.
That would prepare the ground for an eventual serious
consultation between the parties.

In preparing for that political road to peace, I make
it my job to meet with as wide a section of society
as possible. I was particularly lucky in that regard to
be invited to attend a recent meeting here in Amman
with more than 100 Yemeni women, organized by UN-
Women. Many had travelled, courageously and with
great difficulty, to get here and make their contributions
to resolving the conflict. My pledge to them at that
meeting was that we would make sure in the months to
come that we would consult them and their networks on
all the different issues that will be debated between the
parties. As I will say before concluding these remarks,
there is no doubt that we can all do a lot better when it
comes to the inclusion of women and other sectors of
civil society in the political process.

I will also continue to meet with as many
representatives of the varied Yemeni political parties
as possible who can contribute their thinking. Doing
this will, of course, ensure that we benefit from their
experience. But it is more than that. These are the people
who will eventually return to their rightful positions in
running the politics and Government of Yemen once
the parties have agreed to resolve the conflict. If that is
to happen, those politicians and political class will need
to work together instead of competing with each other.

The engagement process that I have just been
describing builds on the rich past experience of
negotiations, particularly the 100 days in Kuwait three
years ago, concerning which I doffmy hat to Ambassador
Mansour. It is a process that, while led by the Office I
am privileged to be a part of, is not done only by my
Office. I have already mentioned the contribution of
UN-Women. I will have further discussions with our
own technical advisory group of women in Edinburgh
next week. Track-II organizations, where I have my
own background - including the Berghof Foundation,
IDEA, VMI and others - building on their own
extensive experience in Yemen over the years, are
active and valued partners in this endeavour and have
been centrally involved in the thinking and planning
that we go through in my Office when we begin to hope
that we may be able to engaged in the political process.

I am also grateful for the support and advice we
receive from the Peace Track Initiative and the Women's
Solidarity Network, which represents a large number
of Yemeni women and women-led organizations. The
Council will hear shortly from Ms. Muna Luqman, one
of Yemen's leading peace activists. I am sure she will
urge us to do better in our efforts to include women,
both in the formal delegations that come to rounds of
formal consultations and in the much more extensive
consultations that will, between sessions, help us to
refine the issues we put before the parties.

My primary responsibility in the next few months
will be to winnow down the differences between the
parties so that when they meet they can be asked to
answer precise questions about the nature of the
arrangements to end the war, in an equitable fashion
and in accordance with the resolutions of the Council. I
seek the support of the Council for this approach. Let us
together require those who can help us towards peace
be encouraged and the sceptics set aside while we work
to make our case.

I cannot conclude without reminding
everyone - and I am sure that Mr. Lowcock will do so
in a much more sufficient way - that Yemen bleeds.
Its people go hungry. Many of its children have not
seen the inside of a classroom. In many ways, it is one
of the world's most tragic places. That is the spur that
encourages us to imagine, beyond Al-Hudaydah, that
we could see progress towards that solution, which
alone can bring back the hopes of Yemeni families and
the control of Yemen under its political class.

