Mr. Jiirgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy Griffiths and Under-Secretary-General Lowcock for their briefings on the political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. I also thank Ambassador King for her briefing as Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 2140 (2014). The situation in Yemen remains deeply worrisome. Unfortunately, during the past month the security situation in Yemen has deteriorated owing to another round of hostilities at the northern frontlines. We call on all parties to the conflict to ensure an immediate cessation of hostilities. The violence is causing further suffering to the Yemeni people, who are already facing the world's largest humanitarian crisis. Thousands more families have been forced to flee their homes. Both those issues - the hostilities and the dire humanitarian conditions - need to be addressed as a priority without any further delay. We are extremely worried about the continuing attacks on civilian infrastructure. There can be no justification for bombing hospitals, as recently happened in Al-Jafra and Al-Saudi, leaving 15,000 people with limited access to medical care. In addition, the air strike in Al-Jawf province last Saturday killed at least 31 civilians. Such indiscriminate attacks are a clear breach of international humanitarian law. We call on all parties to the conflict to continue to make the protection of civilians a priority. Secondly, the continuing restrictions on distributing humanitarian aid to the Yemeni people are another breach of international humanitarian law. Intimidating humanitarian workers, obstructing their work and even arresting aid workers must stop immediately. It is extremely worrying to hear from the aid agencies and donors that they may be forced to scale down or stop aid distribution in certain areas. An indication that the Houthi authorities would cancel the 2 per cent tax on every humanitarian project would be a step in the right direction, as such a tax is contrary to the principles of humanitarian aid. It is also increasingly worrying that United Nations officials have not been granted access to the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Access must be provided to prevent an environmental disaster in the Red Sea. Despite those mostly negative tendencies, I am nevertheless glad to also hear about a few positive developments. We welcome the announcement of an agreement on a large-scale exchange of prisoners, as stated by the prisoner-exchange committee last Sunday. That would be an important humanitarian measure and a step towards implementing the Stockholm Agreement. We also welcome the beginning of mercy flights from Sana'a. We urge the parties to allow those flights to continue so that Yemeni patients can receive the treatment that they need. Hopefully, such much-needed confidence-building measures may also contribute towards the resumption of formal political talks with the participation of the Yemeni Government. It is clear that the solution to this conflict can only be political. We call on the parties to begin discussions on a comprehensive political solution under the auspices of the United Nations without delay or preconditions. We support the efforts of Special Envoy Martin Griffiths in that regard. We also urge the Government of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to overcome the obstacles in implementing the Riyadh agreement, which is crucial in order to move towards a comprehensive political settlement in Yemen.
