Mr. Ahmad (Pakistan): I would like first of all to
express our thanks to you, Sir, for arranging today's debate
on humanitarian aspects of the Security Council's role in
maintaining international peace and security. We are
particularly happy to see you in the chair as the Foreign
Minister of an important country of our region, presiding
over this important meeting on a subject of global
concern with direct relevance to our own region.

Violence is an unfortunate and unacceptable by-
product of wars and armed conflicts. The Secretary-
General, through his reports, has repeatedly invited the
attention of the States Members of the United Nations to
the humanitarian consequences of conflicts in various
parts of the world. His reports and the numerous debates
in the Security Council on the subject have highlighted
the magnitude of the problem and the threat it poses to
international peace and security. It is our collective
responsibility to ensure respect for international
humanitarian law with a view to alleviating the suffering
of people in conflict situations and to enhancing the
global peace and security environment.

We believe that the most prudent and tested method
of conflict resolution is through recourse to preventive
diplomacy, as outlined in Chapter VI of the Charter of the
United Nations. Pakistan believes that prevention is better
than cure. This was best described by the
Secretary-General in his lecture at the World Bank last
October, when he said that the costs of prevention have
to be paid in the present in order to draw benefits for the
future by avoiding wars and disasters.

In our view, it is imperative that the international
community, in particular the Security Council, address the
root causes of conflicts and disputes and not merely
attempt to treat the symptoms. Only then can preventive
action yield the desired results.
In the post-cold-war era, the nature of conflicts has
changed significantly, both within and between States. It
is a painful reality that over a million people die each
year in various conflict areas around the world. During
the last decade, 2 million children have died as a result of
armed conflicts and 12 million more have been rendered
homeless in 30 conflict situations.

Another unfortunate consequence of conflicts is that
there are over 30 million refugees in the world. Pakistan
itself was host to more than 4 million Afghan refugees for
over a decade during the Afghan war against foreign
occupation. Currently, we continue to carry the burden of
1.5 million Afghan refugees.

Any study of wars and conflicts clearly shows that
poverty and underdevelopment have accentuated conflicts.
This has been true in the post-cold-war era conflicts. It is
a commonly held view that the best way to promote

 

adherence to universally agreed humanitarian law in today's
conflicts is through the implementation of the right to
development and through poverty eradication. There is also
a need to undertake long-term strategies by creating an
enabling international economic environment in pursuit of
the goal of poverty eradication.

The Secretary-General has advocated international
preventive action in all humanitarian emergencies as a
consequence of wars and conflicts. We must be clear and
certain about the purpose, scope and legitimacy of such an
enterprise. The prospects of preventive action must be
studied within certain fundamental parameters.

First, the principle of State sovereignty and
non-interference and non-intervention in the internal affairs
of States must be respected. However, this principle cannot
be extended to situations where people under colonial rule,
foreign occupation or alien domination are struggling for
their inalienable right to self-determination.

Secondly, for humanitarian action to find general
acceptance, it must have legitimacy under international law.
Such action must fully conform to the provisions of the
United Nations Charter and be undertaken only with the
explicit authority of the Security Council, after a clear
breach or threat to international peace and security has been
established.

Thirdly, a clear distinction must be maintained
between, on the one hand, humanitarian crises as a result of
wars, conflicts or disputes which by their very nature
constitute threats to international peace and security and, on
the other hand, other human rights issues. The latter fall
within the purview of the United Nations human rights
system and not of the Security Council.

Fourthly, the central role of the General Assembly as
the only body with universal representation in the United
Nations system must be maintained and in fact
strengthened. There should also be no encroachment by the
Security Council on the role of other United Nations
bodies. The Security Council must operate strictly within its
mandate. Principles should take precedence over expedients.

Fifthly, the Secretary-General may continue to play an
active role in conformity with the responsibilities entrusted
to him by the Charter.

International humanitarian action as a preventive
measure can be credible only if applied without
discrimination to all situations. There should be uniform
criteria for involvement of the United Nations. It must be
based on the principle of equal justice for all. Selectivity
will erode the confidence of the international community
in the United Nations.

The Security Council, which has the primary
responsibility in the maintenance of international peace
and security, has not always acted on the basis of the
objective requirements of a situation. It has failed, for
example, to address long-standing conflicts with massive
human suffering and systematic violations of international
humanitarian law in a timely and effective manner.

This has held true in the conflicts in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Kosovo, Rwanda, J ammu and Kashmir and
elsewhere. In the case of Jammu and Kashmir, which is
not a dispute over territory but concerns the destiny of 12
million people, India continues to use brutal force to
suppress the indigenous and legitimate struggle of the
Kashmiris for their right to self-determination, as
promised to them under the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Kashmir is kept under subjugation by over
650,000 Indian troops. According to the All Parties
Hurriyet Conference, the sole representative of the
Kashmiri people, over the past decade more than 70,000
Kashmiris have been killed, 15,000 women and girls have
been raped as a strategy of war, hundreds have been
subjected to torture and thousands more are languishing
in prisons. Custodial deaths, summary executions and
disappearances are routine occurrences. There are few
parallels in the annals of recent history for the Indian
repression and State-sponsored terrorism against innocent
Kashmiri men, women and children.

Selectivity in the implementation of the resolutions
of the Security Council also raises serious questions about
the Council's credibility. All resolutions of the Security
Council must be treated with equal importance, and they
must be implemented without any discrimination. The
Council's resolutions on Jammu and Kashmir have
remained unimplemented for more than half a century.
The progress achieved in East Timor must serve as a
model for resolving the dispute over Jammu and Kashmir
in conformity with the wishes of the Kashmiri people.
There cannot be different criteria for United Nations
involvement in similar or identical situations.

The United Nations has often been subjected to
strong criticism for not being able to effectively respond
to crisis situations. This lack of response has been owing
to various reasons, including lack of determination on the
part of the members of the Security Council, ineffective

 

early-warning mechanisms, unreliable sources of
information, restricted access to the conflict areas and
inadequate preparations in terms of the availability of
resources and personnel. We must therefore evolve a
uniform strategy and strengthen the United Nations
capacity, not only for crisis prevention and conflict
resolution, but also for early and effective response to crisis
situations irrespective of their geographic locations, in strict
conformity with the Charter.

In recent years, the Security Council has been
bypassed because of its failure to fulfil its primary
responsibility due to differing perceptions among its
members as to the proper course of action in response to a
serious breach of or threat to international peace and
security. Last year, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization
was forced to take unilateral action against the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia in order to prevent massive and
systematic violations of human rights in Kosovo. This
development has also led to calls for streamlining the
working practices of the Security Council.

The credibility of the Security Council is undermined
each time it ignores a conflict and leaves it to the parties to
resolve, or when regional organizations are asked to field
for the United Nations. While cooperation between the
United Nations and the regional organizations should be
improved, we firmly believe that the regional organizations
can play a limited role in the prevention of armed conflict
in consonance with Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter. In our view, the United Nations must play a more
proactive role in the peaceful settlement of disputes and
conflicts that cause humanitarian suffering and massive
destruction.

I would like to conclude by expressing the hope that
today's debate will contribute to the adoption by the
Security Council of effective approaches to fulfilling its
primary responsibility concerning international peace and
security, as envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations.

