Mr. Khalilzad (United States of America): I
would like to welcome Mr. Lamberto Zannier, the new
Special Representative of the Secretary-General in
Kosovo, to the Council. Mr. Zannier is well qualified
to assume this role, and the United States is confident
in his ability to consolidate the considerable
achievements of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) in
preserving peace and stability in Kosovo.

Mr. Zannier's role is different from that of his
predecessors. His task is more limited: to implement
the reconfiguration of UNMIK in accordance with the
order of the Secretary-General, rather than to
administer Kosovo. Facilitating the reconfiguration is a
different, but significant mission. Listening to his
briefing, I understand that he appreciates that vital
change. He and his staff have the support of the United
States as he works to implement the Secretary-
General's plan to reconfigure UNMIK.

I would also like to take this opportunity to thank
the former Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Riicker, and his deputy, Larry Rossin, for
their hard work and significant achievements during
their tenure.

I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Jeremie here today and congratulate Serbia on
demonstrating its commitment to the rule of law
through the arrest of Radovan Karadzic. We are also
pleased with the tone shown by the Minister here
today. The new Serbian Government is making
commendable efforts to improve relations with the
European Union. We encourage Serbia further to
illustrate those gestures by engaging constructively
with the European Union on Kosovo.

I would also like to welcome Foreign Minister
Hyseni to the Council and congratulate him on his
historic appointment as Kosovo's first Foreign Minister
and on the progress his Government is making as it
charts its new independent course.

Today, I would like to make three additional
points. First, this is a time of promise for all the people
of Kosovo. The 11 July donors conference in Brussels
that the Foreign Minister of Kosovo referred to
exceeded expectations, with pledges totalling
$1.9 billion. The conference underscored the
commitment of key members of the international
community to help foster economic growth, support
regional stability and encourage prosperity for all the
people of Kosovo.

I am pleased to note that, since Kosovo's
declaration of independence on 17 February, a
Constitution and 41 laws have been adopted, with
strong commitments to the protection of minority
community rights and religious and cultural heritage,
in line with the recommendations of former United
Nations Special Envoy Ahtisaari.

Furthermore, three minorities, including two
ethnic Serbs, continue to serve as ministers in
Kosovo's Government. Ethnic Serbs are active in
several of Kosovo's local and central Government
institutions. Forty-three countries have recognized
Kosovo's independence, and Kosovo has applied for
membership in the International Monetary Fund and
World Bank. The Government of Kosovo and the vast
majority of Kosovo's citizens of all ethnic groups have
shown goodwill and restraint, despite continued
provocations by hard-line opponents of Kosovo's
independence. The progress and stability in Kosovo
have been laudable and should be commended by all
members of the Security Council.

Secondly, despite that progress, we share the
Secretary-General's concern regarding the continuing
lack of control on the Serbia-Kosovo border.
Smuggling remains rampant and the threat of violence
from hardliners remains worrisome. We call on Serbia
to support all authorities in their efforts to restore
legitimate customs and other normal border functions.
The threat of violence against those who would seek to
impose order must cease.

We deplore ongoing efforts by hardliners in
Serbia using financial levers and physical intimidation
to coerce ethnic Kosovo Serbs not to participate in
Kosovo's institutions. We expect that the new
Government in Belgrade will halt the destabilizing
policies and support legitimate efforts at building
reconciliation and stability.

We also share the Secretary-General's concern
about the property dispute at the Decane monastery.
That issue highlights an important principle as the
Government of Kosovo and the international
community work to ensure that minority cultural and
religious rights are respected. The International
Civilian Representative will exercise oversight to
ensure that the Government of Kosovo meets its
obligations to protect the rights of minority
communities and their cultural and religious heritage.

Thirdly, as this Council has remained deadlocked
and unable to provide guidance to the Secretary-
General regarding UNMIK's future, we welcome and
fully support the Secretary-General's announced
decision to reconfigure UNMIK in the light of new
realities on the ground in Kosovo, particularly as
Kosovo's new Constitution has come into force. That
decision of the Secretary-General is completely in line
with his existing authorities under resolution 1244
(1999). We look forward to quick progress on
UNMIK's reconfiguration and its carrying out of the
residual functions the Secretary-General has previously
outlined. As we have consistently held since a broad
international coalition moved to implement the plan of
former Special Envoy Ahtisaari, UNMIK must adapt to
the new reality of Kosovo's independence and the
establishment of the International Civilian Office and
the EU's Rule of Law Mission (EULEX).

Specifically, we welcome and fully support the
decision of the Secretary-General to authorize the
transfer of responsibilities regarding the rule of law
from UNMIK to EULEX. EULEX will play a critical
role in supporting the development and enforcement of
the rule of law throughout Kosovo. It is for that reason
that the United States will contribute police and
judicial personnel to the EU-led mission. We look
forward to EULEX's early deployment throughout
Kosovo and encourage the United Nations and the EU
to conclude technical negotiations that would allow for
full EULEX deployment as soon as possible. All
parties must recognize that the deployment of EULEX
throughout Kosovo will help to ensure stability for all
ethnicities in Kosovo.

The Council can contribute to the preservation of
UNMIK's tremendous legacy of having preserved
peace and stability in Kosovo since its establishment in
1999. We call on all Council members to support the
Secretary-General as he exercises his authority under
resolution 1244 (1999) to guide UNMIK as it makes a
key transition in Kosovo. We also ask that Council
members support the members of the International
Steering Group and the EU as they work to take on the
responsibility of international supervision of Kosovo
and, by extension, the preservation of UNMIK's
positive legacy.

