Mr. Cuellar Suarez (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): At the outset, I would like to convey the gratitude of Her Excellency Karen Longaric Rodriguez, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Bolivia, for the kind invitation extended to her. Unfortunately, she is unable to participate in this debate due to a scheduling conflict, but she asked me to express her congratulations and good wishes on Viet Nam's assumption of the presidency of the Security Council and organization of this debate on such a key issue for the States Members of the United Nations. We also welcome the participation of Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and Mrs. Mary Robinson, Chair of The Elders. Today, we are going through a particularly challenging time for international peace and security. We live in a time of growing uncertainty and instability for global security. The existence of armed conflicts shows that geographic tensions have persisted or intensified in various parts of the world, as we have seen over recent weeks. Unfortunately, that global uncertainty and instability undermine or threaten to undermine multilateral dialogue for disarmament. As the concern over global instability has grown, so too has our concern for the future and reliability of the global architecture for arms control. In recent years, we have witnessed the constant erosion of various disarmament treaties and agreements and it is evident that there is growing global concern over their future. The challenges facing the Security Council in the fulfilment of its mandate are many and complex. Nevertheless, we believe that those that jeopardize the efforts of the Council and the Organization to avoid the breakdown of international peace and security are also linked to the inadequate implementation of the mechanisms stipulated in the Charter of the United Nations. We are particularly concerned that authoritarian Governments that do not act in accordance with the basic principles of respect for human rights and democratic freedoms in their own countries bring that tension to the international arena, which is frequently the trigger for confrontations or problems of global security. The use of force should never be considered as an alternative. That is very clear. We believe that all countries should exhaust all peaceful means of resolving disputes before employing the use of force as a last resort. The application of that measure must always be occur in line with the principles of the United Nations Charter and exercised within the Security Council in the framework of respect for multilateralism, which underpins our Organization. The effectiveness of our Organization's efforts to safeguard and maintain international peace and security depends specifically on Members' respect for and compliance with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as the actions implemented through the Council, which must at all times promote dialogue and the peaceful settlement of disputes over the use or threat of use of force. Dialogue requires a dynamic, inclusive and participatory process that promotes mutual understanding and cooperation, with the primary purpose of resolving conflict through the peaceful means set forth in the Charter. The International Court of Justice, as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations, plays a leading role in the peaceful settlement of disputes, as long as the universal jurisdiction with which the Court was conceived and the work it has been carrying out since its creation represent a permanent call for dialogue and always opt for negotiation and peace rather than force and aggression. A comprehensive peace can only be achieved in the context of adequate living conditions for all, without exception, which in turn requires that we recognize our differences and promote dialogue and consensus in order to pave the way for sustainable development at all levels of society so as to fully comply with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. Bolivia therefore consistently advocates the peaceful settlement of disputes, good offices, preventive diplomacy, multilateralism and non-interference with respect to State sovereignty - so violated of late, with my country as victim - as well as respect for the independence and territorial integrity of States, which are all universal principles that are recognized by the international community and effective tools to avoid the scourge of armed conflict and its consequences.
