Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): I would
like to thank Special Adviser Thiaw, Ambassador
Jinga, Mr. Ghanem, Vice-President of the World Bank
for Africa, and Mr. Rioux for their respective briefings.

The Sahel is generally stable and has seen
continued economic growth. Meanwhile, terrorism,
transnational organized crime, poverty and imbalances
in development and other issues threaten peace and
development in the region. Addressing such problems
will require greater input and a holistic approach from
the international community. The United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel and the United Nations
Support Plan are important documents for building
peace and achieving development in the region. With
regard to peacebuilding in the Sahel, I would like to
elaborate on the following points.

First, it is important to seek a political settlement
to regional hotspot issues so as to achieve regional
stability and create the conditions for peacebuilding
and long-term development. While upholding the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and respecting the sovereignty of the countries
concerned, the international community should
actively support countries in the Sahel in their efforts to
promote peace and national reconciliation. We should
continue to support the Malian parties concerned in
expediting the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali and pay attention to
the spillover effect on the Sahel of issues outside the
region, such as the Libyan crisis, so as to minimize
their negative impact.

Secondly, we need to help countries in the region
accelerate development and address the root causes of
conflict. The international communityneeds to honourits
aid commitments, respect the leadership and ownership
of countries in the Sahel, help them implement the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and Agenda 2063
of the African Union, formulate development strategies
suited to their own national conditions and improve
their own capabilities for self-reliant development. The
Peacebuilding Commission can play a coordinating role
to that end, while relevant international development
agencies should continue their efforts to help countries
in the region.

Thirdly, we should assist countries in the region
in upgrading their security capabilities to ensure the
implementation of peacebuilding efforts. The countries
of the region have been actively engaged in security
cooperation and, through the formation of the Joint
Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel),
they have taken the initiative to counter regional
security threats, such as terrorism and transnational
organized crime. China commends all such efforts. We
hope that the international community and the United
Nations will respect the ownership and leadership of
African countries in seeking their own solutions to
African issues and actively support and help countries
of the region build security capabilities and collectively
address regional security threats.

Fourthly, priority should be given to cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, the Economic Community of
West African States and the G-5 Sahel, as well as to
improved coordination with relevant Sahel initiatives.
The international community should strengthen
communication and coordination with the countries
of the Sahel and the relevant regional and subregional
organizations, so that country-specific and regional
strategies, the United Nations Integrated Strategy for
the Sahel and the United Nations Support Plan are
organically combined to showcase their respective
strengths and form synergies.

China has always been supportive of African
countries, including those in the Sahel, in their pursuit
of peace and development. In September this year,
the Beijing Summit of the Forum on China-Africa
Cooperation defined peace, security and economic
development as the focus of future China-Africa
cooperation. China supports Africa's implementation
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063. Together with the international
community and the countries of the region, China will
continue to support the Sahel to achieve lasting peace
and common prosperity and contribute its share to the
cause of peace and development in Africa.

