Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
President Carmel Agius and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their informative and insightful
reports and briefings. On International Criminal
Justice Day, it is fitting to commend the President's
and the Prosecutor's commitment and contribution to
international criminal justice. Let me express Poland's
appreciation for their dedicated leadership in efforts
to ensure accountability, reflected by the efficient and
effective functioning of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and its Office of the
Prosecutor, notwithstanding the difficult challenges
they face. Given the fact that today's briefing is the first
by President Agius in this capacity, allow me also to
warmly welcome him in particular and to assure him
of Poland's continuing commitment to accountability,
as well as its support for and cooperation with the
Mechanism. Allow me also to praise your efforts and
leadership, Mr. President, as Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.

Poland is encouraged by the priorities set out by the
President and the Prosecutor. Their focus on the timely
completion of judicial proceedings while maintaining
highest international standards of due process and fair
trial are particularly appreciated. The innovative and
efficient solutions adopted to that end are welcome. The
priority attached to increasing the branch coordination
and harmonization of procedures and to fostering a
working environment that encourages high staff morale
and performance also deserves recognition. Moreover,
we commend the efforts to provide protection and
support services to the victims and witnesses as
well as assistance to national jurisdictions. We also
welcome the considerate and careful approach to and
work conducted on the issue of early release. The
significant progress in many other spheres thanks to the
determination and efforts of the International Residual
Mechanism's President, Prosecutor and staff should
be acknowledged as well. We therefore agree with the
positive assessment of the Mechanism's functioning
during the reporting period and we look forward to its
further achievements.

We note the challenges that the Mechanism faces,
including those related to resources, fugitives and
acquitted and released persons. In that context, we would
like to recall that the Security Council has repeatedly
urged States, particularly those where fugitives are
suspected to be at large, to intensify cooperation with
and assistance to the Mechanism. We call on all States
to cooperate fully with the Mechanism, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions, and
to render as soon as possible all necessary assistance
to it, in particular with regard to the location, arrest
and surrender of all remaining fugitives indicted by
the Mechanism and the relocation of acquitted and
released persons.

We encourage them also to demonstrate support for
accountability by increasing cooperation among them
on the relevant issues and for international criminal
justice by agreeing to a budget for the International
Residual Mechanism's commensurate with its needs
and allowing it to carry out its mandated functions in a
timely manner.

International criminal justice institutions, including
the Mechanism, play an important role in fighting
impunity, which can contribute to the deterrence and
prevention of the most serious crimes of international
concern and to the maintenance of an international
rules-based order. Let me reassure the Council of
Poland's commitment to all of the aforementioned,
continued support for the Mechanism and readiness to
cooperate with it. We reiterate our call on others to take
the same stance.

