It is an honour to have the Federal Minister of Defence of Germany, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, preside over this debate. We view this debate as important, not only due to its focus but also because it is the first time that the Security Council discusses the topic of peace operations and human rights under the agenda item on peacekeeping. My delegation is grateful for the briefings received from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for South Sudan and Head of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, David Shearer, as well as civil society representative and President of Groupe LOTUS based in Kisangani, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Dismas Kitenge Senga. Our deliberations today are taking place at a time when the world is grappling with the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, which has impacted all of us, irrespective of our levels of development and of whether or not we are experiencing conflict. However, countries in conflict where peacekeeping operations or special political missions have a presence would require additional support to mitigate the impact of COVID-19 on the population's human, as well as political, social and economic, rights. The inclusion of human rights elements in numerous mission mandates established by the Council reflects its general acceptance of the relevance of human rights to peace and security efforts. South Africa notes with concern that the topic of those human rights elements has not escaped the political dynamics of the Security Council as it continues to be politicized and applied selectively. While some members of the Security Council advocate for the importance of the human rights component in peacekeeping missions, it is regrettable that the same vigour and enthusiasm is conspicuously absent from other missions, such as the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara. We must not put ourselves on the wrong side of history by allowing our narrow interests to trample over the interest of the majority of world citizens, whom the Council is mandated to serve, particularly those in conflict areas during this global crisis. The Council should commit to implementing the protection of civilians mandates of peacekeeping missions, where required, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, mission mandates and applicable international law without fear, favour or prejudice. In line with the principles of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, launched by the Secretary-General to refocus peacekeeping through more targeted mandates, make peacekeeping operations stronger and safer and mobilize support for political solutions and better equipped and trained forces, South Africa wishes to highlight that the pursuit of sustainable political solutions should guide the design and deployment of United Nations peacekeeping operations. Lasting progress on strengthening security, national reconciliation, the rule of law, human rights and sustainable development needs to occur in parallel. Indeed, the host country bears the primary responsibility to protect civilians. In that regard, we wish to stress the contribution that, where mandated, peacekeeping operations can make to international efforts to protect civilians and promote and protect human rights. The protection of women and children, as those most vulnerable in such contexts, is paramount and can be enhanced through the involvement of women and girls in the peacebuilding process, which remains undervalued and underresourced, leaving a vital tool for transformative change and sustainable peace underutilized. The inclusion, training and support of women protection advisers responsible for monitoring, analysing and reporting on conflict-related sexual violence in the seven missions - the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Somalia and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya - is a step in the right direction. Furthermore, the creation of gender units within the leadership team in nine peacekeeping operations to ensure that women's rights and the women and peace and security agenda are mainstreamed across all mission activities is welcome progress as we mark the twentieth anniversary of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action. It is clear that the effective implementation of the women and peace and security agenda directly contributes to the objective of long-term global peace and security. Peacekeeping operations are mandated to monitor and report; however, if human rights violations fall outside the scope of the protection of civilians, it may be difficult for peace operations to intervene without the appropriate mandate. The sharing of best practices and lessons learned among Council members is important, and the experiences of the major troop- and police-contributing countries with regard to integrating human rights aspects of the mandates into the work of an operation on the ground are crucial. In conclusion, South Africa wishes to highlight the positive contributions special political missions and peace operations can make, through their peacebuilding mandates, by sharing their expertise in building institutions responsible for the promotion of human rights in collaboration with host countries. Such an approach can go a long way in building and sustaining peace and in promoting human rights when working in tandem with national authorities and civil society, including grassroots community-based organizations.
