Mr. Hickey (United Kingdom): At the outset, let me
thank Ms. Reena Ghelani for her briefing, as well as to
pay tribute, through her, to all the United Nations staff
members who are doing such important humanitarian
work in Syria.

Today Ms. Ghelani reminded us that the
humanitarian situation in Syria remains grave. We
cannot afford to lose sight of the 12 million people
suffering daily. Eighty per cent of Syrians live below
the poverty line, and one third of the population
does not have reliable access to affordable food. The
Security Council must therefore step up its efforts to
ensure that humanitarian assistance reaches those who
need it throughout Syria. We must also do much more
to support United Nations-led efforts to end the conflict
through a political process.

I agree with all the remarks made today by the
representative of Belgium on behalf of the three
humanitarian co-penholders, but I wanted to highlight
three points: the situation in Rukban, the situation in
regime-held areas and the situation in Idlib.

First, concerning Rukban, the United Kingdom
welcomes the news that an urgently needed
humanitarian convoy finally reached Rukban on
6 February, delivering assistance to thousands of
people in desperate need. The situation of more than
41,000 people sheltering in Rukban remains a serious
concern. We must not see the same repeated delays
before the next convoy, which the United Nations
has now requested. The United Nations-conducted
intention survey in Rukban shows that the majority of
residents wish to leave the camp, but it also highlights
their fears and concerns about doing so. Many are
worried about their safety and security if they choose
to return to their homes. Lack of civil documentation
and concerns about access to their property were also
reported. Those concerns need to be addressed before
people move. The United Nations is therefore right,
as our humanitarian co-penholders have said, to call
for certain conditions to be in place beforehand, while
any return or relocation must be safe, voluntary and
dignified. Any effort to assist in the relocation of the
population of Rukban must be in line with international
protection standards. United Nations humanitarian
staff should be granted access to the population before,
during and after any movement. Children, women, the
elderly and persons with disabilities must be afforded
special protection during all phases of relocation.
Screening procedures must be conducted in accordance
with international law.

Concerning my second point, about the situation in
regime-held areas, the United Kingdom remains deeply
concerned about conditions in former opposition-held
areas that the regime now controls. The Russian
Ambassador spoke of steps by the regime to welcome
back refugees to areas under regime control. You do not
welcome back refugees by arbitrarily detaining them in
conditions in which torture is systematic and rife. You
do not welcome back refugees by forcing them to join
the army and fight in a conflict they have fled. And you
do not welcome back refugees by threatening to seize
their property under Law Number 10.

All of those reasons were cited by Syrians
themselves in the United Nations recent survey as
reasons for why they are not returning to regime-held
areas. That is clearly not an environment for safe,
dignified and voluntary refugee return. It clearly falls
short of the Council's call in resolution 2254 (2015)
for the establishment of inclusive and non-sectarian
governance in Syria. Three quarters of those
communities that came under regime control in 2018
are considered hard-to-reach areas to deliver aid. Let us
be clear: they are only hard to reach because the regime
chooses not to allow necessary aid to reach those who
need it. We therefore join our French colleagues in
calling on the regime to allow unfettered humanitarian
access to all of those people in areas that it controls.
Thirdly, concerning the situation in Idlib, we remain
deeply concerned about the 3 million people in north-
west Syria, more than 2 million of whom are entirely
reliant on cross-border aid. We should also remember
that, when we talk about the threat from terrorism in
Idlib, more babies than terrorists remain in Idlib. Fifty
per cent of the population has been displaced from
their homes - sometimes multiple times - thereby
stretching scarce resources beyond their limits and
putting further strain on host communities. We heard
today from Ms. Ghelani that a military escalation in
Idlib governorate would have catastrophic humanitarian
consequences. We therefore call on all parties - but
in particular the regime and Russia - to respect the
ceasefire and facilitate humanitarian access to Idlib.

Finally, I would like to echo the points made
by my South African colleague, the humanitarian
co-penholders and almost all other speakers today
about how we will tackle this humanitarian crisis in
Syria in the long-term only through a political solution
in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015). That
means, in practice, a political transition. It means the
establishment of credible, inclusive, non-sectarian
governance, which we know is so sorely absent in
Syria today. As my Belgian and Polish colleagues
emphasized, it also means accountability for the war
crimes and crimes against humanity that have been
carried out during the conflict, in particular by the
regime and by Da'esh.

