Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): At the outset, I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for organizing
this meeting to discuss the activities of the United
Nations Regional Office in Central Africa (UNOCA) in
the implementation of its mandate. I would also like to
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Abou Moussa for his comprehensive briefing. Our
thanks are also due to him for the report ofthe Secretary-
General on UNOCA and the Lord's Resistance Army
(LRA) (S/2012/923).

We appreciate the efforts of countries in Central
Africa to overcome the negative effects of decades of
instability and conflict, including through bilateral and
regional cooperation. UNOCA has been effectively
coordinating those efforts and has facilitated a number
of meetings and promoted greater international
attention on the region. We welcome and support those
activities.

We have noted that the region has enjoyed overall
political stability and that successful elections were
held in two countries during the reporting period.
However, socioeconomic trends present a mixed
picture. The region as a whole has a high incidence of
youth unemployment and poverty. Limited progress has
been registered in the achievement of the Millennium
Development Goals. The region continues to face
serious challenges, such as the proliferation ofweapons,
transnational organized crime, illicit drug trafficking
and terrorism. There has been an alarming increase
in incidents of piracy and armed robbery at sea in the
Gulf of Guinea. The deteriorating situation in the Sahel
region has also aggravated problems for the Central
African region. Unless they are addressed seriously,
those problems have the potential to derail the gains
made thus far, as well as to threaten peace, security and
stability in the region.

The Lord's Resistance Army (LRA) also continues
to remain active in the region, in particular in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Central
African Republic. It is also reported that it has
established bases along the Central African Republic-
South Sudan border areas.
It is in that overall context of the situation in the
region that the activities of the United Nations Office
in Central Africa (UNOCA) take on significance, in
particular in the areas of conflict prevention, early
warning and partnering with countries to achieve their
socioeconomic development goals. UNOCA should
promote regional strategies to comprehensively address
the challenges facing the region. UNOCA should further
strengthen this collaboration with the United Nations
Office in West Africa, the Economic Community of
Central African States and other United Nations offices
and assist the efforts of Governments and regional and
subregional organizations.

With respect to the LRA, we welcome the steps
taken by UNOCA and the African Union (AU) towards
the implementation of the LRA regional strategy.
We have noted that Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Moussa convened a meeting with
national, regional and international partners in July
to develop a joint road map, and that the participants
agreed to convene a general coordination meeting
every six months to assess the progress made in the
implementation of the regional strategy, in particular
the five strategic objectives. We welcome the decision
stating that UNOCA and the AU will organize a joint
resource-mobilization forum to raise additional funds
for the implementation of the strategy.

The focus ofthe Council should lead to galvanizing
the international community to provide adequate
resources for national and regional endeavours,
particularly in the strengthening of national capacities,
with regard to civilian administration; police and
security forces; security sector reform and disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes; and
socioeconomic development.

Given the fragility of political institutions in
several countries, it is also important for the national
and regional authorities to pay attention to the need
for inclusive political processes, including electoral
reforms. In that connection, it is important that United
Nations missions in the region not be burdened further
without augmentation of their resources.

In conclusion, India stands ready to support and
contribute to the efforts of the African Union and the
United Nations to address the challenges facing the
countries of the Central African region, particularly in
the fields of capacity-building and human-resource and
socioeconomic development.

