Mr. Shin Dong Ik (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, I would like to express my sincere appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for organizing this meaningful open
debate on the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
I am sure that, under your able stewardship, today's
debate will serve as a timely occasion to continue the
progress made on the issue. My appreciation also goes
to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his thorough and
insightful ninth report (S/2012/376).

Since the adoption of resolution 1265 (1999), the
protection of civilians has come to occupy a prominent
place on the agenda ofthe Security Council. The Council,
with cooperation from all the relevant agencies and
Member States, has been making significant progress
on the issue in a variety of ways, including diversifying
different aspects of the protection of civilians by
incorporating the specific and unique protection needs
ofwomen and children, addressing the scourge of sexual
violence, ensuring the necessity of accountability and
overcoming constraints on safe, unimpeded and timely
humanitarian access. Nevertheless, the international
community is still suffering from a basic failure to
protect civilians in many parts of the world who, caught
up in the horrors of wars, are in desperate need of
greater protection.

My delegation believes that the most important
principle is enhanced compliance with international
human rights and humanitarian law. In other words, no
violation of international human rights and humanitarian
law should go unpunished under any circumstances.
Indeed, when there is no escape for a violator, regardless
of the status of the parties in conflict, compliance
with international human rights and humanitarian
law will be accordingly enhanced. In that connection,
the punishment, in 2012, of Charles Taylor, former
President of Liberia, and two non-State armed groups
in Sierra Leone represents important steps forward
for international justice and the greater fight against
impunity. We also note with appreciation that, in his
report, the Secretary-General has highlighted attacks
against and interference with, health-care facilities and
providers, as well as the need to prevent displacement.

In particular, sexual violence against women and
girls in armed conflicts is one of the most horrible
forms of violence against civilians and civilization
itself, and it deserves our special attention. Women and
girls are most vulnerable, and sexual violence has a
devastating and corrosive effect on society as a whole.
My delegation is pleased that the Security Council has
made significant progress in deterring egregious sexual
violence, including through its adoption of resolutions
1820 (2008), 1888 (2009) and 1960 (2010). As such,
my delegation hopes that the Security Council will
continue to strengthen its efforts to address that issue
through increased coordination with UN- Women, the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and other
concerned organizations in order to better confront
those atrocious crimes and ensure a brighter future for
women and girls around the world.

Access for civilians affected by armed conflict to
humanitarian aid and basic safety and security also
needs to be guaranteed. Unfortunately, we have seen
many cases where humanitarian personnel and supplies
have failed to reach those in urgent need owing to the
interference of certain parties in armed conflicts. Such
acts are clearly a violation of humanitarian norms and
rules, and those involved in such crimes must be held
accountable. As the Secretary-General recommends,
Member States should be encouraged to consult
closely with humanitarian actors and to facilitate
humanitarian access in a safe and sustainable manner,
while the Security Council, on the basis of the relevant
resolutions, including resolution 1894 (2009), should
deliberate further on the issue.

My delegation also believes that efforts to protect
civilians should be an integral part of all United Nations
peacekeeping missions. United Nations peacekeeping
operations are a supplementary tool to the States'
primary responsibility for civilian protection, but they
are taking on more responsibilities to support and
provide security to civilians at great risk. As has been
highlighted in the Security Council's recent meeting
with United Nations Force Commanders last week
(see S/PV.6789), there is a vital need to strengthen
peacekeeping mandates related to civilian protection
in View of the complex challenges we face today.
Troop-contributing countries should also do their part
by providing predeployment preparation and training to
equip the peacekeepers with the range of skills required
to operate in that regard.
My delegation shares the deep concerns over
systematic, flagrant and widespread violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law,
which all seriously affect civilians. In that regard,
the Republic of Korea fully supports the continued
attention that the Security Council is devoting to this
issue. My delegation is also committed to rendering our
full support.

