Mr. Pascoe: Since the briefing of 27 January,
efforts to bring about Israeli-Palestinian negotiations
have continued. A proposal from United States Envoy
Mitchell that the parties begin indirect talks with
United States mediation is currently under serious
consideration. Israel has indicated its readiness to work
on this basis, while President Abbas has been engaged
in intensive consultations and sought clarifications.

The Secretary-General hopes that President Abbas
will move forward on the basis of this practical
proposal so that serious talks can begin. He notes
Prime Minister Netanyahu's stated commitment to a
two-State solution, although confusion as to the Israeli
Government's intentions arises from statements by
various of its officials.

We continue to stress the importance of doing
everything possible to ensure that negotiations lead in a
clear time frame to an agreement resolving all final
status issues, including Jerusalem, borders, refugees,
security, settlements and water. We believe that the
international consensus on what it will take to reach a
sustainable agreement is strong and that an active
Quartet will be vital to support the process.

The Israeli Government's partial restraint on
settlement construction in the West Bank, excluding
2

East Jerusalem, remains in effect and has led to a
slowdown of construction activity. However, violations
of the restraint orders have been identified by the
Israeli authorities in at least 29 settlements, with the
Defence Ministry that it is issuing demolition and stop-
work orders against violators. While the Israeli
Government's settlement restraint constitutes a step
beyond previous positions, the settlements themselves
are illegal and continued settlement activity violates
Israel's Road Map obligations and prejudges the
outcome of negotiations. We therefore urge additional
measures to enforce the restraint. We also urge its
extension into a comprehensive freeze, including in
East Jerusalem, as well as its continuation beyond the
current lO-month period.

There were no demolitions of Palestinian homes
or evictions in East Jerusalem during the reporting
period - a positive development which we hope will
continue. We continue to call for the reopening of
Palestinian institutions in East Jerusalem in accordance
with Road Map obligations. The status of Jerusalem is
to be determined through negotiations, and we believe
that a way must be found through negotiations for
Jerusalem to emerge as the capital of two States.

The efforts of the Palestinian Authority (PA) to
meet its Road Map obligations to combat terrorism
have continued in the West Bank, reflecting impressive
achievements in reform, professionalization and
performance. It is important that the Palestinian
Authority leadership continue to speak out against
violence and incitement. On 10 February, an Israeli
soldier was killed by a knife attack. The incident was
condemned by Palestinian Prime Minister Fayyad.

There were 79 Israeli army incursions into West
Bank towns and villages in response to alleged security
threats. Nearly 500 Palestinians were arrested. On
12 February, Israeli security forces shot and killed a
Palestinian for attempting to stab a soldier in Hebron,
while 41 other Palestinians were injured in actions of
the Israel Defense Forces (IDF). Israeli security forces
also carried out extensive operations in Shuafat refugee
camp in East Jerusalem between 8 and 10 February.

Palestinian, Israeli and foreign protesters
continued demonstrating against the barrier where it is
being constructed within the West Bank in contravention
of the Advisory Opinion of the International Court of
Justice. There have been raids into Ramallah against
individuals and organizations involved in protests. In a
10-24445
positive action, we note that Israel began work on
10 February to reroute a section of the barrier around
the village of Bil'in to implement a 2007 Israeli High
Court order, which is expected to return 700,000 square
metres of arable land to the village, while leaving
approximately 150,000 square metres west of the barrier.

We are also concerned at continued settler
violence. There have been 8 reported attacks by settlers
on Palestinians, including on 9 February when settlers
shot and injured a Palestinian teenager. We note
legitimate Israeli and Palestinian security concerns.
Sustainable security will be best achieved through
intensified cooperation, the continued empowerment of
PA security efforts and PA performance, the curtailment
of IDF incursions into Palestinian areas, full respect for
legitimate non-violent protest, Israeli action to curb
settler violence, Palestinian action against incitement,
and progress in both political negotiations and
economic development.

The Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs recorded the removal of 24 closure obstacles
throughout the Hebron governorate, continuing the
gradual easing of Palestinian movement in areas to the
east of the barrier. However, as of 16 February,
550 obstacles to movement remain in place throughout
the West Bank, of which 89 are permanently and
partially staffed checkpoints. The Israeli Government
recently allowed tourist buses to use the Jalameh
vehicle crossing from northern Israel into the West
Bank with the aim of boosting the Palestinian tourism
sector. The Israeli Government is encouraged to
continue to facilitate this access and to take more far-
reaching measures as well.

The important work of Palestinian State-building
through institutional reform and development is
continuing. However, the recurrent financing
requirements facing the Palestinian Authority are still
substantial and projected at about $1.2 billion in 2010,
despite reduced spending on wages and subsidies. We
encourage donors to channel their assistance first and
foremost through the single treasury account and to
support the priorities articulated by the Palestinian
Authority for 2010. We welcome recent transfers and
pledges and also strongly encourage those donors who
have not yet done so to frontload financial support to
allow for greater predictability. We also stress the
importance of applying accepted principles of aid
effectiveness to ensure better targeting and maximize
programme impact.
10-24445

On 8 February, the Palestinian Cabinet called for
local elections to be held on 17 July 2010, in accordance
with the local election law for all 335 municipal
councils in the West Bank and Gaza. The Palestinian
Central Election Commission is planning to start
registering voters on 6 March. We take this opportunity
to urge Hamas to respond positively to this important
part of the democratic process.

Senior Fatah and independent figures visited Gaza
during the reporting period in an effort to ease tensions
and promote reconciliation. Other factions in the Gaza
Strip have also been active in this direction, and an
Arab parliamentary group visited the Strip on 15 and
16 February. However, to date, there has been no further
progress in finalizing an agreement based on Egypt's
proposal.

It is deeply regrettable that there has been no
breakthrough on a prisoner exchange to secure the
release of Corporal Shalit and Palestinian prisoners,
despite intensive efforts in recent months.

While the Hamas de facto authorities are
reportedly exerting efforts to prevent the launching of
rockets at Israel, 19 projectiles were fired from Gaza
and 11 reached southern Israel during the reporting
period, with no damage or injuries reported. Three
barrels of explosives washed up on Israeli beaches
between 1 and 3 February, with a further two detonating
at sea. There was an improvised explosive device (IED)
attack on a convoy of International Committee of the
Red Cross (ICRC) vehicles on 4 February, which
damaged one vehicle, and two other IED attacks,
reportedly by Salafist elements, killing one Hamas
militant and injuring four others. One Palestinian was
killed in an Israeli air strike, and seven others were
injured in IDF incursions and operations. We continue
to condemn rocket fire, and call for its cessation and on
all parties to maintain calm and to strictly observe
international humanitarian law.

We continue to receive reports of the smuggling
of weapons supplied from within the region. Egypt is
maintaining its efforts, as all States are called on to do
in Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). Egypt is
also seizing explosives and installing metal sheeting in
areas along its border with Gaza. Those efforts further
underscore the vital importance of opening all legitimate
crossings for imports and exports, as envisaged in the
2005 Agreement on Movement and Access and in
resolution 1860 (2009).
3
The Israeli closure of Gaza remains in place. That
counterproductive policy is empowering smugglers and
militants, destroying legitimate commerce and causing
unacceptable hardship for the civilian population, more
than half of whom are children.

During the reporting period, food and hygiene
products comprised 84 per cent of imports and a weekly
average of 561 trucks entered the Strip, which is slightly
more than the previous reporting period, but far short
of the weekly average of 2,087 trucks before the Hamas
takeover in June 2007. Cooking gas supplies met only
48 per cent of estimated weekly needs during the
reporting period. We take positive note of the entry of a
slightly wider range of materials, such as glass,
electricity spare parts and one elevator for a maternity
hospital. The first phase of the northern Gaza
wastewater treatment plant project was completed in
late January. We also note that the export of cut flowers
and strawberries continued.

However, the scale and quantity of goods entering
Gaza through the Israeli crossings, as well as the level
of exports, remain far short of requirements. Sufficient
materials to restart civilian reconstruction are still not
entering Gaza through the Israeli crossings. We again
express our disappointment that there has been no
satisfactory Israeli response to the United Nations
proposal to complete stalled projects for housing,
schools and health facilities. We also continue to be
concerned about fuel shortages at the Gaza power plant
as a result of funding shortfalls and technical failures,
leading to rolling blackouts.

If I may turn to the regional situation, we deplore
the heightened and belligerent rhetoric during the
reporting period and call for its cessation. We continue
to support all efforts to revive the Israeli-Syrian track
and a broader resolution to the Arab-Israeli conflict, as
envisaged in Security Council resolutions and the Arab
Peace Initiative. The situation in the occupied Syrian
Golan remained calm despite continued settlement
activity.

In Lebanon, on 14 February, a large rally took
place in Beirut to commemorate the fifth anniversary of
the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri
and 22 others. On that occasion, leaders of the 14 March
coalition commemorated Mr. Hariri's contribution to
Lebanon's development and reaffirmed their determination
to establish the truth behind his murder. Prime Minister
Saad Hariri emphasized the importance of national
unity and Lebanon's role with regard to inter-Arab
reconciliation. In a statement, the Secretary-General
said that he stood with the people of Lebanon and
reaffirmed the commitment of the United Nations to
the efforts of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon.

On 15 February, clashes between members of
radical Islamist movements and members of Fatah broke
out in the Palestinian refugee camp of Ain el-Helweh,
near Saida. At least one person was killed as a result of
the fighting before calm was restored to the camp. That
incident disrupted an otherwise generally calm situation
in the camps.

Even as progress is being made in the
reconstruction of the Nahr el-Bared refugee camp,
funding remains a major concern. The United Nations
urges the international community to renew its financial
support for the reconstruction of Nahr el-Bared so that
progress can be sustained.

The situation in the area of operations of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
remains quiet. On 31 January 2010, the IDF
apprehended a 17-year-old Lebanese shepherd in the
vicinity of Kafr Shuba, alleging that he had crossed
south of the Blue Line. On 1 February, the civilian was
handed over to UNIFIL, which, in turn, handed him
over to the Lebanese authorities. An investigation into
the incident is ongoing. Israeli overflights have
continued on an almost daily basis, with a marked
increase on several days in early February.

We remain deeply concerned at the current
stalemate. We call for the resumption of talks on final
status issues, implementation of Road Map
commitments, continued efforts to improve economic
and security conditions, and a different and more
positive approach to Gaza. We remain committed to an
end to the occupation that began in 1967, an end to the
conflict through the creation of an independent
Palestinian State living side by side with Israel in peace
and security, and comprehensive regional peace, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions, previous
agreements, the Road Map and the Arab Peace Initiative.

