Mr. Iliichev (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his assessment of the
current state of affairs in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank the Force Commanders of the
United Nations peacekeeping from the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force, the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, UnitedNations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic and the United Nations Mission in Liberia for
sharing the state of affairs of their missions.

The nature of the issues raised by modern-day
crises is changing significantly. In carrying out their
mandates, United Nations peacekeeping operations
have at various times come up against terrorist attacks
on civilians and peacekeepers themselves, organized
crime, and illicit trafficking in weapons and narcotics.
The situations in countries where they are deployed and
their respective theatres of operations each have their
own special features.

United Nations missions are increasingly working
in a context in which at least one side of the conflict is
not a State. Instead, one of the sides is armed opposition
or illegal armed groups. Furthermore, we have seen
cases where a region with a traditional clash between
two sides gets a third side that is not controlled by
anyone. This was the case, for example, in the Golan
Heights, where terrorist and illegal armed groups now
run rife.

The trend in the Central African Republic is also a
matter of concern, as there are ongoing intercommunal
clashes, continuous extraordinary violence committed
on religious and ethnic grounds, and widespread
organized crime and gangs. Governmental and security
bodies in many areas of the country are weak or
totally lacking.

In these circumstances, peacekeepers need to act
with utmost caution. It is more important than ever to
respect the basic principles of peacemaking, that is,
the consent of the parties; impartiality; the non-use of
force, except in cases of self-defence; and respecting
Security Council mandates. The loose interpretations
that we have been hearing, based on the situation on the
ground, are unacceptable.

We also must not allow peacekeepers to be directly
pulled into conflicts, but this is exactly what happens if
we get overly involved with robust mandates and even
more with preventive responses to asymmetric threats.
This also applies to offensive and counter-terrorist
operations. It is unacceptable to take the concept of the
protection of civilians as a pretext for the use of force by
peacekeepers against the host State. That automatically
turns Blue Helmets into a party to the conflict, provokes
the Government and simply generates new violence.

In this context, we must be extremely cautious and
balanced in approaching the situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, where the Government and the
opposition are having a hard time cooperating on the
issue of implementing the December 2016 political
agreement. Instead of overpoliticizing the subject
of electoral violence and violations of human rights,
there is a need to focus on assisting the Congolese in
reforming the security sector and building the capacity
of local security forces to counter lawless gangs in the

east of the country and to improve the military-political
situation in country as a whole.

We must remember that the Government bears the
primary responsibility for ensuring the security of the
population, including by countering terrorist attacks,
establishing a political process, ensuring development
and eliminating the root causes ofconflict. International
assistance should be provided to support local and
regional efforts, but not substitute for them.

With respect to the issue of increasing the
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations while
lowering financial expenditures, we note the need
to improve approaches to mission planning, timely
mission reconfiguration and drawing up exit strategies.
It is puzzling that generic functions, such as addressing
gender issues, peacebuilding and preventing the
escalation of conflicts, are included in the mandates
at the same time that a mission's capacities are being
reduced. Let us consider, for example, the situation
in Liberia where Blue Helmets are mandated simply
with peacebuilding tasks. That is where we have room
for a significant drawdown in the military and police
components. Nevertheless, for some reason there are 700
armed peacekeepers and 5 military helicopters there.

Blue Helmets should be deployed where they can
work effectively while remaining neutral. Let us not
forget that the essence of peacekeeping is the absence
of an alternative political settlement. That priority has
also been confirmed by Secretary-General Guterres
himself. High-quality, thorough political and mediation
efforts should be the priority. The history of conflicts
in various regions of the world has shown that this is
the only way to eradicate the root causes of conflicts,
as opposed to endlessly addressing their consequences.
Otherwise, after a brief respite, crises are at risk of
rearing their ugly heads again.

