Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): I thank you, Sir,
for the opportunity to brief the Security Council on the
situation in Abyei and the deployment of the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA).

As Council members are aware, the status of the
disputed area of Abyei remains unresolved and is a
major source of tension between the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement.
In May, during the period leading up to the
independence of South Sudan, an outbreak of violence
culminated in the Sudanese Armed Forces taking
control of Abyei town and the entire region north of the
Kiir/Bahr el-Arab river and the displacement of the
local population. One month ago, pursuant to the
20 June agreement between the parties, the Council
authorized the deployment of UNISFA, composed of
Ethiopian troops, to monitor and verify the withdrawal
of all armed forces from Abyei. The mission will also
include up to 50 police officers to support the
formation of the Abyei police service and a limited
number of civilians to support the Force.

I can report that as of yesterday, 26 July, 521 of
the 4,200 soldiers authorized for UNISFA had been
deployed on the ground, including 411 in Abyei town
and 110 in Diffra, in northern Abyei. A further
495 troops are in Kadugli, awaiting deployment to
2
Abyei. We hope to have approximately 1,200 soldiers
in the area of operations in order to establish the
mission's initial operating capability by the end of July,
in just a few days.

It is true that the deployment is encountering a
variety of difficulties, and we are working closely with
the Government of the Sudan to overcome these
challenges. For instance, the lack of sufficient
accommodation for troops limits the speed of
deployment and will necessitate the construction of
additional accommodation once the rainy season ends.
In view of the need to proceed with the speedy
implementation of the 20 June agreement, we are, as I
said, working closely with the Government of the
Sudan to ensure that everything possible is done to
facilitate UNISFA's deployment, including a status-of-
forces agreement, which is awaiting signature.

In the meantime, while the security situation in
Abyei remains tense, both sides appear committed to
avoiding an escalation of violence and ready to
cooperate with UNISFA. The Sudanese Armed Forces
retain a considerable presence north of the Kiir/Bahr
el-Arab river, but have indicated their intention to
withdraw when UNISFA deploys. In the next few days
the Head of Mission, Lieutenant General Tesfaye of
Ethiopia, will discuss the precise timing of this
withdrawal with the parties involved. Two days ago, on
25 July, more than 100 Sudan People's Liberation
Army soldiers were observed south of the river near
Banton Bridge. However, the troops pledged not to
cross the river and agreed to withdraw upon UNISFA's
deployment.

Concerning the humanitarian situation, which
was largely described by Under-Secretary-General
Valerie Amos in her briefing of the Council on 15 July,
an estimated total of 113,000 persons remain displaced
from their homes. About 27,000 of those are currently
in Agok, south of Abyei, and the rest are in South
Sudan, in Warrap, Unity, and Bahr el-Ghazal states.
Humanitarian agencies have relocated their personnel
in order to provide food, shelter and other emergency
aid to the displaced population. As a result of the
displacement and destruction in Abyei, food security,
shelter and the resumption of livelihoods will be
critical needs in Abyei in the future. The Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights is planning to
conduct an assessment mission in Abyei as soon as
possible in order to take stock of the events of May and
June, including allegations of human rights violations,
11-43241
in furtherance of the Security Council's request for
effective monitoring of respect for human rights in the
region.

Although the deployment of UNISFA represents a
positive step forward, sustained improvement in the
security situation clearly will depend on the progress
achieved in the political implementation of the 20 June
agreement and, eventually, on the overall question of
the status of Abyei. In this regard, the parties have
exchanged proposals on the composition of the Abyei
area administration, but have not yet finalized the
appointments. Naturally, we require mutually accepted
local authorities in order to ensure liaison with
UNISFA in the implementation of its mandate. Those
appointments have still not been made, as I said earlier.

(spoke in English)

Abyei is, of course, a critical component of the
larger spectrum of security, political and economic
issues that must be resolved between the Sudan and
South Sudan, including the demarcation and joint
management of the border, the ongoing violence in
Southern Kordofan as well as the tensions in Blue Nile
and other outstanding post-separation arrangements. In
this context, and as previously reported to the Council,
we note the signing of agreements on 28 and 29 June,
on Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile and on border
security, which have provided a useful framework for
the continuation of the negotiations. However, the
situation in Southern Kordofan remains particularly
alarming, and we continue to urge the parties to reach a
ceasefire as soon as possible.

The 29 June agreement has specific implications
for UNISFA, since it requests the Mission to provide
force protection for an international border-monitoring
verification mission. We are currently consulting with
the parties in order to further refine the nature of such a
border-verification mission and the possible force
protection role of UNISFA. Upon conclusion of these
discussions, the Secretary-General will prepare
recommendations for consideration by the Council on
the further support that the United Nations may
provide for the implementation of this mechanism.
11-43241

The signing of a number of agreements over the
past several weeks is welcome and shows goodwill on
both sides with respect to addressing the security issues
between them in a peaceful manner. As we move
forward, we must continue to support the parties to
reach full agreement on issues that remain unresolved,
including on the final status of Abyei. We continue to
stress that UNISFA can provide only a temporary
solution. More broadly, border disputes, wealth-sharing
and citizenship arrangements should be urgently
addressed; they have practical concerns for the
populations of both countries. The former Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan,
Mr. Haile Menkerios, has now been appointed Special
Envoy for the Sudan and South Sudan, and will, in
coordination with the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel (AUHIP), led by former
President Mbeki, offer the good offices of the
Secretary-General to help facilitate the conclusion of
all post-independence issues.

In this regard, we call on all members of the
Council to coordinate their bilateral support for both
the Sudan and South Sudan with the AUHIP and the
Special Envoy, Mr. Menkerios, in order to assist in the
quick resolution of outstanding issues.

The AUHIP, with President Mbeki, will convene
with the Governments of the Sudan and South Sudan in
Addis Ababa on 28 and 29 July for further discussions
and negotiations on security, as well as on transitional
financial and currency arrangements. I hope that both
sides will seize this important opportunity to resolve
their remaining differences.

