Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to extend our sincere thanks to Mr. John Holmes,
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, for his important
briefing to the Council.

Since February 1999, the Security Council has
adopted several resolutions that reflect the
international community's increasing commitment to
develop and improve ways to address the tragic
suffering of civilians living in areas of armed conflict.
Those resolutions, particularly resolution 1674 (2006),
have condemned the deliberate targeting of civilians,
acts of violence and attacks against civilians, the
forced displacement of civilians and the deliberate
denial of access for humanitarian assistance.

In spite of these efforts, the world continues to
witness an increase in the deliberate targeting of
civilians, including humanitarian workers, by terrorist
attacks. Civilians living in conflict areas are still
suffering under the scourge of forced displacement.
There are other matters for grave concern, such as the
indiscriminate use of force and the accidental killing of
civilians in conflict areas or in areas where military
operations are conducted. This situation requires all
parties in such areas to take the necessary steps to
prevent risks to civilians, in accordance with the
Fourth Geneva Convention, of 1949.

On the same note, we would like to recall
Security Council resolution 1674 (2006), which
reaffirms the provisions of the 2005 World Summit
Outcome (General Assembly resolution 60/ 1) regarding
the responsibility to protect populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against
humanity. We would like to emphasize that, on the
theoretical level, the responsibility to protect civilians
is an important humanitarian principle, for it embodies
a noble humanitarian value: defending innocent people
whose only fault is that they live in or near areas of
conflict and who, in most cases, are intentionally
targeted for pure political and ideological reasons. But,
from a practical and operational perspective, we should
be cautious in dealing with this principle in order that
it not be exploited or abused. If we apply this principle,
while respecting the ideals behind it, we should ensure
that our objectives are not politicized, that they rise
above individual interests and that they reflect purely
humanitarian motives.
What we need today is the effective
implementation of actions and measures contained in
the relevant Security Council resolutions aimed at
improving conditions for civilians in areas of armed
conflict. In this regard, we would like to stress that the
parties to armed conflict, whether Governments or non-
governmental actors, are duty-bound to comply fully
with their commitments under international law and
relevant Security Council resolutions, since the
responsibility to protect civilians rests, first and
foremost, with the States concerned. The role of the
international community is to provide the necessary
protection to civilians and to find the means to mediate
the settlement of conflicts peacefully. Peacekeeping,
humanitarian relief operations and other forms of
intervention under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in conflict areas are merely
contingency solutions. Furthermore, urgent action is
required to end conflicts in a definitive manner.

Security Council resolution 1674 (2006) lists
various groups of civilians who suffer as a result of
armed conflict and are in need of assistance and
protection. That list, however, does not include the
category of persons with disabilities in conflict areas,
despite the serious impact that armed conflict has on
such people. In that regard, we recall General
Assembly resolution 60/ 131 on the implementation of
the World Programme of Action concerning Disabled
Persons, which expresses grave concern about the
devastating consequences that armed conflict continues
to have on the human rights of persons with
disabilities, as well as the United Nations Convention
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the
preamble of which stresses the importance of providing
full protection to persons with disabilities, particularly
in situations of armed conflict and foreign occupation.

In this regard, we would like to underline that it
is important that the Secretary-General, in his next
report on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
to be submitted in October 2007, take into account
conditions for persons with disabilities in conflict areas
with a view to strengthening and improving ways of
meeting their needs.

Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full
commitment to promoting and strengthening the
protection of civilians in conflict areas, in accordance
with the relevant Security Council resolutions.

