Ms. Bakuramutsa (Rwanda): Allow me to express
Rwanda's appreciation to the Polish presidency for
convening today's open debate on the state of respect
for international law in the context of the maintenance
of international peace and security.

It is evident from today's briefings that upholding
international law is fundamental to the maintenance
of international peace and security and to preventing,
managing and resolving crises. We all agree that
international law directly contributes to world peace.
We also agree that this is not something new, as the
concept of international law predates even the United
Nations, which was founded in 1945. Today's discussion
therefore stresses the need to uphold the principles of
international law in the maintenance of international
peace and the need to support the role of the Security
Council and the international judicial system in
fostering a culture of the rule of law that promotes
international peace and security.

Peace and security are strengthened if there are
no exceptions or double standards in the application of
international law. The Security Council should promote
the rule of law through greater use of the means for
pacific settlement of disputes and, more frequently,
by recourse to the International Court of Justice. We
believe that the starting point is to look at the Charter of
the United Nations, by which we are all bound.

Today we see a world that is hardly at peace. Human
rights abuses remain rampant and humanitarian law is
flouted in open violation of the Charter's principles.
The Charter does not just collectively bind us to efforts
aimed at saving succeeding generations from the
scourge of war; it also confers a shared commitment
to creating a world order that is based on the rule
of international law. Let me reiterate my country's
continued commitment to translating our trust in the
Charter into practice.

On the maintenance of international peace and
security by upholding international law, allow me
to begin with a simple fact: we, as Member States,
solemnly entered into this covenant, the United Nations
Charter, trusting that its principles were immutable.
However, what we see is that certain nations show
contempt for those principles, pursuing narrow
national or group interests, which can have devastating
consequences. We have yet to see a world order emerge
that is based on justice and respect for the obligations
arising from treaties and other sources of international
law and, most critically, the purposes and principles of
the Charter itself. In that context, I would like to focus
on the following four points.

First, the United Nations must fulfil its purpose of
developing friendly relations among nations, predicated
on the principle of equal rights.

Secondly, there should be a renewed focus on using
peaceful means for addressing breaches of international
peace and the settlement of international disputes, with
a wider and more effective use of the provisions of the
Charter. We appreciate Judge Owada echoing that point.

Thirdly, the management of international peace and
security must be based on a genuine consensus that is
forged on the basis of the principles ofinternational law.

Fourthly, as the primary organ responsible for
maintenance of international peace and security, the
Security Council also needs to make wider and more
effective use of the procedures and framework for the
pacific settlement of disputes, particularly Articles 33
to 38 of the Charter.

African countries have put in place a Peace and
Security Architecture through regional and subregional
organizations that possess built-in mechanisms for
conflict prevention and mediation. Bodies such as
the Peace and Security Council and the Panel of the
Wise give this architecture greater strength. Africa
has wisely resorted to the wide spectrum of modalities
envisaged in Chapter VI and other relevant provisions
of the Charter of the United Nations in the desire to
prevent disputes between parties and stop existing
disputes escalating into conflict.

It is worth pointing out that we are having
this debate on the seventieth anniversaries of the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights. Those important instruments
are being threatened by numerous instances of
backtracking on our pledges. Accountability has been
threatened by Member States' lack of cooperation in
complying with arrest warrants issued by international
mechanisms, supporting investigations concerning
fugitives and prosecuting suspected individuals within
their jurisdiction. We believe that there should be no
impunity for egregious crimes against humanity and
mass atrocities. Accountability for those responsible for
heinous crimes is integral to maintaining international
peace and security. The Council must stress that peace
and justice go hand in hand, and that its members,
particularly its permanent members, must serve as
models when it comes to upholding accountability by
not harbouring fugitives implicated in genocide.

The Security Council has tribunals and mechanisms
in place that were established to fight impunity and
contribute to international peace and security. Debates
such as today's present us with an opportunity to
be introspective and consider whether those legal
institutions and mechanisms have met our expectations.
Are they actually ensuring accountability? Among
other things, the establishment of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and, later, of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals was aimed at ending impunity and contributing
to the process of national reconciliation and restoring
and maintaining peace. Rwanda is concerned that it is
not living up to that goal. Our concerns are based on
the ICTR's recent early releases of some masterminds
of genocide who have shown no remorse for the crimes
they committed. To be exact, 14 of them have been set
free and three more are currently in the process of early
release. In some instances, such as that oer. Ferdinand
Nahimana, those early releases have enabled various
publications to continue propagating the ideology of
genocide.

Furthermore, their early release, accomplished
without consultation with the Government of Rwanda
and at the discretion of one single individual,
seriously erodes the ICTR's achievements in holding
accountable those responsible for the meticulous
planning and execution of the genocide against the
Tutsi. It also conveys the extremely dangerous message
that international justice is lenient when crimes are
committed in certain parts of the world and thereby
trivializes the crime of genocide.

In conclusion, Rwanda calls on the Security Council
to consider the challenges that threaten the primacy of
international law in sustaining international peace and
security. Restoring the rule of law is not just the true
means of achieving sustainable international peace and
security, it is the only one.

