Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): The Netherlands is
deeply concerned about the further deterioration of the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We
therefore welcome the opportunity to address this question
in an open debate of the Security Council. It goes without
saying that we associate ourselves entirely with the
position of the European Union, as it will later be
expressed by the German Presidency.

It is particularly worrying that, after a promising
start, the peace process has reached an impasse. We must
collectively find a way out of this impasse before the
conflict develops into a full-scale war of unforeseeable
proportions.

 

It is not only the fighting itself that demands our
immediate attention. Widespread Violations of human rights
on both sides and the collapse of the economy are plunging
ever more inhabitants of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo into misery.

We are convinced that a structural political solution
can be found only through a process of negotiations. We
call on President Kabila to enter forthwith into a dialogue
with all parties involved in the conflict.

The success of these negotiations depends on the
political will of all sides to confront the key issues, in a
common endeavour. Respect for the principles of
sovereignty and territorial integrity is one of those key
issues at stake here. Respect for the legitimate security
concerns of the countries neighbouring the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to the east is another.

As for the internal situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a political dialogue, with the
participation of all parties in Congolese society, must be
launched without delay. The Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo should take up its responsibility in
this regard. The Netherlands expresses the hope that the
Government's announcement of a national debate on a new
constitution will pave the way for further democratization
of the country.

The scope of the crisis and the inherent risk of further
escalation require that the international community involve
itself and facilitate the process of peace in every possible
way.

Some of the groundwork for such a process has
already been laid in regional efforts. We trust that a more
active involvement of the United Nations and the
Organization of African Unity will further the cause of
peace. The Netherlands is prepared to support the
negotiations between the parties to the conflict and the
national dialogue in an appropriate way. Ultimately, an
international conference on peace and security in the Great
Lakes region should bring about a durable peace in that
region.

We should like to reiterate our view that the illegal
flow of arms is one of the root causes of conflicts in the
region. Peacemaking makes no sense if the international
community cannot address this problem more effectively.

