Mr. Holmes: Thank you, Mr. President, for the
opportunity to provide the Council with an update on
the humanitarian situation to complement what
members just heard from the Joint Special
Representative.

The Council first discussed Darfur four years ago
this month. Sadly, many of the observations that my
predecessor made at that time remain only too relevant
today: growing numbers of displaced, continuing
hostilities and violence against civilians, increasing
humanitarian needs and limited access to beneficiaries.
The difference is that almost six times as many people
are now affected. Jan Egeland spoke in April 2004 of
approximately 750,000 people in danger. Of Darfur's
estimated 6 million people, some 4.27 million have
now been seriously affected by the conflict;
2.45 million are internally displaced, while an
additional 260,000 have sought refuge in neighbouring
countries.

One year ago, I briefed the Council myself for the
first time, following my first visit to Darfur as
Emergency Relief Coordinator. I am sad to say that the
humanitarian situation is as grim today as it was then,
if not more so. In 2008 so far, a further 100,000
civilians have been forced to flee, many of them not for
the first time. Nearly 60,000 were displaced in West
Darfur alone. The Justice and Equality Movement
(JEM) rebel movement was responsible for initiating
the latest round of violence there by attacking
Government installations, including reportedly
launching attacks from within civilian areas, with the
civilian population bearing the brunt of the
consequences. But military units of the Government of
Sudan once again used disproportionate force and
failed to differentiate between military and civilian
targets in their response, including aerial
bombardments. Last month's report by the Office of
the High Commissioner for Human Rights highlighted
targeted attacks on civilians during that campaign, in
particular through the use of Janjaweed militias to
terrorize the population before the arrival of regular
forces.

Elsewhere in Darfur, too, hostilities between the
parties, intra-rebel and tribal clashes, aerial
bombardments and the resurgence of Janjaweed
militias have resulted in death, displacement and
widespread violations of international human rights
and humanitarian law. Cross-border attacks and
support for each other's rebel groups by Chad and the
Sudan have further destabilized security in both
countries, despite efforts to reduce tensions following
the Dakar Agreement.

Darfur today is therefore still characterized by
insecurity, lawlessness and impunity. The effects on
civilians are not difficult to imagine. Widespread
human rights abuses continue to be reported in many
areas. A particularly worrying feature is evidence of
high levels of sexual violence and exploitation in the
northern corridor of West Darfur over the past two
months - for example, judged by the dramatically
increased number of women and girls seeking
treatment for the effects of those brutal acts and
statistics for sexually transmitted infections treated at
local health clinics.

In my previous trips to Darfur, I met women who
had the courage to tell me some of their stories, while
the authorities have continued to deny that any such
thing could exist in their country. Sexual violence in
Darfur is not a figment of our collective imaginations. I
call upon the Government, which has the primary
responsibility for the protection of its citizens, to take
concrete steps to address this scourge, and on the
armed groups to help stamp it out.

The humanitarian community itself is also subject
to constant violence. Since the start of the year we
have seen 106 vehicles hijacked - 46 United Nations
and non-governmental organization vehicles and
60 trucks contracted to the World Food Programme
(WF P). One WFP-contracted driver has been killed and
26 drivers are still missing. The rate of hijackings is
more than 350 per cent higher than even the already
alarming statistics of 2007.

So far in 2008, 42 humanitarian premises have
been assaulted, and six aid workers killed. Rebel
groups and individuals associated with them appear to
be primarily responsible for the attacks on convoys and
hijackings, whether their motives are military or
criminal. All that is seriously jeopardizing efforts to
deliver aid, and in particular to preposition relief
supplies ahead of the rainy season. It also comes at a
time when several key humanitarian indicators are
getting worse, including those on malnutrition, which
6
is now in excess of emergency threshold levels in many
areas of Darfur.

That may sound a sadly familiar story, if no less
unacceptable for that. But we need also to be aware of
the cumulative effects of continued Violence, stress and
upheaval in Darfur. Those in the camps feel helpless
and voiceless. The fear of never being able to return to
their areas of origin and the pressure by Government
authorities to return when conditions are clearly not
right lead to increasing tension, polarization,
politicization and even militarization.

But the conflict and the continuing degradation of
traditional social structures after five years of fighting
and flight have serious consequences not just for the
stability of camps for internally displaced persons
(IDPs), but more fundamentally for the long-term
stability of Darfur itself. How many will be able, or
indeed even willing, to return to their previous lives
when peace finally arrives? Normality cannot simply
be suspended for five years or more and then resume as
if nothing had happened. That problem is aggravated
every month that passes without peace.

Meanwhile even relatively untouched rural
communities are increasingly vulnerable and require
our assistance in growing numbers. In some areas, for
example, the price of staple commodities such as millet
has doubled since this time last year. That partly
reflects the global phenomenon of rising food prices
and partly unfavourable weather, but it is also a result
of general dislocation and neglect as so many fields go
untilled and infestations of disease and pests go
unchecked. Unfortunately, we cannot always access
those rural communities. It is inevitable that some of
their inhabitants too will end by migrating to IDP
camps - many of which are currently well beyond
capacity - in search of assistance. We are already
seeing this in Al Salaam camp in south Darfur, where
approximately 1,000 newly arrived families remain
unregistered, with 17 deaths among that group during
the month of March alone.

There is a risk that developments will take an
even more serious turn. The World Food Programme
announced last week that it would be forced to reduce
its food distributions next month. Regular attacks on its
convoys, in particular on the roads from Kordofan to
El Fasher in north Darfur and Ed Daein in south
Darfur, mean that they have simply not been able to
preposition food stocks as necessary and cannot now
catch up without a radical transformation of the
position. That means that the amount of food provided
to the conflict-affected men, women and children in
Darfur will be halved in a matter of days. That heart-
breaking decision could not come at a worse time, as
the agency continues to struggle in any case to deliver
to its existing beneficiaries as the rainy season
approaches.

During that period malaria, water-borne diseases,
respiratory infections and other illnesses normally
cause mortality to increase in Darfur. The effects on
those further weakened by poor nutrition are likely to
be much worse. Global acute malnutrition in children
under the age of five, for example, which is already in
excess of emergency thresholds in many areas of
Darfur, could double. It is therefore Vital that the
Government of the Sudan does much more to protect
those convoys and that the armed groups stop such
attacks by anyone associated with them, as well as
halting all attempts to extract so-called taxes at
checkpoints along the roads.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur is also looking at how it can help.
Meanwhile, I appeal to the donor community to
redouble its efforts to ensure that key under-funded
sectors such as health, nutrition and water and
sanitation receive the rapid support they need.

I am pleased to say that the moratorium on
restrictions and the joint communique on the
facilitation of humanitarian assistance in Darfur, which
were extended at the end of January, have helped to
alleviate bureaucratic obstacles. I am grateful to the
Government of the Sudan for improved cooperation in
that area, but the humanitarian operation still faces
other obstacles. Those agreements do not, for example,
ensure physical access to IDPs and other vulnerable
groups. Humanitarian workers are too often blocked by
military intelligence, national security elements or
civilian police, seemingly at random. Those denials of
access serve no discernible purpose aside from
frustrating relief efforts and increasing suffering.

The Government of the Sudan can therefore do
much more to help on the humanitarian side. In areas
under its control, the Government should improve
security for civilians and the international community,
in accordance with international law, and ensure more
freedom of movement for relief organizations. The
Government should disband once and for all the

Janjaweed militias and put an end to impunity for those
who commit crimes - including banditry, the killings
of civilians and rape - by actively seeking out those
responsible and prosecuting them. As an increasingly
prosperous country, the Sudan should provide more
assistance to its population, rather than continuing to
allow the international community to shoulder Virtually
all the financial responsibility.

Rebel movements are responsible for many of the
threats facing civilians and the relief operation. They
too can do much more. They should stop endangering
the lives of civilians by the kind of attacks that are
bound to provoke a response in civilian areas, with
predominantly civilian casualties. All groups should
stop attacking humanitarian vehicle convoys and
premises, control all those within their ranks and
punish those responsible. The movements should
ensure safe humanitarian access and assistance and
show respect for basic humanitarian principles. They
should ensure the civilian character of IDP camps and
Villages.

In spite of those challenges, 14,700 international,
national and local relief workers continue, wherever
and whenever possible, to provide life-saving
assistance. I spoke a year ago of the fragility of the
operation. That has increased as time has gone by. But
the agencies, organizations and individuals involved
have refused to be intimidated. I salute their
determination and that of donors.

However, even if the humanitarian presence at
times can act as a deterrent to Violence against civilians
and our efforts sustain the lives of millions,
humanitarians still cannot provide what is
fundamentally lacking.

I am saddened and angry as Emergency Relief
Coordinator that, after five years of that suffering and
four years since the Council became actively engaged,
we have still not been able to find a lasting solution to
the suffering of those millions of men, women and
children. A study in 2006 suggested that 200,000 had
lost their lives from the combined effects of the
conflict. That figure must be much higher now, perhaps
half as much again, yet we continue to see the
goalposts receding, to the point where peace in Darfur
seems further away today than ever. Further progress in
the deployment of UNAMID, equipped to protect
civilians and improve security, will help, but only an
end to all violence and concrete steps towards a

political settlement will make the fundamental
difference needed, as the rebel movements themselves
above all need to recognize. Otherwise, the reality is
that the people of Darfur face a continued steady
deterioration of their conditions of life and their
chances of lasting recovery.

I said at this time last year that I hoped from the
bottom of my heart that I would not be back here one
year later to repeat the same messages, but the reality
is that I have come here today to give the Council even
worse news. In the absence of any real progress
8

towards a solution, whatever the efforts of the
international community and the Council, profound
human suffering will continue to grow in Darfur.

