Mr. Tsiskarashvili (Georgia): The Russian
Federation attempts to downplay the importance of the
pledge of non-use of force made by the President of
Georgia on 23 November in the European Parliament,
and later reinforced in the letters to the heads of
various international organizations, including the
Secretary-General.

The pledge of Georgia not to use force against the
Russian occupying forces and the proxy regimes in the
name of restoring Georgia's territorial integrity
remains an international legal obligation of Georgia no
matter how Russia tries to downplay its significance.
Georgia is seriously committed to pursuing a peaceful
agenda towards its occupied regions, as exemplified by
the calls to engage in dialogue with Russian
authorities, as well as with the populations of the
occupied regions.

Russia needs to start living up to its obligations
under international law. By continuing the policy of
violating Georgia's territorial integrity, by breaching
the 12 August 2008 ceasefire agreement, by further
11-23198
militarizing the occupied regions, by rejecting all
offers of dialogue and by pursuing aggressive military
rhetoric against Georgia, Russia will hardly manage to
change the perception of my country that Russia is a
hostile State.

I would like here to remind representatives that
Russia committed military aggression against Georgia
in 2008. It continues to occupy 20 per cent of
Georgia's territory. Russia committed ethnic cleansing
of ethnic Georgians in 2008. All those violations are
duly reflected in the findings of the International
Independent Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in
Georgia, led by the Swiss diplomat Heidi Tagliavini.
Moreover, the Russian Federation's decision to
recognize the so-called independence of Abkhazia and
South Ossetia was considered a serious breach of
international law by the international Fact-Finding
Mission.

Finally, the illegal military presence of Russia
and its effective control of the occupied territories of
Georgia make the Russian Federation an occupying
Power, and all the responsibility for the situation in the
occupied territories lies with Russia.

