Mr. Kadiri (Morocco): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the United Kingdom on its
successful presidency of the Security Council and for
convening this very welcome and long-overdue debate
on mediation and the settlement of disputes. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General and the other
distinguished speakers for their statements. We reiterate
our heartfelt condolences and deepest sympathy at the
passing of former Secretary-General Kofi Annan.

Our discussion today is indeed timely and
necessary in several senses. First, the last dedicated
debate on mediation and the settlement of disputes
was held almost a decade ago, in 2009 (see S/PV.6108).
Secondly, this is a time when new, more complex and
global challenges are posing considerable threats to the
safety and security of our States. Thirdly, the scourges
and challenges we face today mean that only united
and concerted efforts can restore our ability as an
international community to find cost-effective ways to
prevent new conflicts and crises that could undermine
all the peacebuilding, development and sustainable
peace efforts made so far.

From our perspective, for mediation efforts to
be successful, the mediators should first operate in
full respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity,
political independence and national ownership of the
States Members of the United Nations. Secondly, they
should ensure consent with regard to the process as
well as a mutually acceptable political agreement, as
rightly stated in the definition of mediation included
in the concept note (S/2018/586, annex). Thirdly, they
should ensure that the main, essential stakeholders
in a dispute fully participate in and contribute to any
mediation process. Fourthly, they should underline the
importance of national capacity in conflict prevention
and resolution, with the aim of encouraging greater
involvement nationally, including that of women and
young people. Fifthly, they should draw strategic
conclusions from past experiences of good offices, best
practices and lessons learned, and sixthly, they should
help focus the international community's attention on
the root causes of conflicts by acting before they occur.

Morocco is firmly committed to the principle of
the peaceful settlement of disputes, as enshrined in
Chapter VI of the Charter of the United Nations. Since
our independence, we have played a key mediating role
within the framework of the United Nations and at the
bilateral, regional and subregional levels, particularly
in Africa and the Middle East, a role based on our
firm belief in the principle of collective security and
in the centrality of the United Nations in promoting the
peaceful settlement of disputes. In addition, following
the General Assembly's adoption of resolution 65/283
encouraging Member States to promote regional
mediation initiatives, in 2012 Morocco and Spain
launched the Med-Med Initiative, promoting mediation
in the Mediterranean region. This unique experience
has enabled participants in the Initiative to achieve
concrete results, such as mapping all mediation actors,
as well as organizing several workshops, including one
dedicated to the work of women in mediation. Morocco
has also been part of the Mediterranean Women
Mediators' Network, launched by Italy in 2017, and has
actively participated in building valuable contacts and
enlarging the scope of experiences and best practices
for strengthening the role of women as drivers of peace
across the Mediterranean.
Morocco remains more committed than ever to
contributing to resolving conflicts at every stage
by fostering preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping
operations, mediation, disarmament and peacebuilding
efforts, and through dedicated collaborative
partnerships and South-South cooperation, aimed at
ensuring the benefits of economic development at the
regional level.

Before concluding, I would like to share a few
thoughts on how we as Member States, together with
the United Nations, can further promote mediation
for conflict resolution and the settlement of disputes.
First, we should focus on the key role that the
Security Council can play by promoting mediation
as a key aspect of the maintenance of international
peace and security. Secondly, a better knowledge and
understanding of disputes and their intricate dynamics
is key to preparing for any mediation effort. Thirdly,
to be successful, those efforts must be guided by
clear parameters and priorities while preventing any
proliferation of stakeholders. And fourthly, it is crucial
that the United Nations and the Security Council take
back the lead on any mediation process that does not
meet the prerequisites for successful mediation.

In conclusion, I would like to congratulate the
Secretary-General on his new strategy of putting
conflict prevention, mediation and the primacy
of political solutions at the centre of the work and
priorities of the United Nations. I would also like
to thank the Department of Political Affairs for
supporting our efforts to promote mediation and the
Med-Med Initiative.Morocco will continue its strong
support for the Department of Political Affairs, as
it has for many years. It is our conviction that, if the
international community manages to unlock the full
potential of mediation and conflict prevention, then the
United Nations will be able to act in advance of any
crisis and to invest considerable human and financial
resources to benefit development.

