Mr. Pascoe: Since we have tried to brief the
Security Council regularly on the situations in Libya,
Syria, Yemen and Bahrain, I will limit today's briefing
to its traditional topics.

As popular protest and political change continue
to sweep the region, the Israeli-Palestinian political
process remains at a dangerous standstill. The
Secretary-General is increasingly worried about the
impasse. The resumption of meaningful negotiations is
urgent.

In that context, the Secretary-General hopes that
both parties will demonstrate a renewed determination
to achieve a peace agreement that provides for two
States living side by side in dignity, security and peace,
consistent with long-established and recognized
parameters. He believes that President Obama, in his
speech of 19 May, offered important ideas that could
help the peace talks to move forward, consistent with
international positions and responding to the legitimate
core concerns of both parties. He encourages Prime
Minister Netanyahu and President Abbas to respond
positively to that important speech.

The Quartet agrees that moving forward on the
basis of territory and security provides a foundation for
Israelis and Palestinians to reach a final resolution of
the conflict through serious and substantive
negotiations and mutual agreement on all core issues.
In a statement on 20 May, the Quartet reiterated its
strong appeal to the parties to overcome the current
obstacles and resume direct bilateral negotiations
without delay or preconditions.
The Secretary-General strongly supports the
convening of the Quartet at the principals level soon.
The Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace
Process and Personal Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Robert Serry, is in close contact
with his fellow envoys in that regard, and with the
parties. In addition, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
France, Mr. Alain Juppe, made proposals for resuming
negotiations, and the High Representative of the
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy, Baroness Catherine Ashton, visited the region
to impress upon the parties the European Union's sense
of urgency and concern.

During the reporting period, Fatah and Hamas
leaders met under Egyptian auspices to discuss the
implementation of the reconciliation agreement
concluded in Cairo on 4 May. Factional representatives
also met in Moscow and Ankara. On 24 May, the
League of Arab States discussed ways to support the
implementation of the Palestinian reconciliation
agreement and to provide financial assistance to the
Palestinians. President Abbas also held consultations in
Saudi Arabia on 13 June. However, no agreement has
yet been reached on the composition of the proposed
Government.

We recall the Secretary-General's consistent
support of efforts for Palestinian unity in line with
resolutions 1850 (2008) and 1860 (2009). We wish to
see unity in the framework of the positions of the
Quartet and the commitments of the Palestine
Liberation Organization and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We urge the parties to implement their agreement
accordingly. It is vital that, until elections are held, any
Government be committed to the programme of
President Abbas and maintain security cooperation in
the West Bank and calm in Gaza.

Security cooperation between the Palestinian
Authority and Israel in the West Bank continues, and
must be maintained. I welcome the announcement that
an eighth battalion of Palestinian security forces will
be trained in Jordan with international assistance,
bringing the number of internationally trained
Palestinian security forces maintaining law and order
in the West Bank to around 4,000.

We count on Israel's continued cooperation in
keeping up regular transfers of value added tax and
customs revenues collected on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority, in line with its international obligations.
11-38534
Those transfers help to ensure the payment of salaries
for essential State functions, including security. It is
also critical that donors commit additional funds to
support the Palestinian Authority's recurrent budgetary
expenditures, given its projected budget gap of
approximately $300 million for the year.

We will continue to work towards the full
implementation of all aspects of resolution 1860 (2009)
regarding Gaza. An overall state of calm between Israel
and Gaza has generally prevailed for the past 10 weeks.
However, during the reporting period, two rockets and
two mortars were fired at Israel from Gaza, fortunately
causing no injuries or damage, while Israel conducted
six incursions and one air strike. One Palestinian
civilian was killed by Israeli fire on 21 May while
approaching the border fence during the night, and two
civilians were injured by Israeli forces on 20 and
29 May, respectively. We continue to urge calm and
restraint for the sake of the civilian populations on both
sides.

On 16 June, the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) summer games were launched in Gaza,
providing thousands of children with recreational and
learning activities. We welcome Israel's approval,
earlier this week, of a further $100 million in UNRWA
construction projects, in particular 1,100 UNRWA
housing units in Khan Younis and Rafah and a further
18 UNRWA schools, bringing the total of approved
United Nations reconstruction over the past 15 months
to approximately $265 million. We continue to stress
that the market in aggregate, steel bar and cement can
and should be liberalized by the Israeli authorities.

On 25 May, Egypt announced extended working
hours and eased crossing procedures for persons at the
Rafah crossing point between Gaza and Egypt, subject
to security checks. Difficulties have surfaced between
Egypt and the de facto Hamas authorities in the
implementation of that adjustment. Efforts continue to
combat the smuggling of weapons through tunnels.

In relation to reports that a new flotilla is planned
in the next few days, I want to reiterate today the
strong view of the United Nations that assistance for
the population of Gaza should be delivered through
official crossings. The Secretary-General has called
upon, and written letters to, Governments concerned to
use their influence to discourage flotillas, which carry
the potential for dangerous escalation. All involved
11-38534
must act responsibly and with caution to avoid any
violent incidents.

On 25 June, Israeli Staff Sergeant Gilad Shalit
will have spent five years in Hamas captivity. We urge
humanitarian access to him and his immediate release,
and hope that prisoner-exchange efforts will bear fruit.
This would impact favourably on the situation of
several thousand Palestinian prisoners in Israel and on
the broader political atmosphere. The Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle
East Peace Process uses its contacts with all parties to
support efforts in this regard.

Israeli settlement activity continued in violation
of international law and the Road Map. According to
the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics, construction
was under way on 1,774 units in the first quarter of
2011 in the West Bank, excluding East Jerusalem. The
Ministry of Defence approved an additional 294 units
in the settlement of Beitar Illit during the reporting
period. Settlement activity is continuing in East
Jerusalem as well. I note with concern the conduct of a
dedication ceremony at the settlement of Ma'aleh
Zeitim, in the heart of the Palestinian East Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Ras Al-Amud, in the presence of the
Knesset Speaker and senior Cabinet members.

We are concerned that continued demolitions in
Area C are displacing Palestinians from their
communities. The Israeli Defence Forces (IDF)
demolished 81 Palestinian structures in the West Bank,
including two in East Jerusalem, displacing 260
people, including 145 children. This included the
demolition of 29 structures in Al-Hadidiya and in the
northern Jordan Valley on 21 June. The planning
regime applied by the Israeli authorities in this area
prohibits residents from constructing any structures in
their community.

On 5 June, large crowds of demonstrators in two
locations in the Golan attempted to breach the ceasefire
line and cross the technical fence. This incident has
been reported by the Secretary-General in his current
report (S/2011/359) on the United Nations
Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF), and
Assistant-Secretary General Edmond Mulet will brief
the Council after this meeting. The IDF first responded
with verbal warnings through a loudspeaker, the use of
tear gas and warning shots above the crowd. It then
employed live fire to prevent demonstrators from
reaching the fence, resulting in reports of 23 people
3
killed and many more wounded. UNDOF helped calm
the situation and is seeking to confirm the facts.

The Secretary-General, who had sent appeals for
calm, responsibility and restraint to all parties
throughout the region, regretted the loss of life and
condemned the use of violence and all actions intended
to provoke violence. He called for maximum restraint
on all sides and strict observance of international
humanitarian law to ensure the protection of civilians,
while reminding the Syrian authorities of their
obligation to protect UNDOF personnel and facilities.

Riots took place the following day in the
Yarmouk Palestinian refugee camp in Syria during
funerals for those killed, apparently in frustration
against Palestinian factions based in Syria that had
encouraged the breach attempt, resulting in a reported
12 killed.

There were no demonstrations along the Blue
Line on 5 June during the so-called An-Naksa day
events. Following the confrontation on 15 May, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon discussed
measures to prevent further incidents with the parties.
On 2 June, the Lebanese Armed Forces decided to
strictly forbid demonstrators from entering the area
south of the Litani River and to impose strict security
measures along certain portions of the Blue Line.
Following this decision, Palestinian organizations
cancelled protests along the Blue Line and opted
instead to hold a day-long sit-in in refugee camps.

Demonstrations in the West Bank resulted in
approximately 120 Palestinians and one Israeli soldier
injured, and 15 Palestinians arrested by the IDF. In
other demonstrations during the reporting period,
violent clashes between anti-barrier protestors and
Israeli security forces resulted in 95 Palestinians
injured and numerous arrests and cases of gas
inhalation. The IDF conducted 386 search operations in
the occupied West Bank, in which 139 Palestinians
were injured and 329 arrested, among them three
members of the Palestinian Legislative Council, from
the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine and
Hamas, and two Fatah leaders, while 25 Israeli security
officers were also injured.

Israeli settler attacks against Palestinians and
their property in the West Bank resulted in 13
Palestinian injuries and extensive material damage.
Palestinian property was vandalized in Nablus on
29 May by Israelis visiting Joseph's Tomb, a nearby

Palestinian-controlled religious site. In response to the
IDF's dismantling of a settlement outpost on 2 June
near the Shiloh settlement, settlers attacked
Palestinians and their property under the so-called
price-tag policy. A mosque in the village of
Al-Mughayar was set on fire and its outside walls were
sprayed with graffiti on 7 June. The Israeli Government
condemned this attack. The Special Coordinator
condemned the desecration and called on the Israeli
Government to ensure the accountability of those
responsible and to protect the human rights of
Palestinians and their property, including religious
sites.

Please allow me to turn to the situation in
Lebanon. On 13 June, Prime Minister Mikati
announced the formation of a new Government, which
in large part is composed of the 8 March coalition.
According to the Lebanese Constitution, the new
Government must present its programme to Parliament
and gain its confidence within 30 days. Let me be
clear: the Secretary-General expects the new
Government to reiterate its commitment to the full
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and to all of
Lebanon's international obligations.

On 18 June, armed clashes between the
predominantly Sunni neighbourhood of Bab
al-Tabbaneh and the predominantly Alawite
neighbourhood of J abal Mohsen, in the northern city of
Tripoli, left six people dead and 22 others injured. The
clashes erupted after demonstrations in support of
anti-regime protests in Syria.

The United Nations continues to monitor
developments along Lebanon's northern border. The
influx of Syrian nationals into northern Lebanon,
which reached an estimated 4,000 persons in mid-May,
has virtually stopped since early June. This is
attributed to the imposition by Syrian authorities of
additional security measures along the border. The
United Nations is coordinating closely with the
Government of Lebanon on the provision of assistance
to the displaced and on matters of protection and the
determination of their status.

The situation faced by Palestinian refugees living
in Lebanon continues to be a matter of concern. I urge
donors to continue and, if possible, increase their
support for regular UNRWA programmes aimed at
delivering basic services, such as education and health
care, to Palestinian refugees, and for the reconstruction
of the Nahr al-Bared camp in northern Lebanon, which
was destroyed in 2007.

As the sixteenth report of the Secretary-General
on the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) is to
be submitted soon, I will not elaborate today on the
important developments in recent weeks that fall under
the purview of that resolution.

In conclusion, with both the Palestinians and
Israelis stressing their desire to negotiate, President
Obama's speech contained ideas that the international
community can rally behind to offer a framework to
resume talks and seek an agreement. The
Secretary-General looks forward to the Quartet giving
impetus to this objective through a meeting at the
principals level soon.
11-38534

But what is most important is that the leaders on
the ground rise to the challenge. They face political
risks and there are many questions in the minds of their
publics. There is also a gulf of confidence between the
parties. But we appeal to them to return to negotiations
in the interests of their respective peoples, without
further delay, and to negotiate seriously in order to
reach an agreement. We will continue to work with the
parties and our regional and international partners in
this cause.

