Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Ijoin
previous speakers in welcoming Mr. Leonid Kozhara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine, to the Security
Council, and in thanking him for briefing us on his
priorities for 2013 in his capacity as Chairperson-in-
Office ofthe Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE).

Now with 57 States members, the OSCE occupies
a unique place among the regional organizations with
which the United Nations is called upon to cooperate
under Chapter VIII of its Charter. It has an important
role to play in settling conflicts and promoting
human rights in Europe and Central Asia. Mongolia's
recent accession to OSCE membership illustrates the
organization's ongoing appeal beyond Europe's borders.

As an OSCE member, Luxembourg fully supports
the Ukrainian chairmanship's desire to take advantage
of the momentum resulting from the Astana summit in
2010 to deepen the discussion of the vision of a Euro-
Atlantic and Eurasian security community that is free,
democratic, united and indivisible. The "Helsinki+40"
process launched at the Ministerial Council meeting
in Dublin in December can help the OSCE realize
its ambitious vision centred on a global approach to
security that can encompass the political-military,
economic and environmental, and human dimensions.

We are particularly interested in the human
dimension, which is an essential element of any modern
security architecture and should be a priority within
the OSCE. It is important that Ukraine continue the
work begun by the Lithuanian and Irish chairmanships
on freedom of expression and freedom of the media,
including digital media. We commend the important
work that has been done in the area of electoral
observation and assistance by the OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.

The United Nations and the OSCE are founded
on shared values and principles. It is therefore quite
natural for the two organizations to cooperate closely.
We welcome the memorandums of intent signed
between the OSCE and the United Nations Office for
Disarmament Affairs aimed at developing a partnership
for peace and disarmament initiatives and combating
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
promoting the implementation of resolution 1540
(2004) at the regional level. We also welcome the
OSCE's efforts in partnership with the United Nations,
particularly the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime, to combat transnational organized crime, such
as trafficking in drugs and humans.

On the ground, the OSCE cooperates actively with
the United Nations. It has demonstrated its ability to
play an essential role in concert with other regional
organizations in settling conflicts and promoting
peace. It does so in Afghanistan, the Balkans and
Eastern Europe, in the context of the conflict in
Moldova over Transdniestria. It is also the case in the
southern Caucasus, through the Minsk Group and the
Geneva discussion process, as well as in Central Asia.
To cite only the latter example, we commend the OSCE
for working closely with the United Nations Regional
Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in Central Asia on the
cross-border challenges connected to the management
of water and energy resources and to combating
terrorism.

We note with interest that the Ukrainian
chairmanship of the OSCE has made dealing with
prolonged and unsettled conflicts in the organization's
zone its top priority. Any progress towards a lasting
solution to such conflicts will be an important
contribution to peace and security in the region.

Luxembourg will chair the OSCE Forum for
Security Cooperation for the last four months of this
year. As our Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs announced at the Ministerial Council
meeting in Dublin in December, Luxembourg intends
to support, within that framework, efforts to improve
coordination with the United Nations in the area of small
arms and light weapons. We will organize two security
dialogues in September with the aim of promoting the
implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty. Finally,
my country will chair the discussions on the political
and military priorities for 2014 to be submitted for
adoption by the Ministerial Council meeting in Kiev
in December.

In conclusion, I would like to assure the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Ukraine that Luxembourg will
spare no effort in promoting the progress achieved by
the OSCE in all its facets and the cooperation between
the United Nations and the OSCE for international
peace and security.

