The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Paul Badji, Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People.

Mr. Badji (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the
Palestinian People (spoke in French): First, I offer you,
Sir, my most respectful greetings and heartfelt
congratulations on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of March. I am
convinced that under your enlightened guidance, the
Security Council will successfully conclude its
deliberations.

I take this opportunity also to congratulate your
predecessor, Ambassador Wang Guangya, Permanent
Representative of the People's Republic of China, on
the outstanding manner in which he presided over the
work of the Council during the month of February.
I am grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
other members of the Council for this opportunity to
address this body for the first time as Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People. But I regret that this privilege
has been granted to me to participate in the Council's
important debate on a matter of such gravity: the
situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian
question, and in particular the tragic assassination of
Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, spiritual leader of Hamas, and
of his relatives and companions. This was premeditated
murder carried out according to a cold-blooded plan
decided upon by the Israeli Cabinet.

It is regrettable that today, instead of assessing
progress in the Israel-Palestine peace process, the
Council must consider this tragic turn of events in the
occupied Palestinian territories. In a climate of
deteriorating trust between the two protagonists, Israel
has exacerbated an already volatile situation by
assassinating the spiritual leader of Hamas, Sheikh
Ahmed Yassin. The international community has
expressed its indignation, and many voices have been
raised in condemnation of this irresponsible act, which
violates international law and which will probably
revive Palestinian frustration and anger.

Consistent with its practice and in the face of this
mounting danger, the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People condemns
extrajudicial executions and deadly attacks against
innocent Palestinians: acts that poison the political
climate in the region and push back the prospect of a
just and lasting settlement of the Palestinian problem.

The Committee endorses the call by a number of
world leaders who have publicly appealed to the
conscience of all men and all women to refuse to be
apathetic witnesses to the destruction of the Palestinian
people. Here, the Committee demands again that the
Israeli Government immediately put an end to the
untold suffering that is the daily lot of the Palestinians,
and to return to the Palestinians their land, by putting
an end to curfews and by dismantling barriers and the
separation wall. The Committee further demands an
immediate end to the siege laid against the Palestinian
Authority and its President, Yasser Arafat.

Finally, the Committee appeals to the wisdom of
the Security Council and requests it to join the
international community in expressing unequivocal
condemnation of the assassinations that have plunged
Palestine and the rest of the Middle East into
mourning, and to act to cause Israel to renounce its
policy of denying the Palestinian people their
inalienable rights.

The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People urges both parties to
refrain from any action that could exacerbate an
already bad situation, and calls on the Quartet to exert
all its influence to expedite the long-awaited
implementation of the road map, which is the only
viable option to ensure security for both parties and
thus to guarantee lasting peace in a stable Middle East
at peace within itself.

The President (spoke in French): I call next on
the representative of Saudi Arabia.


