Mr. Neewoor (Mauritius): Ijoin my colleagues in
extending a warm welcome to the new Permanent
Representative of Tunisia.

My delegation wishes to thank Mr. Petritsch, the
High Representative for the Implementation of the
Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
candid briefing that he has given us this morning. We
also thank him for the comprehensive report that he has
submitted under the cover of his letter dated 12 March
to the Secretary-General.

We have taken note of the strenuous efforts
undertaken by Mr. Petritsch to implement the Peace
Agreement. We appreciate the courageous measures
taken to establish and strengthen vital institutions, so
important for the consolidation of multi-ethnic
democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular,
we welcome the establishment of an independent
judicial commission charged with bringing about
reforms to the justice system and the measures being
taken to strengthen human rights institutions. We
believe that the education sector should equally receive
the highest possible attention since schools are where
the younger generation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
have to translate into reality the ideal of multi-ethnic
harmony and coexistence.

We note with satisfaction that important
economic reforms are underway. Obviously, a
prosperous economy provides opportunities for
employment for the people and reduces the risk of
inter-communal tensions. We are also pleased that
refugees are now able to return home in larger
numbers. This is indicative of an improvement in inter-
ethnic understanding. We have no doubt that Mr.
Petritsch will continue to do, as a high priority,
everything possible to help create conditions so that all
refugees and displaced persons can return to the homes
that they abandoned due to the conflict.

We understand fully the challenges that Mr.
Petritsch faces with ethnic tensions rising again across
the border of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We wish to
encourage him to confront any new nationalistic action
that spills over into Bosnia and Herzegovina with the
determination that he has demonstrated in all his work
so far. We assure him of the total support of our
delegation.

