Mr. Fernandez Revollo (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First and foremost, we
would like to thank the President for having convened
this meeting this morning. We would also like to pay
tribute to the hard work of the Group of Friends of Haiti,
as they participated in the drawing up of the text of
resolution 2350 (2017). We also thank the members of
the Security Council for having adopted the resolution.

Bolivia would like to reiterate its commitment
to the bright present and future of the Republic of
Haiti. We believe that the international community
needs to work as one in order to support the economic
development of Haiti and to ensure the stability of this
brother country. We would like to underscore the point
that the international community's efforts need to be
pursued in close coordination and cooperation with
the Haitian Government and the authorities within the
country, always taking their priorities into account. Our
support for them must fully respect their sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity.

In line with the position expressed by the
representative of Haiti, we would like to echo the
welcome to all that has been achieved in terms ofsecurity
and stability. Many of these achievements will pave the
way for a period of transition that will, in time, allow
the Haitian National Police to increasingly assume full
responsibility for the policing responsibilities in their
country. We support the Haitian statement with respect
to the convergence of opinion between Haiti and the

United Nations with regard to the orderly drawdown and
withdrawal of the United Nations Stabilization Mission
in Haiti (MINUSTAH). We hope that the new mission,
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti,
which will replace MINUSTAH, will continue to work
in close partnership with the national security forces
in Haiti, contributing to the full implementation of the
rule of law within Haiti and the upholding of human
rights, in line with the recommendations outlined in the
latest report of the Secretary-General (S/20l7/223) and
fully commensurate with the needs and priorities set by
the Government and people of Haiti.

In the same vein, we believe that the Security
Council must continue to regularly assess the situation
on the ground in Haiti. It is for that reason that, as we
have previously announced, it is Bolivia's intention,
under our presidency in June, to carry out a visit of
the Security Council to Haiti as a demonstration of our
ongoing interest in that country and continue to work
with it. That visit will enable us to receive information
first hand from the authorities in Haiti and to see for
ourselves the process of drawing down MINUSTAH
and the planning of a transition between MINUSTAH
and its replacement mission. We believe that a visit
in June will be the perfect opportunity to assess the
situation on the ground. The visit will partially be to
see how the Security Council can further contribute
to the stabilization of Haiti over the long-term and
how we can work with the people of Haiti to deliver
development for the country.

In order to achieve that overall purpose, we would
like to underscore the importance of cooperation
between the new mission and the country team of the
United Nations. All of the aforementioned elements can
make a valuable contribution to the pre-planning for the
new mission that the Secretary-General will establish.
The Security Council's visit will be important for our
understanding of the new mission and our understanding
of what the elements of that mission need to be, all in
order to ensure that everybody is speaking with one
voice and acting in concert. We need to have a proper
understanding of the needs of the State in the current
reality so that we could probably assist and design the
replacement mission appropriately.

We would like to echo the words of the Chair of
the Group of Friends of Haiti, the representative of
Uruguay, particularly with respect to the language used
in paragraph 18, which is borrowed from a resolution on
another mission and thus reflects an entirely different
reality from that in Haiti. That sews doubt over what
has been happening in Haiti. We would like to make
the point that paragraph 18 in no way reflects the
reality on the ground in Haiti. It casts aspersions on the
actions of MINUSTAH's troops and police and in no
way reflects their behaviour. Bolivia has participated
in MINUSTAH in a professional and dedicated manner.
We enjoy the appreciation and recognition of the Haitian
people, which we are proud of.

We believe that the reference to Chapter VII in the
resolution in this particular instance does not properly
reflect the reality in the country. Similarly, the idea
of simply standardizing paragraphs for all Security
Council resolutions pertaining to peacekeeping
operations is neither workable nor beneficial to missions
or to the work of the Security Council. We cannot
have a one-size-fits-all approach to all peacekeeping
operations. They will have their differences. Each
reality and each set of circumstances are different.
We must tailor the language of resolutions to those
different realities.

In the new era in which Haiti finds itself, Bolivia
would like to reiterate its commitment to its Haitian
brothers and sisters as they seek to develop a stable
democracy and sustainable development. We will work
together with the Security Council and the entire United
Nations in order to continue that support.

