Mr. ibogar (Slovenia): At the outset, allow me
to thank Brazil and my friend Foreign Minister Antonio
de Aguiar Patriota for convening today's important and
timely debate on the interdependence between security
and development. I welcome the decision to build upon
the relevant conclusions of recent Security Council
debates addressing peace and security from different
angles. The adoption of the presidential statement
(S/PRST/2011/4) is a significant contribution to that
end.

I want to thank the Secretary-General for his
insightful remarks, which gave us a clearer idea of the
problems and opportunities. At the same time, I
appreciate the respective contributions by the Chair of
the Peacebuilding Commission and by the
representative of the World Bank.

Let me also take this opportunity to congratulate
the new non-permanent members of the Security
Council, namely, Colombia, Germany, India, Portugal
and South Africa. I also wish to congratulate Bosnia
and Herzegovina for its very successful presidency in
January.

Slovenia fully aligns itself with the statements to
be delivered on behalf of the European Union and of
the Human Security Network.

Over the past few years, increasingly more
attention has been paid to conflict prevention and to
the security-development nexus, including the
complementarity, coordination and coherence of
multilateral cooperation. We have come to realize that
in today's globalized world, distance has lost its
meaning. A country may be situated on the other side
of the world, but its problems reach us all. We know
that there can be neither peace nor security without
sustainable development, and vice versa. It is more
likely for conflicts to break out in countries with a
large population living in poverty and inequality of
wealth and in those where human rights and the rights
of minorities and ethnic groups are not respected.
We therefore need to focus on addressing the root
causes of conflicts, achieving sustainable development,
good governance and the rule of law and promoting
respect for human rights and a culture of tolerance.
Preventing unnecessary deaths and ensuring that all

people live free of fear and want and in dignity are a
matter of solidarity and moral imperative. Over 1
billion people live in fragile and conflict-affected
States. We need to help build effective and resilient
national institutions that prevent a country from
slipping back into conflict. We need to invest more in
prevention. The costs of conflicts are high, and the
unrest can spill over to neighbouring countries and the
wider region. Economic development reduces the risk
of the onset of a conflict, while deprivation from
economic and political participation can catalyse one.

Unstable security situations and armed violence
and conflict, which lead to a breakdown of the rule of
law and, very often, to massive human rights
violations, pose a serious threat to human development
and the progress made on the Millennium Development
Goals. We need to effectively manage the crucial phase
of transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding.
Peacekeepers should be able to contribute to the early
phases of peacebuilding where they are in a position to
do so.

A well-coordinated and timely combination of
political, development, security and humanitarian
measures is needed in order to provide an efficient
response to such situations. The Peacebuilding
Commission plays an important role in that respect.
Slovenia supports the strengthening of institutional
arrangements between the various United Nations
actors, along with closer cooperation and dialogue
between the Security Council and the Peacebuilding
Commission. We welcome ongoing efforts to enhance
coordination between the United Nations and the
World Bank. There is a need to strengthen international
civilian capacities for post-conflict peacebuilding, and
we welcome the recommendations of the Secretary-
General's report on the review of international civilian
capacities in that respect.

Slovenia has been an active participant in
peacebuilding and institution-building efforts. Slovenia
implements various humanitarian and development
cooperation projects to provide help in areas affected
by war or other security challenges - for example,
demining projects carried out by the International Trust
Fund for Demining and Mine Victims Assistance and
the project for the rehabilitation of children affected by
the recent conflict in Gaza.

Humanitarian demining and mine-victim
assistance contribute to security in post-conflict
societies and enable the restoration of economically
viable land and institutions, thus helping victims and
their families while, at the same time, lessening the
suffering and contributing to the rebuilding of social
structures. Based on Slovenia's experiences in the
Western Balkans, we can affirm that humanitarian
demining can offer the parties a technical platform for
dialogue, which can consequently lead to regional
cooperation.

In societies where the local population suffers the
consequences of conflict, the understanding of national
and local contexts is crucial to effective conflict
resolution and peacebuilding. However, one must not
forget that political conditions are country-specific and
that blueprint solutions may not be universally
applicable. For successful human, economic and social
development, the dependence of a society on
international assistance has to be gradually but
steadfastly reduced, and its self-reliance promoted.
That has to be a step-by-step process. Nevertheless, it
is vital to increase the local population's stake and
ownership as the guiding principles of partnerships
between security and development actors on the
ground.
32

Therefore, the participation of civil society,
including the most vulnerable groups, in the
development and implementation of peacebuilding and
post-conflict processes is of major importance. That is
why we must consistently promote the significant role
of women and encourage their participation and full
involvement in post-conflict activities and societies,
especially because women are important drivers of
social, family and economic lives in conflict and post-
conflict situations.

Allow me to conclude by saying that the
partnership between security and development needs to
be strengthened and must include global, international,
regional and local actors and civil society. There is no
development without security, and a lack of security
can seriously undermine development.

