Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): In a
few days, the third year of the intifada of the
Palestinian people will begin. This week, the occupied
Palestinian territories witnessed an escalation in the
brutal violence being perpetrated by the Israeli
occupation forces. It witnessed the destruction and
siege of the headquarters of the Palestinian President,
Yasser Arafat. That violence, which has gone on for the
past six weeks, comes at a time when the Palestinian
people, in all their groupings and factions, have
exercised self-restraint, hoping to achieve real detente,
leading to a quieting of the situation in general, thus
opening the way to serious negotiations for the two
parties to achieve peace. Everyone has taken note of
the Palestinian self-restraint, which has continued for
six weeks - not just seven days - despite the ongoing
operations and acts of violence and oppression by the
Israeli army during that prolonged period.

The world has witnessed the ongoing killing of
Palestinian civilians. We have all heard with
amazement and anger many statements by Israeli
officials, not about peace efforts, ending confrontation
and returning to constructive dialogue, but ecstatic
repetitions of their visions of the coming full victory
over all Palestinians, breaking their will and
extinguishing the torch of Palestinian resistance.

Unfortunately, there are trends in Israel that
envisage that military action, the use of force, killing,
siege, starvation and destruction of the human and
economic infrastructures of the Palestinian society will
achieve their objective through domination and
continuation of the occupation.

However, we would like to tell them very clearly
that they will fail. We reject their policies and actions
and advise them to learn from the lessons of history
and of resistance against occupation and colonialism.
This resistance cannot be broken. Violence can only
lead to violence.

Here we would like to say clearly to the people of
Israel that they cannot overcome the will of the
Palestinians to resist occupation, regardless of Israel's
military might or equipment or its oppressive policies.
On the contrary, Israel's actions will only lead to more
pain and suffering for both parties. This state of affairs
will continue until Israel recognizes that goodwill,
negotiations, a return to trust and an end to the
occupation are the key to stability, peace and security.

A hand covered in Palestinian blood has raised
the Israeli flag over the headquarters of the Palestinian
leader, thereby challenging not only the will of the
Palestinian people but that of the international
community as a whole and the norms of international
law. The Palestinian people will take this flag down.

Egypt, which along with the rest of the
international community has condemned all forms of
violence against civilians on both sides, cannot but
condemn Israel's actions against the headquarters of
President Arafat. We call on Israel to put an end to all
oppressive practices that harm the Palestinian people
and their national leadership.

Security cannot be achieved through arrogant and
indiscriminate use of force. True, stable and lasting
security can be achieved only through a peace that is
based on justice and on respect for the rights of others.

Egypt reiterates that peace between the Israeli
and the Palestinian peoples can be achieved only if
Israel refrains from acts of aggression and withdraws
from the occupied Palestinian territories to the line of 4
June 1967, and if a Palestinian State is established,
with East Jerusalem as its capital. This is the path to
peace, security and stability in the Middle East and the
path to relations of good-neighbourliness and
cooperation.

The international community, represented in the
Council, is called on today to shoulder its
responsibility to put an end to the tragedy that is
tearing apart the Holy Land. It must enforce
international humanitarian law and facilitate the return
of both sides to the negotiating table. This would help
to open the way towards the desired settlement.

One of the basic steps we deem important and
necessary is the provision of international protection
for the Palestinian people in a manner decided on by
the international community.

I wish to make one last, important point, which
concerns the manner in which the Council has been
dealing with the situation prevailing in the occupied
territories and the actions of the occupying Power. In
our opinion, the Council has been merely witnessing
the events of the past few days, as if this matter did not
concern it or as if these events were taking place on
another planet. The Council must intervene to remedy
the situation and to put an end to the actions of the
occupying Power. If it does not, its failure to act will
send a dangerous signal to all those who have put their
trust in international law and in the role of the United
Nations in today's world.

