Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, and your country,
France, for organizing this important and timely open
debate on the subject of child victims of non-State
armed groups, under the agenda item of children and
armed conflict. I would also like to congratulate you
warmly on your outstanding leadership during France's
presidency of the Security Council and for the major
role you played in preparing and implementing the
Council's field trip to my country, Burundi. I will
not forget the substantive, animated and hotly argued
debate on the afternoon of 13 March that you moderated
during your meeting with political parties and civil-
society organizations in Bujumbura. Our democracy
emerged from it the wiser.

I would like to thank you for the concept note
(S/2015/168, annex) on the subject we are meeting on
today that you kindly submitted as material for our
discussion. It is concise and well written, researched
and directed. My sincere thanks also go to the
Secretary-General and the other briefers for joining us
this morning in this very interesting debate.

Every year, hundreds of thousands of children
worldwide are enrolled, most of them against their will,
in Government armed forces or non-State armed groups
in conflict. They are thereby exposed to violence both as
witnesses and as direct or indirect victims. The impact
on their mental health and physical well-being amounts
to a violation of their rights as children and their most
fundamental human rights, besides the serious threats it
poses to peace and development. Similarly, children are
being killed, maimed and, depending on the situation,
sexually abused, abducted and separated from their
families by non-State armed groups every day. This
deplorable trend has become a new tactic used without
compunction by such armed groups. It is also a way of
instilling fear and terror in innocent people, controlling
them and forcing them to leave their family homes and
become refugees in their own country.

We cannot repeat too often that children are more
vulnerable to recruitment and exploitation by armed
groups, at a time when conflicts all over the world are
becoming more brutal, intense and frequent. While it
may be true that Governments around the world have
made progress in recognizing that children have no
place in their own armies, the recruitment and use of
child soldiers continue to be a huge problem, especially
among non-State armed groups, and constitute a
serious violation of international humanitarian law
and international standards of human rights. Injured,
maimed and traumatized by a war that is not of their
choosing, children are left seriously handicapped,
marginalized and rejected when they are victims of
rape or forced marriage. Deprived of their basic rights,
they no longer have access to education, playgrounds,
health care or psychological supervision, and they
suffer from the absence of affection and other traumas
resulting from their time in enforced conscription under
unscrupulous non-State armed groups.

The experience of combat can have devastating
long-term physical and psychological effects on
children, including the loss of limbs, possible exposure
to HIV, emotional problems and reprisals or rejection
by the families and communities to which these young
people wish to return. Such consequences are not only
a major problem for communities affected by war but
also undermine the international community's efforts to
restore peace and promote lasting community recovery
after a conflict.

We believe that all children held by armed groups
should be released without delay. We cannot wait for
peace to return to help children trapped in the turmoil
of war. Even a minute longer in the clutches of such
groups is an eternity for those children. We must point
out that accepting the use of child soldiers in conflict
amounts to accepting the destruction of our own future,
and we must fight to save it, one child at a time. We must
bring them all back, one by one. We firmly believe that
investing in ways to keep children away from the front
lines, particularly through education and support for a
country's economy, is absolutely crucial to their future
and that of their communities.

We should recall that schools and students
continue to be the targets of deliberate attacks. School
facilities are regularly looted or diverted from their
primary function in order to be used for military or
paramilitary purposes. Such acts deprive children, and
the communities whose future and hope they represent,
of a fundamental right, the right to an education. The
ignorance that is the result of a lack of education
encourages intolerance and perpetuates a cycle of
poverty, thus helping to fuel extreme violence.

We would particularly like to highlight the situation
of girls directly or indirectly associated with non-State
armed groups. Girls are even more vulnerable than
their brothers to such groups and are often specifically
targeted by them. They therefore naturally need special
attention and protection. They are at greater risk of rape
or sexual violence, sexual exploitation and even more
devastating abuses such as sexual slavery and forced or
early. Such tragedies tend to get the entire international
community worked up, which is what makes this debate
so relevant, but the persistence of the phenomenon has
raised questions about the ability of the international
community and especially the United Nations to put an
end to it. That is why we need to take urgent action to
give our children hope. These are our proposals. I do
not claim to be reinventing the wheel; some of these
measures already exist, but strengthening them could
make a difference to our protection of our children.

The first is that we must ensure that the inclusion
of specific provisions for protecting children in the
mandates of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
special political missions and peacebuilding missions
becomes a reality. Such measures are effective and
successful, especially if child protection advisers
are integrated systematically into such operations.
However, that must be fully aligned with the child-
protection policy of the relevant department. Secondly,
when it comes to the injustices that children suffer in
the context of armed conflict, especially in relation
to education, investing in basic social services,
particularly by building schools, health centres and
specialist training centres, is an excellent pre-emptive
way of protecting children from involvement or
exploitation in armed conflict. Thirdly, negotiation
and mediation processes should include strengthened
provisions for securing child soldiers' release from the
clutches of non-State armed groups, with a particular
focus on freeing girls who are directly or indirectly
associated with armed groups and providing them with
support after their release.

Fourthly, I should stress the vital importance of
the regional dimension. Local, regional, subregional
and continental stakeholders are well placed to play
a key role in exerting greater pressure on non-State
armed groups in order to put an end to our children's ill
treatment. Cooperation must be strengthened between
the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations that are very close to the areas affected.
Building local, regional and continental capacities is
also necessary in that regard. This is also true of the
process of release and of efforts undertaken at the level
of the countries concerned and by the international
community to rehabilitate or reintegrate children
within their communities of origin.

F ifthly and lastly, we would recall that the protection
and assistance provided to children in situations of
conflict remain inadequate and poorly distributed.
Young people are bearing the consequences of war
because Governments have not allocated sufficient
importance to their needs or their rights; thus the
resources allocated to the settlement of humanitarian
crises vary considerably from one country to another.
Participants in this meeting may have noted that a child
living in Sierra Leone, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo or the Central African Republic does not receive
the same kind of assistance as a child living in Kosovo
or Ukraine. This situation must be rectified.

