Mr. Seger (Switzerland): I am pleased to take the
floor on behalf ofthe Group ofFriends on the Protection
of Civilians, which is composed of Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Liechtenstein, Norway, Portugal, the United
Kingdom, Uruguay and Switzerland as the Chair.

I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate and for inviting
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
Emergency Relief Coordinator Valerie Amos,
Assistant-Secretary-General for Human Rights Ivan
Simonovie and the Director for International Law and
Cooperation of the International Committee of the Red
Cross, Mr. Philip Spoerri.

The latest report of the Secretary-General on the
protection of civilians (S/2012/376) is a stark reminder
of the importance of our continued collective efforts
to address the challenges posed by the protection of
civilians in armed conflict. As we speak, more than
26 million persons are internally displaced because of
armed conflicts and more than 15 million are refugees.

Finding ways of responding more effectively to the
five core challenges identified by the Secretary-General
in his last three reports should help the Security
Council in its deliberations on protecting civilians,
as parties to conflict all too often fail to comply with
their obligations. The widespread violence against
women and children, as well as sexual violence, the
indiscriminate use of weapons in densely populated
areas, and the targeting of schools and health-care
facilities are worrying and unacceptable trends that
must be acknowledged. The Group of Friends believes
that serious and timely consideration should be
given to the concrete recommendations made by the
Secretary-General in that regard in his latest report.

The Group of Friends wishes to use this opportunity
to highlight the need to rebuild consensus around the
concept of the protection of civilians. In our endeavour
to re establish confidence, it is of the utmost importance
to reaffirm the basic tenets of the protection of civilians
as a legal concept based on international humanitarian
law, human rights refugee law and international
criminal law. Ensuring compliance with international
humanitarian law, which applies to all parties to armed
conflict, including the dissemination of international
humanitarian law, is critical to effective protection,
as emphasized in resolution 1894 (2009). Parties must
be reminded time and again that even wars have limits
and those limits apply to all. The Security Council
must demonstrate its leadership in that regard and
systematically reaffirm the basics whenever the need
arises. For the protection message to be understood,
it is essential to promote a positive perception of
humanitarian action, devoid of any political connotation.
Such a perception is also key to the safety and security
of humanitarian actors, who often operate in complex
environments. In that regard, the Group of Friends
looks forward to the conclusion of an ongoing study on
the impact of national counter-terrorism measures on
humanitarian space.

The protection of civilians is a concern for everyone.
We must therefore act together, by strengthening
communication channels between Council members
and troop - and police-contributing countries, for
instance, and by improving cooperation between
the Security Council and other players - Member
States and civil society actors alike. To that end, the
Group of Friends has been briefed by various civil
society organizations working on issues that the
Secretary-General has identified as likely to benefit
from further research and discussion. On the issue of
civilian casualty recording, for instance, the Council's
discussions may benefit from an overview in the next
Secretary-General's report of existing practices, as well
as from specific recommendations on ways to ensure
systematic and reliable data collection in compliance
with humanitarian principles. Parties to conflict have
a duty to assess the impact of their actions on civilians.
Parties to conflict should improve documentation and
transparency - complying with their obligation to
investigate violations under international humanitarian
law - and enable assessment by independent monitors.
The Group of Friends was also briefed on the
humanitarian impact of the use of explosive weapons
in densely populated areas, which was identified as an
issue by the Secretary-General. We call for compliance
with international humanitarian law in the use of
all weapons, to ensure and strengthen international
humanitarian law training for those who operate them
and compliance with international humanitarian law
with respect to targeting.

We also take note with interest of the increasing
practice of some parties to armed conflict to offer
amends in the form of recognition and assistance to
civilians harmed within the lawful parameters of their
combat operations, despite having no legal obligation
to do so. We would encourage the promotion of the
steps taken so far by warring parties committed to the
protection of civilians to minimize civilian harm.

However, I cannot conclude without recalling
that the primary responsibility for the protection
of civilians lies with the State. When international
assistance is provided, it should also be supportive
of the Government's capacity to sustain longer-term
efforts to protect civilians and involve all stakeholders
in a spirit of cooperation that transcends the action of
individual actors involved in protection. United Nations
peacekeeping operations can play an important role in
enhancing the host Government's capacity to protect its
civilians, including through assistance in strengthening
national rule of law and security institutions.

Finally, efforts towards durable solutions
must not exclude accountability. The report of the
Secretary-General contains several recommendations
in that regard. We invite the Security Council to take
them into account when formulating and renewing
mandates.

(spoke in French)

I will now speak briefly in my national capacity. A
longer version of my statement was distributed in the
Chamber.

Switzerland is gravely concerned by the situation
in Syria and firmly condemns the escalation of violence
against civilians. We recall that all allegations of
violence must be investigated so that those responsible
for such acts can be prosecuted. Whoever the
perpetrators of the crimes in Syria are, they must know
that they will have to answer for their acts in a court of
law. Switzerland therefore asks the Security Council to
refer the situation to the International Criminal Court,
which is the appropriate international institution for
prosecuting and judging the alleged authors of crimes
against humanity and war crimes. The struggle against
impunity is a necessary condition for a lasting peace.

I would also like to mention the worrying situation
in the border area between the Sudan and South Sudan.
We are pleased that the question of access to Blue Nile
and South Kordofan states is again being dealt with
specifically by the Security Council.

Humanitarian access remains a critical point in the
protection agenda. In contemporary armed conflicts,
securing and maintaining such access in order to assist
civilians is becoming increasingly difficult. To meet
that challenge, Switzerland has launched a project,
in conjunction with interested partners, to develop
instruments to achieve and maintain humanitarian
access. Those instruments clarify the normative
framework and provide practical information and
advice on humanitarian access.

Non-State armed groups continue to pose a
challenge to the protection of civilians, especially when
it comes to convincing them of the need to improve
their compliance with international law and to allow
humanitarian staff access to populations needing
assistance and protection.

Switzerland calls on the Council and Member States
to take into account the potentially negative effects of
certain measures and legislation adopted while pursuing
the legitimate goal of fighting terrorism. It would be
regrettable if those measures complicated or even
prevented the establishment of a dialogue for purely
humanitarian purposes, prevented access to vulnerable
populations by humanitarian staff or weakened respect
for international humanitarian law by armed groups.

