Mr. Skinner-Klee (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation thanks the Russian Federation, as the
President of the Security Council, for convening this
open debate.

My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.

Although the Council has discussed the situation in
the Middle East on many occasions, this open debate is
timely, given the critical situation affecting the region.
Indeed, indiscriminate military offensives, whether in
Aleppo or Yemen, or recently in Mosul, have victimized
civilians in a barbaric manner, violating the most basic
human right to life. It is unacceptable that civilians
have not been spared the indiscriminate attacks of
armed forces that further threaten international peace
and security.

The abject violence sadly reminds us that Iraq is one
of the countries with the largest displaced populations
in the world, with almost 3.5 million people who have
fled their communities because of indiscriminate
violence. At the same time, the terrible situation in
the Syrian Arab Republic has highlighted the heart-
wrenching reality faced by its civilian population. That
tragic situation is largely due to inaction on the part of
the Council. In Aleppo, alone, about 275,000 people are
trapped in the crossfire between the Syrian army and
its allies and opposition groups, while the international
community is shocked to see the Council incapable of
reaching the minimum consensus, thereby becoming
an ineffective and nearly irrelevant body.

Guatemala regrets the lack of access for
humanitarian aid and calls on the forces on the
ground not to violate international humanitarian law
and to facilitate the affected populations' access to
humanitarian aid. Furthermore, Guatemala joins the
UNICEF strong condemnation of the heinous attack
on a primary school in the city of Dara'a, Syria. Most
shameful of all, regarding the maelstrom of violence, is
the fact that the purposes and principles of the Charter
of the United Nations, whose essential mandate is the
maintenance of international peace and security, are
being rendered null and void by the Council's failure
to meet its Charter-mandated responsibilities, thereby
transforming the tenets of the Charter into mere
rhetoric in the absence of substantive action. Equally
unacceptable are the scale and size of the indiscriminate
bombing, including the use of prohibited weapons, in
densely populated areas. Furthermore, it is regrettable
to see the Council's inaction lead to an increase in
unspeakable violence.

Guatemala supports the efforts made to date by
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Syria,
Mr. Staffan de Mistura. We agree with the Special
Envoy that we must exert all possible pressure to
achieve a cessation of violence and, at the very least,
regular cessations of hostilities to ensure the access
of the civilian population to humanitarian aid. We
consider the unilateral ceasefire to be an important first
step and hope that such action will continue, not only
in Aleppo, but throughout Syrian territory. A ceasefire
is crucial to implementing a humanitarian pause in the
area. Guatemala regrets the fact that no agreement was
reached at the recent discussions between the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation and the
United States of America, in Lausanne, Switzerland.
We therefore urge the parties to do their utmost to
pursue dialogue.

Equally critical is the question of Israel and
Palestine, not only due to the complex history and
the convergence of religions. We share the concern
expressed by the Secretary-General about the decision
of the Israeli authorities to build 98 dwellings as part of
a new settlement, and the establishment of an industrial
complex west of Ramallah, both in the occupied
Palestinian territory in the West Bank. As we have said
here before, walls, checkpoints, violent responses by
security forces, the demolition of homes, restrictions
on non-governmental organizations, violent attacks by
individuals and groups, as well as rocket launches and
disproportionate responses, all impede a solution to the
conflict. Furthermore, we reiterate that the building
of settlements is illegal, fuels the conflict, flouts the
recommendations of the Quartet for Middle East peace
and violates international law. All such actions have
become a clear obstacle to the achievement of a two-
State solution, with both States living peacefully side
by side.

To conclude, Guatemala urges the parties to
continue the dialogue aimed at stabilizing the region,
ensuring respect for human rights and, in particular,
reducing violence towards civilians in the Middle East.
We appeal yet again to each and every member of the
Council to comply with their responsibilities under the
Charter of the United Nations.

