Ms. Ploumen (Netherlands): I would like to start
by thanking you, Madam President, and the United
Kingdom for convening today's important debate. The
horrors of the recent terrorist attacks on innocent people
in various parts of the world remind us that a threat to
one is a threat to all. We have a shared responsibility to
build a more secure world.

The world is winning the fight against poverty.
Never before have so many people escaped hardship in
such a short time. But we know that in the years ahead,
poverty will become more and more concentrated in
places affected by violence and injustice. Ten years
from now, four out of five poor people will have to deal
with fear and human insecurity as part of their daily
lives. The construction of roads, schools and hospitals
will not bring about development if people do not feel
safe.

Strong, inclusive institutions are often taken for
granted by people like me who come from peaceful
and prosperous societies. It is like the ground under our
feet - we do not think about it, we just walk on it.
But imagine if the ground were constantly trembling
beneath us. Imagine waking up every morning not
knowing who to turn to for protection, realizing that
one's freedom, job or business could be taken away
just like that by someone more powerful. Remember
Mohamed Bouazizi, who triggered the Arab Spring
by setting himself on fire because he was fed up with
being exploited every day by the police.

Justice and strong, inclusive institutions are
the bridge between development and peace, and the
foundation for trust between citizens and Government.
But that works only if the law is not used to exclude the
many to the benefit of the few. The rule of law is not
the same as rule by law. Today, the Security Council is
discussing the nexus between security and development,
and some are worried that talking about peace and
conflict prevention in the context of development will
securitize the development discourse.

But I think the opposite is true. Bringing a
development perspective to issues of conflict prevention
and peace will enable us to focus better and earlier on
emerging conflicts and instability. As the Council tries
to focus more on prevention, it must pay attention to
development. Issues such as inequality, poverty and
unemployment have a tremendous impact on the risk of
conflict. We should View development indicators as the
canaries in the coal mine, while justice and legitimate
institutions act as an immune system that can help to
protect countries from violence and from development
in reverse.

Recent reports on peace operations, peacebuilding
and conflict prevention offer the Security Council a
wealth of suggestions for addressing root causes at a
much earlier stage. For the Netherlands, two issues stand
out. First, we support the view that the Security Council
should engage much earlier when a conflict starts to
develop, by adopting a more flexible and sequenced
approach on the basis of conflict analysis. Horizon
scanning and briefings from the Secretary-General
could help the Council in that task. The African-led
International Support Mission in Mali organized by
the Economic Community of West African States is
a good example. It was authorized in resolution 2085
(2012) and later became part of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali.

Secondly, creative approaches are needed to finance
conflict prevention, mediation and peacebuilding. It is
simply unsustainable to rely on a few voluntary donors
to support that very important and central function of
the United Nations. The burden should be shared more
equally among States and stakeholders.

With the adoption of the global Sustainable
Development Goals (General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), the world has turned the importance of peace and
development into an agenda for action. We must deliver
on the pledge we made less than two months ago that
no one would be left behind. We cannot allow fragile
and conflict-affected areas to become the ghettos of the
world.

