Mr. Guehenno: This is the last time I shall have
the honour to introduce a report of the Secretary-
General on the United Nations Mission of Observers in
Prevlaka (UNMOP). The present report (S/2002/ 1341)
summarizes the developments on Prevlaka until 10
December 2002, and as you noted, Sir, on that date -
to our great pleasure - the Governments of Croatia
and of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia signed the
Protocol on the Interim Regime along the Southern
Border between the Two States. That was, without any
doubt, a significant step forward by the two countries
on their way to full normalization of their relations. For
us at the United Nations, it means that the United
Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka, which
monitored the demilitarization of the Prevlaka
peninsula, can withdraw with confidence that their
work has been successfully accomplished.

That task, worthwhile in itself, had two major
effects. It helped to insulate the strategically important
peninsula from the fighting and tensions in the vicinity,
and it later created conditions conducive to
negotiations by the parties on a settlement of the
dispute.

The signing of the Protocol paved the way for a
smooth and orderly handover of the UNMOP area of
responsibility to the local authorities. An expert team
from Croatia is already on the peninsula to work with
UNMOP on the technical aspects of the handover of
the former naval base and its lighthouse, which
incidentally has been maintained and run by UNMOP
military observers for the last 10 years. To the best of
my knowledge it is the first lighthouse ever to be
operated by the United Nations.

The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia has also
nominated personnel for conducting the handover on
its side. Therefore, UNMOP has started the repatriation
of its personnel and by today, 12 December, the
Mission is down to about 10 military observers.
Starting on 15 December, most of them will also be
repatriated, and only three military observers will be
left, to be available for about another week to liaise
with the representatives of the two sides to ensure that
the handover is completed in a secure and effective
manner.

In conclusion, I would like to put on record our
appreciation for those 25 Governments, from all five
continents, which contributed to this truly international
mission. This spirit of internationalism was also
reflected by the successive Chief Military Observers of
UNMOP who came, in the best United Nations
tradition, from all corners of the globe: Colonel Tangai
from Kenya, Colonel Williams from New Zealand and
Colonel Mujica from Argentina. They and the men and
women who served under them, deserve our thanks.

The end of the UNMOP mandate brings to a
close, not only a decade of United Nations involvement
in that part of the Balkans, but also a mission which
demonstrated, as the Secretary-General stated in his
report, that "even a small United Nations presence,
properly conceived and executed, can make a
difference" (S/2002/I34I, para. 12).

