Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to thank you,
Madam President, for organizing today's briefing and
for the flexibility shown to ensure that members of the
Security Council agreed to proceed with today's debate.

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.

As our Swedish colleague stated earlier, from its
inception the United Nations has reaffirmed faith in
fundamental human rights and the dignity and worth
of the human person. Accordingly, promoting and
encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all, without distinction, has been one
of the purposes of the United Nations. That, among
other important factors, is considered imperative for
the creation of conditions of stability and well-being
that are necessary for peaceful and friendly relations
among nations. It is also worth mentioning that,
as was stated in the 2005 World Summit outcome,
development, peace and security and human rights
are interlinked and mutually reinforcing. The Summit
outcome also stressed the universality, indivisibility,
interdependence and interrelatedness of all human
rights, meaning economic, social and political and civil
rights. It further states that all human rights must be
treated in a fair and equal manner, on the same footing,
and with the same emphasis.

In that regard, there is no better embodiment
of that refined notion of human rights than the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development and its motto of
leaving no one behind. Therefore, there is no major
disagreement on the importance of respect for human
rights, conceived as in the foregoing, in fostering peace
and stability. In the light of the evolution of the nature of
conflicts, there is indeed a growing recognition that the
promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms contributes positively to reinforcing peace
and stability, while their wanton disregard and violation
leads to more instability and chaos. That is why the
Council has been giving increasing attention to human
rights issues in the context of addressing the challenges
and threats to international peace and security.

As the concept note has rightly indicated, the
Security Council has been receiving briefings on human
rights issues as part of its consideration of country-
specific situations and thematic issues, including the
protection of civilians, human trafficking, children in
armed conflict, women and peace and security, among
others. A number of important decisions have resulted
from those discussions, which continue to guide the
work of the Council in terms of the linkages between
human rights and peace and security.

Many peacekeeping and special political missions
have also been mandated to monitor and report on
human rights situations. That notwithstanding, it
seems to us self-evident that the protection and the
promotion of human rights do not fall within the
purview of the Security Council. In other words, the
Council considers them only insofar as they relate
to its primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. The primary organ
within the United Nations system responsible for
strengthening the promotion and the protection of
human rights, addressing situations of human rights
violations and promoting the effective coordination
and mainstreaming of human rights within the United
Nations system is indeed the Human Rights Council.

Human rights issues also constitute an important
part of the work of the Third Committee of the General
Assembly, which among others examines human rights
questions, including reports ofthe special procedures of
the Human Rights Council and adopts numerous draft
resolutions submitted under the human rights agenda
item during its annual session. Therefore, we believe
that the Security Council should remain focused on
carrying out its mandated responsibilities, as outlined
in the Charter of the United Nations and not encroach
on the powers and functions of other organs of the
United Nations. Replicating the work of these organs
will not only be inconsistent with the principles of the
Charter, but will also create unnecessary division and
discord. At a time when the Council is not able even to
find common ground in addressing the most pressing
issues of international peace and security, that will
further undermine its ability to effectively carry out its
primary responsibility.

Of course, we cannot ignore the need for improving
the effectiveness and efficiency of the Human Rights
Council and other United Nations human rights
mechanisms in carrying out their mandates, but the
responsibility for that falls within the mandate of other
principal organs of the United Nations, most of all the
General Assembly. Needless to say, the discussions on
human rights issues have always tended to be ideological,
and their susceptibility to politicization and the lack of
the consistency and coherence in dealing with human
rights situations makes it extremely difficult to build
the necessary consensus within the wider membership
of the United Nations. But the solution is not to replace
the functions of those other organs and mechanisms,
but to improve and strengthen them so that they can
effectively deliver on their mandated responsibilities.

However, that does not mean that the Security
Council should remain indifferent to grave instances of
human rights violations and crimes against humanity.
The Council should be able to use all ofthe wide range of
tools at its disposal to respond in a timely and effective
manner to situations that endanger the maintenance of
international peace and security. Unfortunately, the
track record of the Security Council in that regard is far

from reassuring, and that has been the subject of much
political and academic debate for quite some time. It
is undoubtedly overdue for the Council to start being
more self-critical.

In terms of the way forward, the Security
Council would best be served in dealing with human
rights situations by enhancing its constructive and
complementary relations with other principal bodies
of the United Nations and by taking advantage of their
tools and expertise. But, as so clearly indicated in the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), the
general principle to be adhered to is the need for all to
work within their respective mandates, and the role of
the Secretary-General should also not be overlooked.
He may draw the attention of the Security Council to
massive and systematic human rights abuses on the basis
of his sole analysis and assessment of specific human
rights situations, but with full awareness of the need
to respect the sovereignty and the territorial integrity
of States, as well as the principles of international law
governing inter-State relations.

