Mr. Ngoh Ngoh (Cameroon) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing Cameroon's most
sincere condolences to the Afghan people on the
earthquake that has devastated the country, claiming
numerous victims.

My country also welcomes your presence among
us, Mr. Minister, which clearly illustrates the
importance that your country and the international
community attach to the situation in Afghanistan. I
thank Ms. Louise Frechette for her comprehensive
briefing, and the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2002/278).

My delegation welcomes the positive
developments in the political situation in Afghanistan,
in particular the gradual implementation of the Bonn
Agreement. The Interim Authority, established on 22
December 2001, has begun its work and has drafted a
road map for the development of Afghanistan. It has
also set up the Special Independent Commission for the
Convening of the Emergency Loya Jirga, whose work
is already well under way. The Interim Administration
has also begun to establish other institutions provided
for under the Bonn Agreement: the Civil Service,
Judicial and Human Rights Commissions. In that
regard, we welcome the organization of a national
workshop on human rights at Kabul on 9 March 2002,
in which the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights participated.

In spite of the praiseworthy progress made, the
fact remains that the security situation continues to be a
major source of concern. The existence of the vestiges
of Taliban and terrorist forces, clashes between
political and military factions, inter-clan and inter-
ethnic violence and banditry all make the situation
outside Kabul unstable and precarious. We welcome
the positive role played in Afghanistan by the
International Security Assistance Force. We support its
expansion to other major urban centres, as
recommended by the Secretary-General in paragraph
126 of his report, in order to reduce the chances of an
outbreak of hostilities among armed factions. We also
agree with the Secretary-General's view on the need to
give priority to the creation of an effective Afghan
security force and a genuinely multi-ethnic and
apolitical Afghan army.

The humanitarian situation also continues to be
very worrisome, and has worsened with the recent
earthquake. We welcome the praiseworthy efforts that
have been made in this regard by United Nations
agencies, humanitarian organizations and various
countries. We call on donor countries to resolutely
support the Immediate and Transitional Assistance
Programme for the Afghan People, which includes
projects aimed at responding to urgent humanitarian
needs and addresses the country's rehabilitation and
reconstruction.

My delegation supports the comments and
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report on the creation of a United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA), which would be
based on two pillars, namely, political affairs on the
one hand and relief, recovery and reconstruction on the
other. We believe the mission will play a very
important role, especially in ensuring coordination and
consistency among various activities. The General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council should
be included as needed in the establishment of this
structure.

My delegation would also like to pay tribute to
the activities of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Afghanistan, Ambassador
Brahimi, as well as to the entire United Nations team in
the field.

