Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
briefers for their detailed and, indeed, very sobering
insights. We remain deeply concerned about the
violence in Rakhine state and reports of serious human
rights violations and abuses, including those of a
gender-based nature.

It is known that the recent, highly disturbing
developments were triggered by the deadly attacks
of the Arakan Rohingya Salvation Army against the
security forces committed in August, but Ukraine
reiterates that the targeting of any civilian population
is totally unacceptable. We urge the Myanmar military
to show restraint and ensure the immediate protection
of all civilians in Rakhine state. We also call on the
Myanmar authorities to ensure the swift establishment
ofthe rule oflaw and to bring tojustice those responsible
for committing atrocities.

Given the fact that over 626,000 refugees have fled to
Bangladesh to escape violence, we welcome the signing
of the 23 November agreement on the return of displaced
persons from Rakhine state between the Governments
of Myanmar and Bangladesh. That document should
serve the aim of creating proper conditions for the
voluntary, safe and dignified return of refugees to their
places of origin and providing non-discriminatory
access to basic services and justice in Rakhine state.
We express once again our support for the Government
of Bangladesh in its efforts to provide shelter and aid to
all those in need. We also strongly encourage enhanced
partnership and cooperation between the two countries

in addressing common challenges.

Ukraine is seriously concerned by the continuously
worsening humanitarian situation of refugees and
internally displaced persons, and stresses the need for
full and unhindered humanitarian access for the United
Nations and for international and non-governmental
aid agencies across Rakhine state. We recognize
that the situation there is an extremely complicated,
sensitive and challenging issue that cannot be
solved in the short run, but we are confident that the
implementation of the recommendations of the report
of the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State will
help to address complex challenges and achieve peace,
stability and development in the region. We welcome
the initial steps taken by the Myanmar Government
in that regard, including the establishment of the
ministerial-level committee for the implementation of
the recommendations on Rakhine state. Ukraine calls
on the authorities to fulfil those recommendations to
the maximum extent possible and within a reasonable
time frame.

