Mr. Liden (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
today on behalf of the European Union. Turkey,
Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Albania, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia align themselves with
this statement.

This year, Member States and United Nations
system have taken important steps to strengthen
international support to countries emerging from
conflict. We have had debates in this chamber and in
the General Assembly on the matter. Concrete
initiatives are under way to enhance the coherence and
effectiveness of our engagement.

Ending violence is merely the first step in
building peace. Weak State institutions, broken
economic systems and a lack of trust and confidence
between former adversaries remain potent threats to
stability long after a peace agreement has been signed.
The challenge is to ensure basic security while starting
the long process of building sustainable peace. This
requires a comprehensive and coordinated response
from the international community in support of
national efforts.

The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) is
mandated to promote coordination, marshal resources
and advise based on integrated strategies for
peacebuilding. It was created as a forum for policy
coordination at the strategic level among key
international actors, including the international
financial institutions. The Commission can play a
central role in addressing critical gaps in peacebuilding
efforts and contribute to increased coherence among
security, development and humanitarian actors.
Experience shows that the PBC can also be an
important framework for mutual accountability, under
which host Governments and the international
community can be held to account against agreed
commitments. The unique membership of the
Commission provides international legitimacy to
deliver effectively on these roles.

The 2010 review provides an important
opportunity to reinvigorate the vision behind the PBC,
inject renewed political attention and generate a
common understanding on the way forward. In the
review process, we should build on our experiences
from the PBC's first years of operation. We know that
support to post-conflict countries must build on
national ownership and be context specific. The PBC
should therefore be flexible in its engagement,
focusing on a limited set of priorities and building on
existing strategies and capacities at the country level.
We also know that high level commitment and
ownership by the PBC membership is central. We must
ensure that our words and policies correspond with our
actions in countries on the PBC agenda and in relevant
multilateral organizations.

The European Union would welcome a more
structured relationship, including increased interaction,
between the PBC and the Security Council. This would
promote the early inclusion of peacebuilding
perspectives in Security Council considerations and
decisions. We need to ensure better use of synergies
between peacebuilding and peacekeeping, from
mandating and planning to deploying and carrying out
peace support operations.

The processes of reviewing the peacebuilding
architecture and the effectiveness of peacekeeping
operations should be undertaken in tandem. The
recommendations in the Secretary-General's report on
peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of conflict
(S/2009/304) and the non-paper "A New Partnership
Agenda: Charting a New Horizon for United Nations
Peacekeeping" highlight these linkages. Further efforts
are needed to implement the integrated mission
concept for more strategic and coherent United Nations
support to peacebuilding. United Nations leadership in-
country needs to be empowered to corral international
support behind early and prioritized strategies. The
operational capacity in core peacebuilding sectors must
be strengthened, including through improved and
timely deployment of civilian capacities. The European
Union will continue to engage actively in taking these
recommendations forward.

As we approach the tenth anniversary of adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000) on women and peace and
security, urgent action must be taken to implement this
agreement. More resources are needed to advance
gender equality within transitional recovery,
reintegration and reconstruction efforts. Efforts in
countries emerging from conflict can offer
opportunities to redress gender inequities of the past
and set precedents for the future. Gender equality
brings new degrees of democratic inclusiveness, as
well as faster social recovery and more durable
economic growth. The international community should
enhance these opportunities.

It is the international community's moral
obligation and responsibility to support countries
emerging from conflict. We must not fail to meet this
challenge. The United Nations, with its global
legitimacy and broad range of tools, has a central role
to play. We look to the Secretary-General for strong
leadership in enhancing the coherence and
effectiveness of the United Nation peace and security
structures. The European Union will continue to
actively support efforts to better assist countries in
building sustainable peace.

