Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I would like to begin
by expressing our appreciation to Mr. Yamamoto,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
for his comprehensive briefing on the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/189) on Afghanistan and
the activities of the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan (UNAMA). And I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the report itself, which we
have found very useful, particularly for those, like us,
who make no claim to deep knowledge of the Afghan
situation. I would also like to thank the Permanent
Representative of Afghanistan and the Chair of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission for
their remarks.

Despite the notable progress that has been made
in the three areas that Mr. Yamamoto referred to in
his briefing, Afghanistan continues to face enormous
challenges, as the Secretary-General's report and the
statement by the representative of Afghanistan, even
more so, make clear. It is self-evident that the country
needs understanding and support. It seems that the
political situation, including at the highest level, also
needs coherence. It is in the light ofthis situation that we
see the need for sustained support and cooperation on
the part of the international community if Afghanistan
is to overcome those challenges. In that regard, the
efforts of UNAMA to promote peace, reconciliation
and development in Afghanistan, with full respect for
the country's sovereignty and the Afghan Government's
leadership and ownership of the process, continue to
be very important, and we support the renewal of its
mandate for another year.

As the Secretary-General's report clearly states,
the security situation has not been improving. On the
contrary, it was worse in 2016 than in 2015, and that
trend appears to be continuing this year. The report
underlines, quite appropriately in our view, the fact
that it is civilians who are paying the highest price.
The threats posed by the Taliban, Al-Qaida, the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant and other armed groups
are a serious security concern not only for the country
but also the wider region. The increasing numbers
of terrorist attacks, such as those that occurred
recently in Kabul and other parts of the country, are
a clear indication of how far the security situation has
deteriorated. We would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate our firm condemnation of the terrorist attacks
and to express our deepest sympathy and condolences
to the families of the victims as well as the people and
the Government of Afghanistan. The illegal trafficking
of drugs has been further complicating the security
situation in Afghanistan and the wider region.

As Special Representative Yamamoto indicated,
Afghanistan's long-term security and stability can be
ensured only through a comprehensive and inclusive
Afghan-led and Afghan-owned political process. In that
connection, we note the progress that has been made in
implementing the peace agreement with Hizb-i Islami
Gulbuddin, including the lifting of sanctions against
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar. However, we understand that
the peace talks between the Government and the
Taliban have remained stalled. Obviously, listening
to the statement by the representative of Afghanistan,
we can see how that process is indeed daunting. As
the Secretary-General's report notes, the role of other
countries in the region is also critical to creating the
necessary conditions for advancing the peace efforts.

Lastly, the political and security situation in
Afghanistan will not improve if we do not take a
comprehensive approach to addressing the economic
and development challenges facing the country. It is
imperative that the international community provide
coordinated support to reconstruction and development
efforts through the implementation of the national
framework for peace and development in Afghanistan.
We hope that the commitments made at the Brussels
conference last October will be honoured.

I would like to conclude by expressing our support
for and solidarity with the Afghan Government
in its herculean task of addressing the country's
multiple challenges with a view to promoting peace,
reconciliation and development. I also wish to express
our appreciation to UNAMA for its role in support of
those endeavours and its efforts to fulfil its mandate
under difficult circumstances.

