Mr. Nduhuura (Uganda): Ithank you, Mr. President,
for organizing this open debate on the protection of
civilians in armed conflict, focusing on protection of
journalists. We are grateful for the first-hand insights
in the briefings by media practitioners from the NBC
News, the AP, the AFP and The Guardian.

Uganda welcomes the concerted efforts by the
Security Council and various actors at the national,
regional and international levels aimed at ensuring more
effective protection for civilians in armed conflict.
Nevertheless, the fact that civilians still account for the
vast majority of casualties in such situations shows that
a lot remains to be done.

While in many cases the warning signs of threats
to civilians are detected in good time, they are often
not acted upon promptly, due to a number of factors,
including political sensitivities and lack of adequate
capacity. We therefore underscore the necessity for
redoubling collective action towards preventing
conflicts, resolving them peacefully and protecting
civilians, with national authorities and non-State actors
bearing the primary responsibility. In that regard, the
parties to armed conflict should fulfil their obligations
under international humanitarian and human rights law
to ensure the protection of affected civilians.

Turning to the specific issue of the protection
of journalists, the Geneva Conventions of 1949, the
Protocols additional to the Conventions and other
relevant instruments provide a solid foundation for
the protection of civilians, including journalists, in
situations of armed conflict. Article 79 of Additional
Protocol I in particular provides that journalists are
entitled to all the rights and protections afforded to
civilians in armed conflicts.

The briefings we heard today put in sharp focus the
dangers that journalists covering conflicts often face,
including violent attacks, arrests, detention and, in
extreme cases, death. Indeed, this issue deserves serious
attention, given that, over the past 10 years, nearly to
1,000 journalists have lost their lives, including an
estimated 121 killed in 2012.

We recognize the important role that journalists
play in drawing the attention of the national, regional
and international communities to the impact of conflict
situations through their reports, which, in the digital
age, can be received in real time. Many journalists
carry out their responsibility with professionalism
and objectivity. However, there have also been cases
of journalists working with some media outlets whose
reports appear to take positions that favour one side of
a conflict, as well as incidents of others who engage
in activities incompatible with their status, including
espionage.

The work ofjournalists can be fraught with risks,
especially if they report from one side of a conflict
and are accused by the other of collaborating with the
enemy. While embedded journalists may gain exclusive
access to frontline reporting, they may also jeopardize
their status as civilians.

It is therefore important to take into account all those
and other factors vis-a-vis the role and responsibilities
ofjournalists working in conflict situations in order to
devise more effective strategies for their protection.

In conclusion, we welcome the adoption, in April
2012, of the United Nations Plan of Action on the
Safety of Journalists and the Issue of Impunity, and
look forward to its implementation in cooperation
with Governments, media outlets, professional
associations and other stakeholders. Those efforts,
which complement resolution 1738 (2006), should be
underpinned by enhanced awareness of and respect
for existing international instruments and conventions,
and with regard to emerging threats to journalists in
conflict, especially those posed by non-State actors,
and should be accompanied by practical guidance on
the safety ofjournalists.

