First of all, I would like to thank today's speakers for their briefings and their work to promote peace in Afghanistan, starting, of course, with Deborah Lyons at the head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan. I commend her and thank her for her efforts. I would also like to pay tribute to the remarkable work and unfailing commitment of Indonesia as Chair of the Security Council Committee pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999) 1989 (2011) and 2253 (2015), concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, and the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), and as co-penholders alongside Germany. They have done a truly outstanding job. Finally, I thank Ms. Shkula Zadran, whose powerful testimony, courage and determination are a sign of hope on Afghanistan's long road to peace. I would like to share three points today. First of all, I wish to emphasize the need for intra-Afghan peace negotiations to finally get off to a substantive start. The agreement reached on 2 December on the code of conduct for those peace talks is an encouraging first step. I note, however, that it took three months to reach that agreement and that much work remains. In that regard, I note that, in line with the women and peace and security agenda, the full and complete participation of women is absolutely essential to achieving a lasting peace. The consolidation of democratic gains is, of course, a sine qua non for peace. Secondly, I would like to recall that the fight against terrorism must remain a priority for the international community. France condemns in the strongest terms the recent terrorist attacks, including the assassinations of journalists and media representatives mentioned in the briefings. Such attacks threaten the freedom of expression and the very foundations of Afghan society, and they hamper peace efforts. The current level of violence remains unacceptably high. The conflict in Afghanistan continues to claim the lives of too many civilians, particularly among women and children. The Secretary-General's call for an immediate ceasefire, in accordance with resolution 2532 (2020), is essential. In addition, as mentioned, the fight against drugs on all fronts - from prevention to the eradication of production - is also critical if we are to ensure lasting peace in Afghanistan. Thirdly, there can be no progress towards peace unless all parties to the conflict fully commit to talks. In that regard, the extent of the Taliban's commitment remains to be demonstrated. As we consider the renewal of the mandate of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team attached to the Security Council Committee established pursuant to resolution 1988 (2011), I would like first of all to commend the work of the experts and recall the relevance of the 1988 Sanctions Committee. Pursuant to resolution 2513 (2020), the sanctions list can be revised only if the Taliban extends serious and credible pledges to reduce violence, commit to negotiations and renounce all activities that threaten the peace, stability and security of Afghanistan. As we demonstrated yet again at the 2020 Afghanistan Conference, held in Geneva, we are firmly committed to peace. Proof of that is the European Union's commitment, last month, to provide €1.2 billion over four years in both emergency aid and long-term assistance to support the country's modernization and sustainable democratic development, including the fight against corruption and in favour of institution-building, as well as to help improve the daily lives of Afghans, particularly by reducing poverty. But that support is not blind; it is conditioned on the preservation of the democratic gains of the past 20 years. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate that peace is not to be achieved at all costs. The fight against impunity for criminals is absolutely essential. The protection of civilians, including humanitarian and medical personnel, must be an absolute priority, and all parties must respect their obligations in accordance with international humanitarian law.
