Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
begin by saying how pleased the United Kingdom is to
see Judge Carmel Agius, President of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Judge Theodor
Meron, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, recently Prosecutor of the ICTY and now
Prosecutor of the Residual Mechanism. We are grateful
to all of them for their very thorough assessments and
reports and for coming to the Security Council today to
present them to us.

Today is a landmark day for both the ICTY and the
Security Council. Nearly a quarter of a century ago,
the Security Council formally established the ICTY by
means ofresolution 827 (1993). At the time the Tribunal
was something new and an innovation - a body that
would lead the way for others - and nobody knew how
or whether it would be able to fulfil the tasks that were
being assigned to it. However, during its lifetime, the
Tribunal, in the face of many obstacles, has worked
tirelessly to deliver justice to thousands of victims and
their families.

In delivering its final report, Judge Agius has
highlighted the important legacy of the Tribunal. It has
worked with objectivity, professionalism and a sense
of purpose to convict those most responsible for some
of the most serious crimes of international concern.
In doing so, it served not only to entrench the rule of
law but also to develop international law, including
in relation to non-international armed conflict,
genocide and sexual violence. However, probably most
importantly, it has demonstrated that individuals who
perpetrate such heinous crimes, however powerful and
however senior, cannot do so with impunity.

We commend the more than 7,000 staff members,
87 judges, 5 prosecutors and 4 registrars who have
served at the Tribunal and contributed to its work for
their diligence, determination and commitment over
the past 24 years. We recognize that their task was not
easy but, thanks to them, the Tribunal has fulfilled
its mandate to hold individuals accountable for their
appalling actions and to contribute to lasting peace in
the region. Set up more than two decades ago, when
it was nothing more than an aspiration on a piece of
paper, it was never the role of the Tribunal to ensure
full reconciliation in the region but it has contributed
significantly to that.

Besides the judgments that it has delivered, the
Tribunal has shown, through its legacy conferences,
how much it has achieved beyond the courtroom. The
conferences have involved hundreds of participants
from the former Yugoslavia, engaging them in dialogue
and forging important relationships. Participants have
included victims, officials from national judiciaries,
experts on transitional justice, lawyers and journalists.
In that way, the Tribunal has shown how it can impact
significantly in a post-conflict region to deliver on
Security Council and United Nations objectives, We
look forward to the final academic symposium, which
will be held in The Hague on 18 December.

While we recognize those important achievements,
we are also aware of the ongoing challenges still
being faced. Acknowledging the need to address
those challenges is still important as we recognize the
significant contribution of the Tribunal. In that regard,
we remain concerned that the arrest warrants for the
three individuals in the remaining contempt case have
still not been executed. State cooperation is integral to
holding perpetrators accountable.

We also note the Prosecutor's concern that
reconciliation and stability are jeopardized by the
denial of crimes, the rejection of facts and revisionism.
In moving forward, we encourage States within the
region to promote regional judicial cooperation in
order to bring justice to victims. While the ICTY
has completed its mandate, it is also important to
ensure that the objectives of the ICTY are continued
through independent and impartial prosecutions in
national courts.

With the closure of the ICTY, we will continue
to support the Residual Mechanism. We have been
pleased to hear from both Presidents that the transition
is progressing smoothly and recognize that that is due,
in large part, to the collaboration that has taken place
between the two Presidents and their staff, including
with the Prosecutor moving from one body to the other.

The United Kingdom looks forward to further
progress in the remaining cases, with the Stanisic' and
Simatovic' retrial, the Karadeie and Seselj appeals and
the review proceedings in the Ngirabatware case. We
hope that the Mechanism will proceed with all those
cases in an expeditious and efficient manner and
acknowledge that that is the intention of President Meron.
We also remain fully supportive of the Prosecutor, his
Office and his continued efforts in apprehending the
remaining fugitives, including through the proactive
efforts of his Office and by engaging with national
enforcement authorities.

We would also like to thank the Prosecutor's Office
for the extensive capacity-building efforts in which it
has been involved. Through its activities and training
in Nairobi, Nuremberg and Colombia, the Prosecutor
has successfully drawn attention to national ownership
of post-conflict accountability and provided support
to national judiciaries. We welcome the book jointly
published in June 2017 by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism and the Office of the Prosecutor of
the ICTY, entitled Prosecuting Conflict-Related Sexual
Violence at the ICTY. We also recognize and welcome
the training that has been provided to address conflict-
related sexual violence at both the international and
national levels.

Finally, we would like to highlight the invaluable
service of the Tribunals in producing a comprehensive
historical record of the atrocities committed during
the conflicts of the 1990s. It is a matter of great
importance that the judgments of those Tribunals and
the facts that they record be universally accepted. Only
by acknowledging the truths of the past can we learn
lessons for the future, ensuring peace and reconciliation
for all.

I would like to finish by again thanking the
Presidents of the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism
and the Prosecutor for their reports and to warmly
commend them on what they have achieved and
are achieving.

