Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): At the outset, I
would like to warmly welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, to
the Security Council and to thank him for his report
(S/2014/777, annex).

We welcome the adoption of resolution 2183
(20014), which was submitted by my delegation, acting
in its capacity as a rotating Chair of the contact and
drafting group, extending the mandate of the European
Union-led peacekeeping force Operation Althea for a
period of 12 months. We thank the delegations concerned
for their cooperation in drafting the resolution. We also
express our appreciation to the delegation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina for its insights and frankness of exchanges
over the past few weeks as we were drafting the
resolution. Its message to us on its country's European
Union (EU) perspectives could not have been more
clear. It is that delegation's firm choice, and has been so
for years, supported by all political forces and groups
within the country, and should be respected by all. The
resolution that the Council adopted today reflects that
choice and is an important signal of the international
community's support to the European perspective for
and broad engagement with Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Lithuania shares the findings of the most recent
report of the High Representative. Euro-Atlantic
integration provides the framework and incentive for
reform. Inclusive and wide-ranging reforms are needed
to achieve tangible progress in moving forward towards
that goal. We note that some of the recent developments
in Bosnia and Herzegovina have great potential to
generate a new momentum in the country.

On 12 October, Bosnia and Herzegovina held its
seventh general elections, which were conducted in
an orderly manner in a competitive environment. We
are concerned, however, that the recent elections saw
manifestations of inter-ethnic divide in the country.
We urge the elected leaders of all ethnic groups to
fundamentally change the way politics is conducted, to
reach out to the people and to chart, in close cooperation
with civil society, a path towards irreversible progress.
Swift Government formation at all levels is crucial, since
what citizens need the most are properly functioning
institutions capable of responding promptly and in a
comprehensive manner to their legitimate needs and
concerns. Implementing legislation and initiatives on
strengthening the rule of law, combatting corruption
and financial accountability are matters of immediate
priority.

At the same time, we note that the mass protests
that took place at the beginning of the year and the
readiness of the local communities to work together
and assist their neighbours in need after the severe
flooding in May signal that beyond the divisive rhetoric
that still occurs on the political level, there is a real
interest in that multi-ethnic society to mobilize and
seek common solutions for the country's future. We
appreciate the solidarity shown by many countries
and international organizations and their respective
contributions in response to the floods that devastated
Bosnia and Herzegovina and to ongoing reconstruction
efforts. The continued commitment of the international
community is essential so that Bosnia and Herzegovina
is not left alone to deal with the consequences of that
terrible natural disaster.

The EU remains actively engaged in supporting
the country in its reform process and efforts to foster
positive changes that are a prerequisite for strengthening
stability in the country. In July, the EU presented the
Compact for Growth and Jobs, a package of ready-
to-go economic and social reforms that, according to
experts, are needed to overhaul the country's economic
and social base. As an immediate action, it is aimed at
addressing the country's unemployment level, improve
economic governance and create a better business
environment.

The Dayton Peace Agreement was a necessary
tool to end the worst war in Europe since the end of
the Second World War. Collective political will and
putting the country's interests first are now needed to
enable Bosnia and Herzegovina to progress towards
the shared vision of a united, stable and prosperous
country, cooperating peacefully with its neighbours
and moving towards membership of the European
Union. In that regard, we share the concerns of the
High Representative regarding the destabilizing
effects of the various secessionist statements made by
a number of Republika Srpska officials who persist in
challenging the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well about obstructive
actions at state-level institutions that impede Bosnia
and Herzegovina's efforts to meet its international
obligations.

We are convinced that, with the political will and
collective determination, Bosnia and Herzegovina will
be able to pick up speed on its reform track. The EU's
Compact for Growth and Jobs is an opportunity not to
be missed so that the country can regain its upward
trajectory in the nearest future.

