Mr. Imnadze (Georgia): Let mejoin my colleagues
in congratulating the Swedish presidency and expressing
our gratitude for its convening today's open debate on
children and armed conflict. Let me also thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for

Children and Armed Conflict, Virginia Gamba, and the
other briefers for their reports and studies.

Georgia aligns itself with the statement made
by the observer of the European Union earlier today.
In my national capacity, I should like to make the
following remarks.

We welcome the recent report of the Secretary-
General on children and armed conflict (S/2018/465),
which unveils gross violations ofchild rights and the dire
situation facing children in many conflict situations.
According to the report, there were at least 6,000
verified violations against children by Government
forces and more than 15,000 verified violations by the
range of non-State armed groups in 2017. Asymmetric
attacks by non-State armed groups had a particularly
severe impact on children in areas controlled by
non-State armed actors and terrorist groups.

The report also states that in situations where
Governments and armed groups have enhanced the
prevention of grave violations, important advances have
been achieved. Over 10,000 children were released and
over 12,000 children were reintegrated by UNICEF in
2017. And yet we have to see even more tangible results
on the ground. It is therefore vital that the Member
States enhance their engagement in strengthening the
child protection mechanisms.

Georgia has prioritized the protection of the rights
of children in all aspects of life by ratifying the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child and its
optional protocols. My Government spares no effort
to assist children affected by conflicts and forced
displacement, both in Abkhazia and in the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, and to guarantee adequate living
conditions for them by extending welfare programmes
and the implementation of relevant strategy.

At the same time, we are extremely concerned that
the fundamental human rights of children continue to
be violated on a daily basis in both occupied regions of
Georgia. Since 2015, the Georgian language has been
banned as a language of instruction in the first grades
at the remaining Georgian schools in Gali district,
gradually resulting in the total restriction of education
in the native language in the Abkhazia region. In the
academic period 2015-2017, about 4,000 pupils were
deprived of the right to receive their education in their
native Georgian language. A similar process has been
initiated in the Tskhinvali region.
To make matters worse, the children who cross the
occupation line to attend classes in Georgian schools
located in the adjacent area controlled by the Government
of Georgia fall victim to Russian occupying forces, who
inspect their schoolbags and, in cases of discovering
Georgian books inside, hold them detained for hours.
This kind of treatment, in violation of internationally
recognized norms and principles, places children under
immense psychological and emotional pressure and has
an unbearable impact on their future.

We fully realize the importance of ensuring the
protection of children in the occupied territories of
Georgia and use all the available formats to advance
both the protection of the rights of children and peaceful
conflict resolution. In this respect, the Government
of Georgia recently presented a new peace initiative,
entitled A Step to a Better Future, seeking to improve
the humanitarian, social and economic conditions of
the populations, including children and young people,
residing in the regions of Abkhazia and Tskhinvali.

Against this backdrop, while reaffirming our
commitment to the protection of the fundamental
rights of the child, we call for increased attention of the
international community in order to protect children's
rights in the occupied regions of Georgia and other
conflict-affected areas around the world.

