Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I should like very clearly to emphasize, as we
have done in previous statements, that our participation
in this meeting in no way indicates recognition or any
sort of interaction with the International Criminal
Court (ICC). As everyone is aware, the Sudan is not
party to the Rome Statute, which established the Court.
Therefore, like a significant number of Member States
on the Security Council, the Sudan has not recognized
the ICC or ratified its Statute. Eight Member States
currently serving on the Council are not parties to the
Rome Statute. Our participation today is merely to
correct the false information and concepts contained
in the sixteenth report of the ICC Prosecutor to the
Council. I would like that to be reflected in the record
of this meeting.

We had expected a different approach from the
Court's new Prosecutor, unlike the misguided approach
adopted by the previous Prosecutor. We had expected
the new Prosecutor to have refrained from making
unsubstantiated claims that were not supported by facts
on the ground. Unfortunately, however, the sixteenth
report includes the same erroneous concepts that
completely contradict the reality in Darfur today. The
Council might wonder what the facts are that lead me to
say that. I shall tell the Council.

More than 10 persons from Darfur, from the Fur
and Zaghawa tribes, currently serve as ministers in the
central Government in Khartoum. In fact, our country's
Vice-President is from Darfur. The Minister of Finance
is from Darfur. The Cabinet Minister is from Darfur.
In addition, the Minister of Justice himself is from
the Zaghawa tribe - a devoted Darfurian and one
of the most distinguished members of the Zaghawa
tribe - which the Court alleges has been the victim of
ethnic cleansing. The Minister of Federal Governance
is from Darfur. The Federal Minister of Health is from
Darfur. Those are the facts on the ground and the state of
affairs we refer to when we say that what we are hearing
is a litany that is entirely unsupported by logic or facts
on the ground. Moroever, I should like to mention that
five of the states in Darfur are governed by governors
from Darfur itself. All members of the Governments
of the states are from the various groups and tribes in
Darfur. Therefore, where is the deteriorating situatiuon
we read about in wholly baseless reports?

As to the most glaring contradictions in the
sixteenth report - and this is not an exclusive
list - paragraph 15 of the report refers to so-called
attacks by the Government and rebel groups against
camps for internally displaced persons in Darfur,
during which theft, rape and destruction of property
took place. In that connection, I would refer the
members of the Council to refer to the reports of the
Secretary-General on Darfur prepared by the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID), which is currently on the ground and
which is the mission with the proper mandate from
the United Nations concerning Darfur. Being on the
ground, it does not prepare its reports by remote control
while relying on imaginary figures. It depends and
relies on international officials working on the ground
throughout Darfur.

With regard to the two most recent reports submitted
by the mission in Darfur, the report issued on 16 July
(S/2012/548) reaffirms the stable situation there and
requests the Security Council to reduce the military
component of UNAMID in the light of the established
security. The most recent report (S/2012/771), issued on
16 October, also reaffirms the stable situation except
for some isolated incidents, which were tribal disputes
in certain areas.

I therefore ask members of the Council: Which
reports should we trust - the Secretary-General's
reports submitted by the current mission in Darfur, as I
explained, or those of the humanitarian aid coordinators
of the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs? 1 met yesterday with the head of its office in
Khartoum, Mr. Mark Cutts, in my own office here. He
reaffirmed the return of 200,000 internally displaced
persons and refugees in the course of this year. How
could they have returned if the situation was unstable
and insecure and if atrocities were being committed in
Darfur? Should we believe those reports or anonymous
ones whose sources we do not know. The right answer
is, of course, that the reports of the United Nations
missions in the Sudan are more credible.

The report intentionally cites disinformation in
describing events that took place in Kabkabiya, Kutum
and Mellit. In paragraph 16, the report ascribes such
events to what it calls "militias", although most of the
events were, in fact, tribal disputes. Clashes among
farmers and herders in Darfur are as old as time. The
Government, in coordination with the Darfur Regional
Authority, established pursuant to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur, has made significant efforts to
contain or put an end to many of those tribal conflicts.
We are striving to prevent such clashes through
development and the provision of water sources by
digging wells, by creating model villages and by setting
up nomad crossings through farming areas.

In paragraph 18, the report mentions that there is
widespread gender-based violence in Darfur. It falsely
accuses the Sudanese Security Forces of such acts. It
alleges that some such information has been included
in United Nations reports but does not mention which
reports or which United Nations offices prepared
the reports. In that connection, we would like to
underscore our complete rejection of such falsification
and defamation on the basis of false, incorrect and
anonymous sources. Needless to say, such practices
contradict the most basic principles of justice and law,
namely, the verification of facts and evidence before
making random accusations.

So one reason why we are participating in this
meeting is to draw the attention of Council members to
the danger of such a shameful approach, which is still
being taken by the Office of the Prosecutor despite the
significant and positive changes that have taken place
in Darfur and the prevailing stability and security in
most of the region following the signing and entry into
force of the Doha peace agreement.

In addition, the attacks on UNAMID and some
humanitarian workers were all acts of illegal armed
groups. When they occurred, the Government of the
Sudan was the first to declare its cooperation and strive
to arrest the perpetrators and bring them to justice.
Unfortunately, the report of the Prosecutor before the
Council refers to this issue in paragraphs 21, 22 and 23
without naming the unknown armed groups that carried
out those acts. That represents a dishonest attempt to
expand the scope of the crimes and to imply thereby
that the situation in Darfur continues to deteriorate and
that it represents a threat to international peace and
security. That is all untrue.

In that regard, I underscore the problems in the
relationship between the ICC and the Security Council
and its negative implications. The ICC is a judicial
body, whose terms of reference are supposedly set out
in the Rome Statute, while the Security Council is a
political entity, whose mandate for the maintenance
of international peace and security derives from the
Charter of the United Nations. We avoid linking those
two bodies because linking a political and a judicial
body distorts and flouts the principles ofjustice.

The necessary independence of judicial bodies
must never be questioned. As on previous occasions,
we therefore reaffirm that the referral of the dispute in
Darfur to the ICC was a politicization of international
justice. We also underscore the fact that the Darfur
conflict is an internal matter that has not gone
beyond the borders of the Sudan and has not in any
way threatened international peace and security. The
Security Council's consideration of that situation
on the basis of such a false assumption is wrong and
unacceptable.

Let me refer to the allegations in the Prosecutor's
report concerning the so-called lack of cooperation by
the Government of the Sudan and its non-compliance
with ICC decisions. Those are illogical and
unacceptable because, as I have said, the Sudan, like
many other States, including members of the Council,
is not a member of the Court. In addition, we recall
the reservations expressed by members of the Council
regarding the Rome Statute, specifically insofar as the
current exercise of its jurisdiction may directly affect
the sovereignty of those States, including through
gross violations of the noble principles of international
law providing for the respect of the privileges and
immunities of Heads of States. The Sudan is therefore
not concerned with the findings of the Court.

As I have noted, the situation in Darfur today is
completely different from what it was in 2005, when
the Council adopted the mistaken decision to refer
that situation to the ICC. The Sudan has come a long
way in implementing the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, one of the most important pillars of which is
justice and reconciliation. It includes clear provisions
for effective national legal steps to be taken with regard
to any crimes that might have taken place in Darfur. In
that connection, I recall the appointment of the Special
Prosecutor to investigate alleged war crimes in Darfur
and the establishment of branch judicial offices in the
five states of Darfur for that purpose.

We also recall that the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur stipulates, in paragraph 295, that

"immunities enjoyed by persons by virtue of
their official status or functions shall not obstruct
the speedy dispensation of justice nor shall they
prevent the combating of impunity".

We signed the Document and are one of the original
parties to it. In addition, the Doha Document includes
clear commitments concerning reconciliation and
settlement as primary elements for repairing the social
fabric and establishing justice. All judicial mechanisms
stipulated in that agreement in the context of support
provided by the central Government to the Transitional
Darfur Authority have started their work, with the
welcome participation of civil society organizations
and various constituencies in Darfur.

We are all agreed that peace is the essential
foundation for upholding justice and stability.
Accordingly, the Government of the Sudan has
expanded and continues to expand the umbrella of the
Doha Document for Peace in Darfur so that those rebel
groups that have not yet joined the path of peace may
do so. We therefore look to the Security Council to
play a greater role in urging those rebel movements to
come to the negotiating table so as to turn the page on
conflict and to begin a new chapter of peace in whcih
all parties, including the Government and former armed
groups, shall work together to realize development and
reconstruction in Darfur for the benefit of the entire
population.

We hope to hold a special donors' conference for
Darfur in sisterly Qatar in the near future.

In conclusion, we have often repeated in meetings
of the Council and the General Assembly that the
ICC has become a tool exploited to certain political
ends. That position has been proven correct by many
developments, most recently last month when a State
which is a member of the Security Council asked the
Palestinian Authority not to proceed to the ICC in
exchange for a vote in favour of General Assembly
resolution 67/19 recognizing the State of Palestine and
granting it non-member observer State status in the
United Nations. The ICC has been exploited since its
inception for political purposes, as has been proven by
historical facts. The Court is being exploited every day
to political ends entirely unrelated to justice. It is being
used as an instrument of blackmail and to undermine
the interests of smaller States and to violate their
sovereignty. I ask, therefore, what kind of international
justice can we expect from that Court?

