Mr. Wang Guangya (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The Chinese Government is gravely concerned over the
unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo on
17 February 2008. As we speak, the whole
international community is closely watching the
reaction of the United Nations. China supports the
proposal by Serbia and Russia to convene an
emergency meeting of the Security Council and hopes
that members will engage in serious discussion and
respond in a responsible manner.

The question of the status of Kosovo is extremely
complicated and sensitive. It not just is an emotional
issue for the Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs; it
also bears on the peace, security and stability of the
Balkan region and even Europe at large. China always
stands for peaceful resolution of disputes through
political and diplomatic means and supports a
negotiated and proper settlement of the issue of
Kosovo's status. China opposes unilateral action and
objects to solutions imposed by pressure. China has
always maintained that the best way to resolve the
issue of Kosovo's status is for the two parties
concerned to reach a mutually acceptable solution
through negotiations. That should be the common goal
of all the parties concerned.

Last year, under the auspices of the international
contact group the Troika - Serbia and Kosovo held
several rounds of direct negotiations on the status
issue. It is true that no substantive breakthrough was
achieved during months of negotiations. Nevertheless,
if negotiations are to be fruitful and successful, all
participating parties need to show sincerity and
flexibility, rather than giving up and even shutting the
door of negotiations because of their differences. China
believes that - rather than doing any good for the
settlement of ethnic conflicts, achieving a multi-ethnic
society and the maintenance of peace, stability and
development in the former Yugoslavia - the unilateral
action by Kosovo may rekindle conflicts and
turbulence in the region, which in turn would cause
serious humanitarian crisis and adversely impact the
entire Balkan region and beyond. China is deeply
concerned over this.

Safeguarding sovereignty and territorial integrity
is one of the cardinal principles of contemporary
international law, as enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations. The issue of Kosovo's status does
indeed have its special nature. Nevertheless, to
terminate negotiations, give up pursuit of a solution
acceptable to both parties and replace such efforts with
unilateral actions will certainly constitute a serious
challenge to the fundamental principles of international
law. Together with other countries concerned, we
express our serious concern over this matter. We call
on all relevant parties to take full account of the
complexity and sensitivity of the issue of Kosovo's
status and make a sober assessment of the potential
adverse implications of this unilateral action for peace
and stability in the region, act with maximum prudence
and do their utmost to preserve peace, security and
stability there.

Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) remains
the political and legal basis for the settlement of the
Kosovo issue. Prior to the adoption of any new
resolution by the Council, all efforts and actions for the
settlement of this issue should conform to the relevant
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999). If a resolution
adopted by the Security Council is not observed and
implemented, the resolution in question becomes a
mere scrap of paper; what is more, the authority and
credibility of the Security Council as the primary organ
for safeguarding world peace and security would be
compromised. This is not only a concern of China, but
also one of the international community. The Chinese
Government therefore hopes that all members will
show a responsible attitude and consider and address
this issue seriously and prudently.

China agrees that the future of both Serbia and
Kosovo lies in their eventual integration into Europe
8

and appreciates the desire of the European Union (EU)
to play an active role on the Kosovo issue. China hopes
that the EU will take into account not only the interests
of Serbia and Kosovo, but also the concerns of other
countries in the region. More important, it needs to pay
attention to and uphold the authority and role of the
Security Council in resolving the Kosovo issue. We
hope that the EU will make greater efforts to reconcile
the positions of Serbia and Kosovo, urge the two
parties to continue their dialogue and encourage them
to find a way out in the process of seeking integration
into Europe.

China sincerely hopes that all parties concerned
will keep in mind the long-term interests of peace and
security in the Balkan region, Europe and the world at
large, and conduct candid negotiations and discussions
for a constructive solution to the issue of Kosovo's
status. The Security Council and the international
community should encourage Serbia and Kosovo to
continue their pursuit of a mutually acceptable solution
through political and diplomatic means.

