Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the President for organizing today's meeting and for
his briefing as Chair on the activities of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) - the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Sanctions Committee - in recent months.

Today's meeting cannot be a meeting like any
other. The killings, last March, of Zaida Catalan and
Michael Sharp deeply struck and saddened us. The
presence of the families of Zaida and Michael in the
Chamber today reminds us again, if there were such
a need, of the dreadful nature of these crimes. On
behalf of France, I would like to address Mrs. Maria
Moresby, Mrs. Elizabeth Moresby, Mr. John Sharp and
Mrs. Michele Sharp to express once again our sincere
condolences for the loss of their children and sister and
to express our admiration and gratitude for Michael's
and Zaida's remarkable work. The entire United Nations
family shares their sorrow. They can rest assured that
France is at their side in this time of trial.

As France did in its national capacity, the Security
Council, too, condemned these killings in the strongest
terms. It has repeatedly called for an in-depth
investigation to identify the perpetrators of the crimes
and bring them to justice. In that regard, we would like
to thank the Secretary-General for transmitting the
findings ofthe Board ofInquiry that was established last
April. The elements that the Board of Inquiry provided
have caught our attention, including its finding that
further research and investigation are required. In that
regard, we renew our call for the Secretary-General
to establish, as soon as possible and as he is able to
do, a special investigative mechanism to enable the
competent legal authorities to effectively prosecute
these crimes and achieve justice. In Guinea in 2009 and
South Sudan in 2016, for example, similar mechanisms
proved particularly useful in shedding light on related
dire events before the Council. We owe it to the memory
of these two experts that justice be done. We owe it to
their loved ones, to the many groups of experts set up
by the Council and to all United Nations personnel and
to the long-suffering Congolese people themselves.

Today's meeting is also of particular importance
because the current situation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo remains a major source of
concern. In that regard, I welcome the presence of the
Vice-Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Leonard
She Okitundu. The final report of the Group of Experts
(see S/2017/672/Rev.1), which is ofa high quality despite
these particularly tragic circumstances, underlines
once again the gravity of the situation and the risks of
its continuing deterioration.

The violence in the Kasai region, which remains at
an unsustainable level, is compounded by the spread of
insecurity to Tanganyika, the increase in intercommunal
conflicts in these areas and even the escape ofprisoners
in unusual proportions. Civilian populations continue
to be the primary victims of this growing insecurity,
as is illustrated by the flow of displaced persons and
refugees. The Deputy Secretary-General highlighted
this point last week: the humanitarian situation remains
very difficult, especially for women (see S/PV.8022).

Reversing this unhappy dynamic necessarily calls
for increased efforts to prevent impunity on the part of
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, irrespective of their
affiliation. It is up to the Congolese authorities to get
involved, including by fully cooperating with the team
of international experts set up by the Human Rights
Council last June. The team, established by consensus
and with the consent of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, must be able to enjoy unrestricted access to the
places and persons concerned in order to identify those
responsible for the violations committed.
As the deadline for holding elections approaches,
the accumulation of delays in the implementation of
the 31 December agreement generates questions and
tensions that cannot contribute to the country's peace
and stability. The agreement, which is the framework
agreed by all the Congolese parties for the transition
towards the holding of elections, remains the only
credible road map for an end to the crisis in the country.
As the Council recalled in its presidential statement of
26 July (S/PRST/2017/12), it is urgent that the agreement
be implemented in good faith and in all its components.
It is up to the Congolese authorities to take all necessary
measures as soon as possible to ensure that credible and
inclusive elections are held as agreed in the agreement
no later than December 2017. It is particularly urgent
for the electoral calendar to be released.

The tragic deaths of Zaida and Michael remind us
of the responsibility we must collectively exercise to
put an end to the violence in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. A large number of civilians have already
lost their lives. Faced with this intolerable threat, we call
on all Congolese political actors to be responsible and
to act decisively in order to respect the commitments
made last December. The stability of the country and
its inhabitants depends upon it, as does that of the
region as a whole.

