Mr. Mendoza-Garcia (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to commend you and the Swedish
Mission, Mr. President, on the work you are doing in
the Security Council this month. We are also grateful
for today's briefings.

I will focus on two issues in the region, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the situation in Syria,
while reiterating our position that a diplomatic solution
is required in both cases.

In the case of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
my country emphasizes how urgent it is to ensure a
resumption of negotiations between the Palestinians
and Israelis on the persistent core issues in the conflict.
A political solution should be based on the previous
obligations and agreements already arrived at between
the parties, supported by international law and the
decisions of both the Security Council and the General
Assembly. It is vital that we achieve a political solution
to the conflict and create, with all possible speed, a
new peace architecture for resolving differences. We
need a sustainable peace aimed at establishing the
foundations for direct negotiations leading to a goal that
is acceptable to the international community - that of
the harmonious coexistence of the State of Israel and
a Viable, independent Palestinian State. Costa Rica
remains convinced that a two-State solution is the only
possible way for both States and their peoples to live
side by side in peace and security.

We therefore welcomed the Security Council's
adoption, on 23 December, of resolution 2334 (2016),
which reiterates the consensus established in the
international community that the settlements have no
legal validity and urges all parties to work collectively
to initiate credible negotiations on all the final status
issues in the peace process. We reiterate our support
for the use of international law as a tool in the peaceful
settlement of disputes and for the position of the
Security Council and the General Assembly as bodies
created to preserve international peace and security.
We urge respect for and compliance with the provisions
of resolution 2334 (2016), which is binding on every
State Member of the Organization.

With regard to the conflict in Syria, we welcome the
adoption by the General Assembly ofresolutions 71/130,
of9 December 2016, and 71/248, of 21 December 2016.
We reiterate our position, given the grave nature of the
crimes that may have been committed and the level of
destruction of Syria, that we need to have accountability
mechanisms in place in order to recover, safeguard and
consolidate the evidence that would enable us to bring
the perpetrators of such crimes to justice in the future.
We understand that, given the terrible dynamics of the
Syrian conflict, some legal processes will begin in the
future. For that very reason, it is urgent to compile
as much evidence as possible. We also highlight the
importance that such a mechanism should be financed
through the United Nations regular budget.

The international community has long waited for
a Security Council agreement on Syria. We therefore
welcome the fact that the Security Council was able
to adopt resolutions 2328 (2016) and 2336 (2016)
unanimously. That represents a significant step forward
in the work of the Council and an important initial step
for our efforts to find a lasting solution to the conflict.
We reiterate our conviction that the only lasting
solution to the crisis in the Syrian Arab Republic
will be achieved through diplomatic channels. In that
regard, we call upon all States to respect and implement
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and by
the General Assembly.

Costa Rica urges that the efforts of the international
community should not cease until a final ceasefire has
been achieved through an agreement that covers all the
parties concerned. We wish to recall that the Security
Council has the power to refer the situation in Syria
to the International Criminal Court in the event that
States with primary jurisdiction did not exercise it and
also in the face of the mass atrocities committed there.

In conclusion, Costa Rica reiterates its concern at
the growing tension among regional Powers, which has
raised the tone in those confrontations. We therefore
make a robust appeal for peace in the Middle East. As
Members of the Organization, we have a legal, political
and moral responsibility to prevent and stop any act
that leads to the death of innocents. We should support
and enhance those mechanisms that allow us to bring
to justice those responsible and combine our efforts
to stop the spiral of violence and end the suffering of
civilians. That is the only way that we can feel satisfied
that we have complied with the provisions established
in the Charter of the United Nations.

