Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (interpretation from Russian): The events of the last two months in
Liberia have exceeded the gloomiest predictions and have
struck the strongest of blows to hopes for a rapid return
of Liberia to peace, which is so badly needed for its long-
suffering people, utterly exhausted by a six-year
fratricidal war. The resumption of hostilities in Liberia -
whose epicentre this time was the capital, Monrovia -
led to numerous victims, much destruction and a
bacchanalia of looting and violence, with a mass exodus
of refugees and displaced persons. All of this has not only
exacerbated the situation in Liberia itself, taking it to the
limits, but has threatened the stability of the neighbouring
countries of the region. The leaders of the warring
factions have once again demonstrated complete disregard
for the obligations undertaken under the Abuja
Agreement. What is glaring here is their hostility to the
United Nations and to the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), forcing most of the
international personnel to evacuate.

We firmly condemn these irresponsible actions and
urgently call upon the leaders of the warring factions to
strictly comply with the cease-fire; to provide firm
guarantees of security to the United Nations and to other
international and foreign personnel; to fully withdraw the
fighters from Monrovia; to ensure conditions for the
unimpeded deployment of the Economic Community of
West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG)
within the city; and to restore its status as a safe haven.

We View the main objective of today's meeting of
the Security Council as the sending to the leaders of the
warring factions of an absolutely clear signal that the
patience of the international community is not unlimited
and that they are obliged to enter into constructive
negotiations for a resumption of the peace process, to
draw up a comprehensive plan for its implementation and
to unswervingly implement it.

An important role in moving the parties to dialogue
must be played by the regional and subregional
organizations - in particular, the Organization of African
Unity (OAU) and ECOWAS, which are familiar with the
intricacies and the highly complex web of contradictions
that lie at the basis of the present crisis and can find
mutually acceptable means to resolve them.

We believe that the Security Council must appeal to
the membership of ECOWAS to make use of their
forthcoming summit meeting for the adoption of decisions
on a possible reorganization and strengthening of

 

structures and also on a stepping-up of the role of the
forces of ECOMOG in Liberia, together with measures to
exert pressure on the leaders of the Liberian factions.
Without that, it is hardly possible to count on
implementation of the Abuja Agreements and on a lasting
political settlement in this African country. Also of
particular importance is unswerving compliance by all
States with the arms embargo imposed by resolution 788
(1992).

The Russian delegation regards as well-founded the
proposal of the Secretary-General in his report of 21 May
1996 regarding the extension of the mandate of United
Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) by three
months, to 31 August this year. It is clear that the further
presence of UNOMIL fully depends on the continued
presence in that country of the united regional military
contingent, ECOMOG. We expect that the Secretary-
General will submit to the Security Council
recommendations on the further role of UNOMIL in the
light of the concrete developments and the results of the
ECOWAS summit.

In conclusion, we once again wish to call upon the
leaders of the warring parties in Liberia to renounce
political ambitions, to cease civil strife and to demonstrate
responsibility for the fate of the people in the country. We
advise them to carefully weigh all the possible, far-reaching
consequences of their present senseless policy. We believe
that the sad experience of Somalia should serve as a lesson
to them in this regard.

