The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

We thank Mr. Guehenno for his comprehensive
briefing on the situation in Afghanistan and for
presenting the recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2008/159).

I shall be direct: we are seriously concerned at
the constant increase in terrorist activity on the part of
the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other extremists. Their
activities undermine the fragile foundations of Afghan
statehood and hinder comprehensive implementation of
the Afghanistan Compact. We are particularly alarmed
that terrorists are, in effect, controlling an entire group
of regions on whose territories parallel governments
have been established. Now, more than ever before, it
is important that, through joint efforts, the Afghan
security forces and the international military presences
reverse the negative security situation, which is
hampering the consolidation of peace and democratic
development in Afghanistan.

The dynamic of the military and political
situation confirms the conclusion, expressed by
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon in his report, that the
national reconciliation process must be carried out with
full respect for the anti-Taliban sanctions regime
established by the Security Council through its
resolution 1267 (1999). One thing is clear: a return to
civilian life is possible only for those who are innocent
of war crimes. Any attempt to cosy up to extremists
and to gradually invest them with power can only risk
further destabilization. That is the principle that should
guide the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) as it carries out its mandate.

Unless we cut off the financial sources of terrorist
subversion - the major source of which remains drug
trafficking - we will not be able to cool its intensity.

We support the view of the Secretary-General
that, in the interest of effectively combating the Afghan
drug threat, it is essential to focus efforts on destroying
not only drug crops, but also underground laboratories,
and to take more vigorous action to intercept drugs in
transit. Moreover, the ongoing inability of the Afghan
Government, despite the assistance of the international
community, to curb the drug threat is obvious proof of
the relevance of the Russian Federation's initiative on
establishing, with the United Nations in a coordinating
role and with the participation of neighbouring States,
a comprehensive system of counter-narcotic and
financial security belts.

At the same time, we need to make fuller use of
the opportunities offered by regional associations,
which have proven their effectiveness in this area of
work, in particular the Collective Security Treaty
Organization and the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization. Strengthening counter-narcotic and
counter-terrorist protection around the Afghan State
will not only significantly weaken the financial
resources of extremists, it will also help achieve a
prompt stabilization of both Afghanistan and the region
as a whole. Achieving that goal would also be aided by
comprehensively building regional and integration
processes.

We share the view of the Secretary-General
regarding the vital need to preserve the central role of
the United Nations in coordinating international efforts
for post-conflict settlement and for the socio-economic
reconstruction of Afghanistan. We also fully agree on
the adequacy of the current mandate of UNAMA, as
confirmed by the report, for an effective resolution of
the tasks set forth in the London Compact. We support
the proposal of the Secretary-General to extend the
mandate of UNAMA for another 12-month period.

We welcome the appointment of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
Mission, Mr. Kai Eide, and we wish him success in his
upcoming activities under the mandate to be extended
next week by the Council.

The Russian Federation actively participates in
implementing projects of vitally important significance
for Afghanistan in the areas of energy, transport and
mineral processing. A serious contribution to the
economic renewal of the country has been made by the
agreement to settle Afghan debt to the Russian
Federation. On 31 January 2008, in connection with the
request by the Government of Afghanistan, we

conducted an operation to provide humanitarian
assistance to Afghans suffering from lack of food
owing to the harsh winter. A delegation from the
Russian Ministry for Emergency Situations gave more
than 3,000 tons of wheat flour to representatives of the
Afghan authorities. The Russian Federation will
continue to undertake efforts aimed at stabilizing
Afghanistan and resolving the large-scale challenges
before it.

I now resume my function as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Afghanistan.

