Mr. Munir (Pakistan): We thank Special
Representative Nickolay Mladenov for his briefing. As
the Special Representative said earlier, the prospects
for peace in the Middle East remain grim. Central to
that sobering assessment is the plight of the Palestinian
people, who, for the past 70 years, have suffered
dispossession, displacement and deprivation at the hands
of the Israeli occupation. Israel continues to defy the
international consensus with impunity, while persisting
with its illegal occupation of the Palestinian territory.

The settlement of the Palestinian issue is
central to lasting peace and stability in the Middle
East - not its incidental by-product - and the illegal
Israeli settlements lie at the heart of the matter. In
adopting resolution 2334 (2016), the Security Council
sent an unequivocal signal to Israel that the settlements
in occupied Palestinian territory have no legal validity
and remain the major stumbling block to achieving
a just and comprehensive peace in the Middle East.
Unfortunately, that resolution has been disparaged
by some as representative of the old bias on the part
of the United Nations against Israel. We have heard
that familiar refrain all too often. However, it cannot
absolve Israel from its international obligations.

The Israeli decision to construct new settlements
in the West Bank is yet another dangerous provocation.
The so-called legalization bill aims to provide a veneer
of legality to an act that is internationally recognized
as illegal. Meanwhile, the blockade of the Gaza
strip continues in its tenth year. Such inhumane acts
must end. Human suffering cannot be mortgaged to
political ends.

It is our firm conviction that a viable, independent
and contiguous State of Palestine, on the basis of
internationally agreed parameters, with the borders
of 1967, and with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, is
the only sustainable guarantee for enduring peace in
the Middle East. It is the strength of peace and not the
threat of force that offers the best hope for arresting the
rising tide of extremism in the region.

The seething fires of conflict in Syria rage with
unspeakable fury. The scale of human suffering in
Syria cannot be quantified in mere statistics. The road
to peace in Syria is through an inclusive, Syrian-led
and Syrian-driven process of political reconciliation.
That road must respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Syria. Those who seek military ends
threaten to extinguish any such hope.

In Iraq, as Iraqi forces consolidate their gains
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant and its
affiliates, we are confident that the foundations of a
strong Iraqi State will be laid on the basis of an inclusive
vision that recognizes and reconciles the interests of all
Iraqi people.

With 7 million people facing the threat of famine,
the conflict in Yemen has become a humanitarian
catastrophe. A massive humanitarian response must
complement the political process. The forthcoming
High-level Pledging Event for the Humanitarian Crisis
in Yemen, to be held in Geneva on 25 April, will provide
an ideal opportunity to recalibrate our commitments
and ensure that they are commensurate with the needs
of the Yemeni people. In a spirit of solidarity with our
Yemeni brothers and sisters, my country has already
contributed $1 million of wheat in order to address
immediate needs.

Pakistan lends its support to all diplomatic efforts
to achieve peace and stability in the Middle East. We
are confident that well-intentioned efforts on the part
of the international community will restore the cradle
of civilization to its rightful place as the beating heart
of humankind.

