Mr. Al Bayati (Iraq): Allow me at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for this month. I
would like to extend my thanks to the previous
President of the Security Council, His Excellency the
Permanent Representative of Gabon, for his efforts
during the month of June. I would like also to thank
Mr. Ad Melkert, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq, and his team in Baghdad
and New York for their sincere efforts in helping the
Iraqi people and the Iraqi Government.

The political and security situation in Iraq
witnessed significant developments following the
success of the Iraqi parliamentary elections, which
were held in March 2010 with broad participation on
the part of all components of the Iraqi population.
Those elections resulted in the formation of a national
partnership Government from all of the political blocs
that won in the elections, which strengthened the
democratic process and led to greater security and
stability. The next stage, which will follow the
withdrawal of the American forces at the end of this
year, will bring immense challenges and
responsibilities to the Iraqi Government.

From a security perspective, the Iraqi
Government is continuing to improve the ability of its
security forces and to prepare them to stand in the face
of terrorist attacks, protect internal security and defend
democracy in Iraq. The Iraqi Government will work on
the optimum implementation of the strategic
framework agreement with the United States and the
partnership agreement with the European Union, which
will, hopefully, be signed this year. The Iraqi
Government will benefit from the expertise of NATO
on building military capabilities in keeping with
Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).

On 27 March, the Iraqi Prime Minister, Mr. Nuri
al-Maliki, launched a lOO-day initiative whose goal
was to put Government institutions on the right path so
as to enable them to improve their performance and to
identify their strong points, in order to capitalize on
them, and their weaknesses, in order to address them.
The initiative coincided with the publication of a paper
on administrative, political and services reforms and on
fighting unemployment, which was approved by the
Council of Ministers. The Prime Minister also decided
to establish a coordination committee for the 100-day
initiative, chaired by the Secretary-General of the
Council of Ministers, to prepare a report on the
outcome of the work performed by the ministries.

In a speech televised to the Iraqi people on
23 June, the Prime Minister stated that the general
index and the final outcome of the 100-day plan
showed that the performance of most ministries was
between average and good. However, as the
performance of quite a few ministries was weak and at
an unacceptable level, a series of actions will be
adopted: first, trim the Government and all
non-essential and honorary positions, which had
become an urgent need, according to all indicators;
secondly, at the ministerial level, a change in the
number of ministries; thirdly, conduct a professional
evaluation aimed at implementing changes in the staff
of a number of ministries at the level of deputy
ministers, advisers and general directors; and fourthly,
continue the process of monitoring and evaluation from
the point reached by the lOO-day initiative, at an
accelerated pace.

The Iraqi Government was able to advance the
process of national reconciliation by ending the issue
of dissolved entities, integrating them into society
within the framework of the Justice and Accountability
Law. The Government also addressed the issue of the

Sons of Iraq - also known as the Awakening
Council- and to date has integrated 45 per cent of
them into the various ministries. Tribal councils were
established for tribal reform and to avert conflicts, so
as to achieve convergence among the different
components of Iraqi society, with a view to breaking
down the barriers placed by terrorists between the sons
of the country.

The Government also supports the religious
conferences held to bring closer the different views of
Iraqis. It is also open to armed groups surrendering
their weapons and converging, with the rest of the Iraqi
people, under the tent of Iraq. In addition, the
Government has created a general atmosphere
conducive to reconciliation by promoting a culture of
understanding and has moved to have the ministries of
education, culture and religious endowments change
certain school curricula so as to spread a culture of
love and harmony among Iraqis.

In the field of development, the Iraqi Government
has coordinated its efforts with those of its
international partners to implement the National
Development Plan for the five years from 2010 to
2014. The plan, whose cost will reach $186 billion,
includes approximately 2,700 strategic projects in
many fields and is aimed at making a quantum leap in
terms of the Iraqi economy and improving the services
provided to the country's citizens. The system for the
management of Iraqi human development was recently
finalized, with a view to supporting and following up
on the implementation of the plan, at a time when the
Government is working on the implementation of an
ambitious development programme to build a strong
economy that encourages investment and provides the
appropriate legislative atmosphere to protect investors
and their capital.

This coincided with the Prime Minister's
assertion that the Iraqi Government was committed to
its obligations in the context of reforming the Iraqi
economy by adopting a free-market policy, carrying
out the legislative reforms needed in different sectors,
and giving the private sector the attention necessary for
it to play its part in the economic development process.

In addition, the Iraqi oil sector is experiencing
stability, with average exports of around 2 million
barrels a day and average production of more than
2.5 million barrels a day. The Iraqi Government is still
working to implement the national plan to improve the
Iraqi oil industry, which aims to reach a production
level of 12 million barrels per day in 2017.

Regarding the efforts made by the Iraqi
Government to solve the housing problem, the
Government signed a contract on 25 May with the
Korean company Hanwha to build 100,000 units in
Baghdad Province. On 31 May, the Government also
signed a memorandum of understanding with the
United Nations Human Settlements Programme
(UN-Habitat), the agency in charge of human
settlement issues.

With regard to the subject of the census, while
attending the celebration of the International Day for
Population, organized by the Ministry of Planning, the
Prime Minister reaffirmed that the Iraqi Government
was committed to reaching an agreement to conduct
the census because it was not possible to build a real
State on scientific bases unless a general population
census were conducted to survey all the needs and the
available capacities and capabilities. The Prime
Minister added that the census was a national
development project that would meet the statistical
needs of ministries and private institutions necessary
for planning and development. He also stated that the
Government had provided the necessary support for the
census project, as well as the technical and
professional preparations necessary to ensure its
success.

The new Iraq has paid special attention to human
rights issues by establishing credible and independent
national mechanisms charged with monitoring the
human rights situation in Iraq and ensuring that those
rights are protected. The Iraqi High Commission for
Human Rights was therefore established. Beginning in
April, nominations began to be accepted for the
Commission's ll-member council. The council will
enjoy broad authority in monitoring the situation of
human rights in Iraq.

In the same context, a conference was held in
June to discuss the recommendations of the United
Nations Human Rights Council. That meeting had the
support of Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki and included
the participation of Mr. Ad Melkert, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Iraq.
Representatives from several international
organizations, ambassadors and members of the
diplomatic corps in Baghdad were also in attendance.
The conference called for a national plan for human
rights and for the teaching of human rights in schools
and universities. Improving the education sector is also
one of the main priorities for the Iraqi Government,
which has adopted a broad programme to improve
curricula, build schools and universities and send Iraqi
students to other countries to study as part of the
educational initiative.

On 7 April, Camp Ashraf, which is occupied by
the Iranian Mujahedin Khalq Organization, witnessed
security events after Iraqi security and riot control
forces attempted to establish Government control in the
north-eastern part of the camp, which includes
farmland that belongs to Iraqi citizens. Iraqi forces
were subject to an attack with firebombs and knives,
which led to clashes. A number of camp residents were
killed or injured, with seven members of the Iraqi
forces injured. The aim of the security forces was not
to take over the camp or remove its residents by force.
I would like to point out here that, since 7 April, the
Iraqi Government has allowed representatives of the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and many
international organizations to enter the camp to deliver
food and medicine to its residents. The Government
also expressed its willingness to start a Government
investigation regarding those events.

However, that organization considers the camp as
liberated and holy territory. It is refusing to leave the
camp, which is a stark challenge to Iraq's sovereignty.
The organization's leadership is interfering in Iraq's
internal affairs and calling publicly for the overthrow
of the Iraqi Government and inciting against it. This
organization is considered a terrorist organization in
the United States. It was considered as a terrorist group
in Europe until it was removed from the European list
of such organizations. It is also one of the
organizations that collaborated with the former regime
of Saddam Hussein, acting as a tool of repression
against the Iraqi people. The Iraqi Government
therefore took the decision to ensure the departure of
members of the group from Iraq by the end of 2011, as
well as to work on their resettlement and on
guaranteeing their human rights.

Iraq has suffered for long time from the sanctions
placed on it because it represented a threat to
international peace and security after Saddam's
invasion of Kuwait in 1990. However, since 2003 Iraq
has proved beyond any doubt that it no longer
represents a threat to international peace and security.
In furtherance of the goals of the United Nations to

maintain international peace and security, Iraq supports
international efforts aimed at disarmament and arms
control. On 19 August 2008, Iraq joined the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. On
12 February 2009, it acceded to the Convention on the
Prohibition of the Development, Production,
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on
Their Destruction. On 12 November 2009, Iraq signed
the Convention on Cluster Munitions. And, on
llAugust 2010, Iraq signed The Hague Code of
Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation. In
addition, Iraq chaired the substantive session of the
Disarmament Commission held from 4 to 21 April
2011, which strengthened the momentum in the
bilateral and group negotiations on nuclear
disarmament.

All of this constitutes a clear message from Iraq
that it is no longer a threat to international peace and
security, but rather that Iraq is an important and
effective country in the international efforts to spread
international peace and security throughout our world.

On the regional front, the Arab world is
witnessing a wave of political changes and reform
movements that prove the rightness of Iraq's political
direction in terms of achieving political change and
adopting democracy, elections and the peaceful
transition of power as a way of governing. I would like
to point out that, during the 2004 discussions relating
to development and modernization in the Arab world,
Iraq emphasized the importance of activating the
mechanisms of the joint Arab system to deepen the
foundations of democracy, expand the participation of
the masses in the political sector and in the taking of
national decisions, continue economic reforms to raise
the living conditions of Arab nations, ensure social
justice and underscore the importance of women's role
in society and the need to support their rights and to
empower them, as well as many other important
matters. If these points had been taken with seriousness
and foresight, maybe we could have avoided many of
the events now happening in the Arab world.

Owing to Iraq's belief in the importance of taking
its leadership role in the joint Arab work system and its
joint mechanisms - at the forefront of which is the
Summit of the League of Arab States - Iraqi Minister
for Foreign Affairs Hoshyar Zebari delivered a letter to
the Secretary-General of the Arab League in which Iraq
requested the postponement of the Summit scheduled
to be held in Baghdad in May, to be rescheduled to its

regular time in March 2012. That request was due to
the situation and political developments in the Arab
world, which is still escalating, with the implications
that entails. The Iraqi Government believes that, at this
stage, the timing is not appropriate for the holding of
the Summit. However, Iraq reserves its right to host the
Arab Summit in Baghdad on the date I have
mentioned. On 5 May, the general secretariat of the
Arab League issued an official statement indicating
that the Summit had been postponed upon an official
request from Iraq, which reserved the right to host the
Summit in Baghdad and to maintain the helm of the
joint Arab work for a full year from the date of holding
the next Summit.

As a result of Iraq's openness to all countries of
the world, the past period has seen many visits to
Baghdad by foreign officials. Mr. John Boehner,
Speaker of the United States House of Representatives,
visited Baghdad on 16 April. Mr. Marzuki Ali, Speaker
of Indonesia's People's Representative Council, visited
Baghdad on 3 May. Ms. Nancy Pelosi, leader of the
Democratic Party bloc in the United States Congress,
visited Baghdad on 5 May. United States Senator John
McCain visited Iraq, along with a congressional
delegation, on 9 May. Russian Foreign Minister Sergey
Lavrov visited Baghdad on 10 May. Iranian Minister
for Foreign Affairs Aliakbar Salehi visited Iraq on
11 May. Czech Prime Minister Petr Neeas visited
Baghdad on 23 May. Jordanian Prime Minister Marouf
Bakhit visited Baghdad on 1 June. Under-Secretary-
General for Political Affairs Lynn Pascoe visited Iraq
on 11 June.

In addition, Iraq's Prime Minister visited the
Republic of Korea on 27 April, where he met President
Lee Myung-bak and Mr. Park Hee-ta, Speaker of the
National Assembly. Iraq's Minister for Foreign Affairs
also headed Iraq's delegation to the ministerial meeting
of the Non-Aligned Movement held in Bali from 23 to
27 May.

At that meeting, he delivered a statement in
which he expressed Iraq's desire to open collaboration
channels in the field of investments, which would
enforce the ties of cooperation between Iraq and
countries of the Movement. He also expressed the hope
of the Iraqi Government to activate its role at the
working level with regional and international
organizations, especially within the framework of the
Non-Aligned Movement. Mr. Hoshyar Zebari also
headed Iraq's delegation that participated in the thirty-
eighth work session of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, held in Astana from 28 to 30 June.

On 15 December 2010, the Council hosted an
historic meeting (see S/PV.6450) on Iraq at which three
important resolutions were adopted: resolutions 1956
(2010), 1957 (2010) and 1958(2010). These resolutions
represented the beginning of the end of sanctions and
restrictions imposed on Iraq as a result of the crimes of
the Saddam regime. The Iraqi Government is working
on following up on those three resolutions adopted by
the Security Council. The Iraqi Government has started
consultations with the Secretariat to formulate a
memorandum of understanding regarding the
implementation of paragraph 7 of the resolution 1958
(2010) relating to ending the oil-for-food programme.

Iraq has presented its fourth and last report to the
Security Council in April regarding the successor
arrangements of the Development Fund for Iraq. The
Ministry of Foreign Affairs is following up on the
subject of ratifying the additional protocol of the
International Atomic Energy Agency as part of its
commitment to resolution 1957 (2010).

The Government of Iraq, pursuant to its
commitment to improve its relations with the State of
Kuwait, has exhibited a thorough spirit of cooperation
at various levels to resolve all outstanding issues. The
Joint Ministerial Committee held a meeting in March,
chaired by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of both
countries. Iraq has emphasized the importance of the
principle of joint management of the navigational
channel in Khawr Abdullah and of respect for the
report of the specialized committee in charge of
marking the borders to ensure the freedom of
navigation.

I would like to point out my Government's
position regarding the issue of missing Kuwaitis and
Kuwaiti property, as mentioned in the letter of 5 July
from the Iraqi Minister of Foreign Affairs to the
Secretary-General, which is not to extend the mandate
of the High-level Coordinator when it expires on
31 December; to depend on the mechanisms of the
Tripartite Commission; and, as suggested in the
Minister's letter to the Secretary-General dated
26 November 2010, to establish a technical team in the
Kuwaiti Embassy in Baghdad, which was welcomed by
all members of the Security Council in its press
statement of 17 December 2010 (SC/10130). Working
in this way, we could better serve the interests of our
two countries.

The Foreign Minister asserted in his letter that the
Government of Iraq is completely serious about
solving all of its outstanding issues with the State of
Kuwait and is proving that it is taking the necessary
steps to implement relevant Security Council
resolutions. Iraq realizes that confidence-building must
originate from the desire of both countries to improve
their relations in order to serve the interests of both the
Iraqi and the Kuwaiti peoples.
11-42035

Finally, I would like to reaffirm my
Government's appreciation for the role played by the
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and for the
efforts of the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Mr. Ad Melkert, in providing the backing and
support requested by the Iraqi Government, in
accordance with the mechanisms agreed upon by the
two parties.

