Mr. Cheok (Singapore): We express our
appreciation to Special Envoy Ian Martin for his
briefing and congratulate Foreign Minister Guterres. It
is good to see him again.

Timor-Leste is in a time of need. The
international community has responded to such need
before. In 1999, the United Nations Transitional
Administration in East Timor was established; it was
followed by the United Nations Mission of Support in
East Timor and, recently, by the United Nations Office
in Timor-Leste. The question is, of course: What
happens next?

It is our view that the Secretary-General's report
provides the answer. It is an insightful and
comprehensive piece with sensible recommendations.
It was not conceived in a vacuum; it was based on the
assessment mission led by Special Envoy Ian Martin.
Mr. Martin and his team consulted a broad cross
section of Timorese society and international
stakeholders. It is clear that their observations and
analysis contributed greatly to the quality of the report.

This is not just about the United Nations; Timor-
Leste's leaders have also spoken. In a letter dated
4 August 2006, Prime Minister Jose Ramos-Horta said
that

"a robust police, military and civilian element is
indispensable to our hard-won peace and
freedom. There is a consensus among all
stakeholders that the situation in Timor-Leste
requires the establishment of a United Nations
multidimensional and integrated peacekeeping
mission" (5/2006/620, annex).

He also spoke of a strong civilian component, a police
force of considerable strength and a small military
force that would all be under the command and control
of the United Nations. If those are the views of Timor-
Leste's leaders, then we should listen. The people of
Timor-Leste are the ultimate stakeholders in this
exercise.

Nation-building is a delicate process. Timor-
Leste's troubles are a vivid reminder that reverses are
possible, but that is no reason for discouragement. We
should take setbacks in our stride, as rarely has there
been a case of absolutely smooth sailing in nation-
building. Indeed, this is motivation for us to stay the
course and ensure success in the face of difficulty.

The Secretary-General's report rightfully
identified priority areas. Ensuring security and stability
is crucial. Here, we must thank Australia, Malaysia,
New Zealand and Portugal for their superb efforts.
Security-sector reform is also key. To a large degree,
institutional failures in the National Police Force of
Timor-Leste and in the Armed Forces of Timor-Leste
were at the core of this crisis; they need to be rebuilt.
Moreover, there is a need for political reconciliation.
Timor-Leste will also need electoral support in the run-
up to and during the 2007 elections. Timor-Leste is in a
transitional phase, and having both a large United
Nations police presence and a smaller military
component is essential. Those two components will
contribute to the restoration of stability and law and
order until the Timorese themselves are ready to fully
reassume those roles.

Albert Einstein once said, "I never think of the
future. It comes soon enough." Let me be a bit
presumptuous and disagree. We need to think about
Timor-Leste's future. We need to help it to put
conditions in place to allow for its development as a
stable and cohesive nation. In tandem, we need to
assist with capacity-building for its institutions and its
people. The Secretary-General's report correctly states
that this will be a long-term commitment. The United
Nations has been at the core of those efforts since
Timor-Leste's independence. It will remain at the core
of those efforts for the next few years. We should
remain committed. If we get this right, we can all look
forward to a brighter future for Timor-Leste.

