Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, allow me to congratulate you, Madam,
on your presidency of the Security Council during
this month. I would like to thank His Excellency the
Secretary-General for his report (S/2017/283) on the
United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL).
I would also like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Martin Kobler, for his
efforts to help the parties in Libya reach a compromise
and for his important briefing on the most recent
developments in Libya and Ambassador Olof Skoog,
Permanent Representative of Sweden, for his briefing
in his capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.

I would like to reiterate that the Government of
National Accord supports all United Nations efforts
aimed at achieving a solution to the political stalemate
in Libya with a view to ensuring stability in the
country and alleviating the suffering of its people.
The ongoing political division and the deteriorating
security conditions, in addition to a variety of difficult
circumstances, undoubtedly cast a shadow over Libya
at various levels and exacerbate the suffering of the
Libyan people on a daily basis, despite the serious
efforts by the Government of National Accord to
salvage the situation and overcome the stalemate and
the worsening difficulties. We reiterate the importance
of reaching an inclusive political solution among the
actors so as to put an end to the division in Libya, relying
on the framework of the Libyan Political Agreement.

The threat of violence and force by any party can
have only very negative consequences on the security
and stability in the country. In that regard, we pay
tribute to all of the initiatives and efforts of the United
Nations, the League of Arab States and the African
Union, in addition to those of neighbouring and fraternal
countries, for their efforts to mend the rift between the
parties in Libya and to establish peace and security
throughout the country. We hope that their constructive
efforts will continue to address the political stalemate
and allow them to reach a compromise and minimize
the tension among the various parties.

We also reiterate that the Libyan Political
Agreement might need limited amendments, especially
on the agreement of the political stakeholders. We do
not think that that is impossible. It could be achieved
by way of a constructive dialogue among the parties
to the dispute. In that regard, we welcome the decision
of the Libyan House of Representatives regarding the
resumption of political dialogue. We consider that to be
a very important step towards a final inclusive solution
to the crisis in Libya.

Since the Libyan Political Agreement was signed on
17 December 2015, the Government ofNational Accord
has faced and continues to face many challenges, but it
has managed to take important steps aimed at delivering
its citizens from their suffering, which are related to
the country's socioeconomic and security problems.
The Government operationalized the institutions of the
country and adopted the 2017 budget, so as to be able to
deliver basic services to its citizens, establish peace and
combat terrorism, irregular and illegal migration and
the smuggling of petroleum products. The Government
of National Accord is also facing many challenges, and
in that regard we commend the sacrifices and efforts
made by all the people of Libya, especially in the two
cities of Sirte and Benghazi - which have resulted in
a lull in terrorist group activities. It is highly necessary
in that respect to have a unified national army to work
under the political leadership of the country and in
accordance with globally recognized professional and
military procedures.

In connection with the Presidential Guard, the
Presidential Council is making ongoing efforts to set
up the system, in coordination with the command of
the Presidential Guard and Lieutenant-General Paolo
Serra, the Senior Advisor to the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on security sector matters.
We call on the international community to support
the system, exempt it from the weapons embargo and
provide it with all of the important equipment that it
needs to undertake its mission, which is to safeguard
governmental institutions. We also call for the Libyan
National Army to be exempted from the weapons
embargo, so that it can uphold its counter-terrorism
mission throughout Libya.

The unjustified and sudden military escalation
around Tamanhint airport, which started with heavy
artillery and aircraft strikes in recent days and
resulted in heavy casualties and damage to facilities,
has brought the country to the brink of civil war and
may even have dealt a very strong blow to all of the
de-escalation and settlement efforts for which we have
been calling. Everyone knows that the targeting of those
areas has nothing to do with the war against terrorism.
We welcome the call issued by the ambassadors of the
permanent five on 12 April for the de-escalation and
immediate cessation of all hostilities. Nevertheless,
the violations and land and air attacks continue. All
of that notwithstanding, the Presidential Council has
established a ministerial committee to de-escalate
and minimize the tension, as mentioned in the letter
by the head of the Presidential Council on 16 April to
the international community, aimed at immediately
urging those responsible for the escalation to cease
their activities.

The human rights situation in Libya remains
a cause for great concern, especially owing to the
ongoing violations taking place for political reasons
or for extortion and ransom, not to mention the
suffering of civilians under the military operations
and indiscriminate bombing, and the illegal migrants
exposed to grave abuses. We reiterate that it will be
difficult to address all ofthose issues unless stability is
restored throughout the national territory and until we
rid ourselves of the rampant armed groups. To that end,
agreement must be reached between the Presidential
Council and the House of Representatives, so that
the Government of National Accord can undertake its
mission, as required.

Based on the principle of national ownership,
we call on the United Nations Support Mission in
Libya (UNSMIL) to cooperate and coordinate with
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in preparing reports,
especially some that are not included in the Mission's
mandate - such as a report on illegal migrants in Libya.
Indeed, illegal migrants transiting through Libyan
territories suffer, and we therefore hope for future
coordination with the Libyan authorities to address
that issue. UNSMIL's positions should be reflected in
writing instead of on Twitter, because tweets might
inflame public opinion.

