Mr. Eler (Turkey): The situation across the
Middle East continues to be a grave concern for all of
us. Terrorism, violence and humanitarian crises have
escalated and engulfed millions of innocent people
in the region. The peace, security and stability of the
entire region and beyond are at stake.

In the face of this grim reality, we must maintain
our focus on the urgent need to resolve the Israeli-
Palestinian conflict, which still undermines the
prospects for lasting regional and global peace. Failing
to do so will further destabilize the region and lead to
more extremism.

One year after the unprecedented suffering caused
by the Israel Defense Forces offensive, little to no
recovery or reconstruction has taken place in Gaza. The
military operation, coupled with the illegal blockade
imposed on Gaza, has led to chronic, widespread and
systematic violations of human rights, above all the
right to life and security, as underlined by the report
of the Commission of Inquiry on Gaza. People who
live in tremendous despair and insecurity are losing
their belief that a solution and peaceful coexistence are
possible. The current situation is unsustainable and will
only further disenfranchise the Palestinian people. The
international community can no longer afford to stand
idly by as this tragedy unfolds.

While the immediate priority must be to address
the grave situation and growing frustration in Gaza,
only long-term solutions can turn the tide in Gaza's
reconstruction. The ongoing illegal blockade and other
restrictions must be lifted in accordance with resolution
1860 (2009). Further steps should be taken to alleviate
the dire situation, sustain the current ceasefire and
support the efforts of the national unity Government
to operate in Gaza. On this occasion, we also would
like to highlight the alarming financial challenge
that United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East is facing today and
the importance of providing sustained support to the
Agency as a contributor to stability in the region.

The need to find a negotiated political settlement for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, achieving a two-State
solution and ending the longest occupation in modern
history in accordance with the relevant United Nations
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, remain urgent
priorities. There is a broad international consensus on
the unsustainability and unacceptability of the status
quo. The trend in Europe towards the recognition of
the State of Palestine is a reflection of this frustration.
It is our sincere hope that reason will prevail and that
Israel will engage with the peace process in a sincere
and results-oriented manner. Israel should demonstrate
its commitment to a two-State solution, as it is the only
viable option for sustainable peace and security.

Palestinian unity is also imperative if a lasting
solution is to be reached. It is high time for the
international community to renew its engagement to
finding a solution of the problem. We need to intensify
our efforts towards the adoption of a Security Council
resolution setting a time frame and parameters for
peace negotiations based on the vision of a two-State
solution for peace. The Council should assume its
primary responsibility vis-a-vis international peace and
security. Turkey will continue its support for finding a
just, comprehensive and lasting solution to the conflict
and the establishment of a sovereign and independent
Palestinian State within the pre-1967 borders and with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

The Syrian crisis has become a constant factor
of instability and immense human suffering for the
entire region and beyond. A collective response that
addresses the magnitude of the threat remains lacking.
One should keep in mind that no country is immune to
this acute crisis as its impacts range from terrorism to
displacement and devastation. The regime is responsible
for this chaos.

Turkey, the largest refugee-hosting country in
the world, is gravely concerned by the humanitarian
and security impacts of the crisis, which have caused
unprecedented devastation. Given the enormity of that
challenge, I need to reiterate that a meaningful and
genuine burden-sharing is the collective responsibility
of the international community. It is neither possible
nor just to expect Turkey to face, alone, the migratory
pressures or the risks and threats emanating from
Syria, as we recently witnessed during the clashes in
Ayn al-Arab/Kobani and Tel Abyad.

The international community has still not envisaged
a comprehensive strategy, with political, security and
humanitarian pillars, to re-establish stability in Syria.
We must focus on addressing the underlying causes
of the problem through resolute action. The regime's
indiscriminate attacks should not be overshadowed
by the appalling actions of Daesh. It is also important
to express outrage at the use of barrel bombs and the
increase in chlorine attacks by the regime forces, as
was emphasized in the recent letter of 18 June, signed
by 71 countries, which was addressed to the Security
Council, the Secretary-General and the President of the
General Assembly.

We believe that there is no military solution to the
conflict. The territorial integrity of Syria is of utmost
importance. Peace and stability can only be reinstated
in Syria through a genuine and comprehensive political
transition, based on the Geneva Communique of June
2012 (S/2012/523, annex) through the establishment
of a "transitional governing body" with authority to
exercise full executive powers. In that framework,
we support the mission of the United Nations Special
Envoy for Syria, Mr. De Mistura, and his bilateral
consultations initiative.

We would also like to highlight our support to the
Iraqi Government in its fight against Daesh, and express
our concern at the rise of sectarian-motivated attacks
against civilians. In that regard, the implementation
of inclusive policies to end the alienation of some
segments of society and the enhancement of efforts to
achieve national reconciliation would be key for Iraq's
stability.

Last but not least, let me express our support for the
efforts to find a political solution to the crisis in Yemen,
which can only occur only through peaceful dialogue
and reconciliation. The parameters for achieving that
goal are clear: the Gulf Cooperation Council initiative,
the final Outcomes Document of the National Dialogue
Conference, and Security Council resolution 2216
(2015). Yemen should not become another showcase
of the damage inflicted by sectarian policies in the
region. With that understanding, upon our proposal an
Organization of Islamic Cooperation Contact Group
on Yemen was established. Its goal is to contribute
to finding a political solution. We are also concerned
about the humanitarian situation in Yemen. To that end,
we will do our utmost to continue our assistance to the
population in need.

The supremacy of diplomacy was demonstrated
again by some recent developments, and gave us hope
that a solution to the protracted crises can be found.
In that regard, we welcome the agreement reached
recently between the P5+1 and Iran on the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action, as well as the adoption
of Security Council resolution 2231 (2015) on the topic.
The initialling of the Libyan Political Agreement is
also a promising first step towards a comprehensive
solution, with the participation of all parties to the
political dialogue and establishment of a Government
of National Accord.

Let me conclude by reiterating our strong
commitment to the peace and security of the overall
region and our full and continued solidarity with the
Palestinian people.

