The President (interpretation from Russian): I shall
now make a statement in my capacity as representative of
the Russian Federation.

Russia has repeatedly expressed its deep concern
regarding the crisis in Sierra Leone. While firmly
condemning the rebels, we have supported the demands of
the African countries and the international community to
restore constitutional order. Following the restoration of the
legitimate Government in Sierra Leone, remnants of the
deposed military junta continue to follow the path of
military resistance. We condemn the inhumane acts of
Violence perpetrated against the civilian population and
demand their immediate cessation.

The legitimate Government of Sierra Leone is now
faced with the tasks of restoring peace and security,
effective governance, developing the democratic process,
reconstruction and restoration and, particularly important,
achieving national reconciliation.

The draft resolution before us today attests to the
importance the Security Council attaches to the restoration
of peace and security in Sierra Leone and to the impact of
the situation in that country on the situation in the
subregion. The deployment of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Sierra Leone, to be authorized by the Security
Council, is an example of the strengthening of the
coordination of actions between the United Nations and the
regional and subregional organizations on peacekeeping
issues, in particular between the Security Council and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), which is making a significant contribution to
the normalization of the situation in Sierra Leone.

A guarantee for the success of the new United
Nations Mission is its comprehensive cooperation and
close coordination with the ECOWAS Monitoring Group
(ECOMOG). It is extremely important that the tasks
assigned to the Mission be linked to the concrete
objectives of the Government of Sierra Leone for the
restoration of peace and stability in the country.

Russia stands ready to participate actively in the
work of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra
Leone, and in particular to provide it with military
observers.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
It is my understanding that the Security Council is
ready to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution
(5/1998/620) before it. If I hear no objection, I shall put
the draft resolution to the vote now.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
A vote was taken by show of hands.

In favour:
Bahrain, Brazil, China, Costa Rica, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Japan, Kenya, Portugal, Russian Federation,
Slovenia, Sweden, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America

The President (interpretation from Russian): There
were 15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 1181 (1998).

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The Council will remain seized of the matter.

The meeting rose at 1.40 pm.

