The President: I should like to inform the Council
that I have received a letter from the representative of
Burundi in which he requests to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Terence
(Burundi) took a place at the Council table.

The President: The Security Council will now begin
its consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the understanding
reached in its prior consultations.

Members of the Council have before them document
S/ 1995/631, which contains the text of a letter dated 28
July 1995 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council.

Members of the Council also have before them
document S/l995/724, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by Argentina, the Czech Republic,
France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, the Russian Federation,
Rwanda, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America.

I should like to draw the attention of the members of
the Council to the following other documents: S/ 1995/ 157,
letter dated 23 February 1995 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting the report of the preparatory fact-finding
mission to Burundi; S/l995/l63, the report of the Security
Council mission to Burundi; and documents S/ 1995/673 and
S/ 1995/731, letters dated 8 and 23 August 1995,
respectively, from the Permanent Representative of
Burundi to the United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council.

The first speaker is the representative of Burundi, on
whom I now call.


