Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We would like to express
our profound appreciation to the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners for their untiring efforts
to provide life-saving assistance in Yemen under
extremely challenging conditions. We also thank Under-
Secretary-General Mark Lowcock for his briefing on
those activities and to express our gratitude to the
United Kingdom for calling for this essential meeting.

There can be no doubt that the humanitarian situation
in Yemen and the suffering of the Yemeni people is still
exceptionally worrying. The Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs has noted that armed conflicts
have intensified in Al-Hudaydah governorate, resulting
in civilians being killed, injured or displaced, and in
the destruction of civilian infrastructure. Overland
access to the City of Al-Hudaydah remains limited,
which affects humanitarian operations. Its port is
vital to humanitarian aid, and it must remain open
and functional. The extremely difficult humanitarian
conditions have been further exacerbated by the rapid
depreciation of the local currency, and the continued
economic decline is pushing millions of Yemenis close
to famine.

Already 75 per cent of the population requires food
assistance. The non-payment of salaries has affected
the already crumbling health service, increasing the
probability of a major cholera epidemic. Thousands
of people have been affected by the severe weather
caused by Tropical Cyclone Luban. The situation has
now amounted to the worst and biggest humanitarian
crisis in the world today. All the reports and figures
from the United Nations and humanitarian agencies
warn that unless urgent and concerted efforts are taken,
the already devastating humanitarian situation will
continue to deteriorate. In the meantime, we welcome
today's announcement by the United Arab Emirates and
Saudi Arabia that they will provide $70 million through
UNICEF to pay teachers' salaries.

There are no options left. All parties must fully
cooperate with the United Nations and its humanitarian
partners so that much-needed aid reaches all of those
in need. Safe, unhindered and sustained humanitarian
access remains absolutely vital. The use of the port of
Al-Hudaydah is critical, and the protection of civilians
and civilian facilities must be given high priority.

For the sake of the surviving civilians, who have
endured so much, we strongly appeal to all parties to
exercise maximum restraint, according to established
international humanitarian law. The international
community should take urgent and coordinated action
to address the distortions in the Yemeni economy.
All of those measures are of major importance, but
they will not be sufficient to sustainably address the
unfolding humanitarian tragedy. The deep-rooted crisis
in Yemen demands far more, most urgently, namely, a
comprehensive political solution that addresses both the
suffering of Yemenis and the concerns of the countries
of the region. In that context, diplomacy must provide
the prime response to finding a durable political
solution, while respecting the unity, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Yemen.

It is very clear that the Yemeni crisis can be resolved
only through a Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned process,
facilitated by the United Nations. We fully support
the continued diplomatic efforts of Special Envoy
Griffiths. We call upon all parties to constructively
engage with the Special Envoy to fully reinvigorate the
political process. The Council should also make clear
its continued, full and comprehensive support for his
tireless efforts.

