Costa Rica congratulates Germany on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of July and appreciates the contributions to today's meeting by Secretary-General Antonio Guterres and the other speakers. While an invisible virus is sweeping the planet without consideration for the size, wealth or level of development of nations, we were concerned that the Security Council had not joined the Secretary-General's call for a global ceasefire. We therefore wish to acknowledge the leadership of France and Tunisia in finally adopting yesterday resolution 2532 (2020), on the current pandemic caused by coronavirus disease and calling for an immediate pause in the 90-day armed conflict. Weapons must be silenced so that countries in conflict can focus their energies and resources on fighting a common enemy that is affecting us all, but mainly those in fragile situations who are totally dependent on humanitarian aid to meet the challenge. Since the beginning of the current pandemic, Costa Rica has insisted that health is a global public good. We believe that this is the first lesson learned from the pandemic and that in reliance on such a perspective we will be able to prevent and overcome similar challenges in future. The pandemic has caused triggered multiple crises, and their solutions must therefore be multilateral and based on solidarity. Costa Rica believes that the World Health Organization (WHO) should lead the multilateral response to the pandemic. On 29 May, Costa Rica, the WHO and almost 40 other States launched a global repository to share data, knowledge and intellectual property and to facilitate equitable access to health products that could lead to cures and save lives. We also presented a proposal to the multilateral and regional financial organizations in support of action for the benefit of the most vulnerable and to take into account the deficits resulting from efforts to reactivate economies and combat impoverishment adopted following the health-care measures undertaken to contain the coronavirus. In addition, Costa Rica would like to highlight two elements that, if left unchecked, could transform a health crisis into a security crisis. The first is logistics, in particular the management of the transport of food, water, medicines and fuel. Logistics is the method that ensures that health workers are where they need to be and that the equipment and pharmaceuticals that support them are in the right place at the right time. During large-scale emergencies, such as the one we are experiencing today, if any of the links in the supply chain from the source to the consumer are broken, the effect is exponential and the break becomes a door through which fear, lawlessness and even the breakdown of social order can leak in. The second is the difference between national territory and viral territory. When a solitary outbreak occurs, the viral territory can be clear. The opportunity to contain and destroy the outbreak is defined by the area where the virus lives. But when we face a pandemic, the territory of the virus transcends national boundaries. As it grows, it defines new territories and regions, sometimes connected, sometimes not. To fight the virus, we have to work in a coordinated way because without joint efforts the virus will act like the Lernaean Hydra of Greek mythology - one head is cut off and two others grow in its place. In conclusion, in order to control and defeat a pandemic, we must cooperate to ensure that supply chains, particularly those for health-related products, are identified, understood and supported. We must also ensure that we understand the regions where the virus lives and, as an international community, coordinate our responses to control and attack the virus, always keeping in mind that the virus has no conceptions of nation, race or creed.
