Mr. Massod Khan (Pakistan): We are grateful
to the Guatemalan presidency for organizing this
debate, and we thank you, Mr. Foreign Minister, for
presiding over it. We thank the Secretary-General for
his important statement. We welcome Judge Sang-
Hyun Song, President of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), as well as Mr. Phakiso Mochochoko, of
the Office of the Prosecutor.

The quest for justice and the rule of law has been
central to the march of civilization. The rule of law is
critical for a just world and international peace and
stability. International law contributes directly to world
peace. The rule of law is strengthened if there are no
exceptions or double standards in the application of
international law. The Security Council would promote
the rule of law by greater use ofthe means for the pacific
settlement of disputes and more frequent recourse to
the International Court of Justice.

There should be no impunity for the most egregious
crimes and mass atrocities. Peace and justice go hand
in hand. In post-conflict situations, however, there is
a time for healing, a time for moving on, a time for
closure and a time for reconciliation - reconciliation
that is not motivated by political expediencies but
that aims to unify hostile and disparate segments of a
population.

Every conflict situation has its own dynamics.
Durable peace is best pursued through a comprehensive
approach that is not restricted to retributive justice. In
post-conflict societies it should take into account the
long-term imperatives of national reconciliation, ethnic
harmony and social stability.

The rule of law needs to be integrated into post-
conflict institution-building efforts. The Security
Council has done seminal work in that regard.

The tension between demands forjustice and peace
must be resolved in a balanced and sustainable manner.
Threats of prosecution can act as a deterrent, but, at
the same time, such threats must not fuel conflicts or
complicate peacebuilding efforts. Other strategies,
such as truth and reconciliation commissions, have
been used effectively in many situations. The views of
regional organizations in that regard should be given
due weight.

Justice should not be reduced to punishment. It
should recognize injury, establish truth, acknowledge
victims' dignity and preserve their narrative in
collective memory. From that perspective, restorative
justice is preferable because it heals wounds and
promotes societal reconciliation. Restorative justice is
more effective when it is neither externally imposed nor
culturally alien.

The principle of complementarity and the need to
strengthen domestic judicial systems are important. The
ICC is a court of last resort. The primacy of national
jurisdiction has to be respected. Where national criminal
justice systems are not robust, reforms of judicial
systems, prisons and the security apparatus may be
undertaken. The objective of ending impunity must be
attained by strengthening local courts, enhancing the
investigative capacity of national police, establishing
forensic laboratories, supporting local prosecutors and
improving conditions in prisons.

Pakistan is not a signatory to the Rome Statute.
However, we acknowledge the rights and obligations of
States parties to the Statute. We are of the view that
no action of the Security Council should lead to the
use of the ICC for political purposes. It is necessary
to maintain the distinction between the Council and
the ICC so as to ensure the objectivity, credibility,
impartiality and independence of the Court.

Since its inception, only a few situations, mostly
from one part ofthe world, have been referred to the ICC.
The 2004 Relationship Agreement between the United
Nations and the Court spells out the parameters of the
relationship between the ICC and the United Nations.
At this stage, more diligent scrutiny of empirical
and accumulated evidence is required to assess the
contribution of the ICC in relation to the work of the
Security Council and the correlation between the Court
and the Council.

Today's discussion will deepen our understanding
of the role of the ICC and its relationship with the
United Nations, especially with the Security Council.
We support the role of the Security Council and the
international judicial system in fostering a culture of
the rule of law in order to promote international peace
and security.

