Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): I have the
pleasure to speak today on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement (NAM). At the outset, I would like to convey
the Movement's appreciation to the Indian presidency
of the Security Council for having convened this
important open debate to discuss the progress achieved
in the implementation of the measures set out in the
note by the President of 26 July 2010 (S/2010/507)
and the concept paper (S/2012/853, annex). This open
debate will help us direct the discussions towards
enhancing the transparency and efficiency of the work
of the Security Council and to meet the expectations of
the general membership of the United Nations. I would
also like to thank Ambassador Moraes Cabral, Chair
of the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions, for his briefing today.

This debate is the fifth on the working methods of
the Council. The increased frequency in recent years
of holding such debates is indicative of the fact that the
Member States attach great importance to this matter.
The same interest has been shown by the Non-Aligned
Movement. The Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement at its sixteenth Summit, held
this year in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, reiterated
their long-standing position on the issue in the relevant
paragraphs adopted at the Summit.

At that NAM. Summit meeting in Tehran, taking
into account the inter-linkage between Security
Council reform and improving its working methods,
NAM. Heads of State and Government underscored the
need for United Nations Member States to fully respect
the functions and powers of each principal organ of the
United Nations, in particular the General Assembly,
and to maintain the balance among these organs
within their respective Charter-based functions and
powers. They stressed that the Security Council must
fully observe all Charter provisions and all General
Assembly resolutions, which clarify its relationship
with the latter organ and other principal organs. In this
context, they affirmed that Article 24 of the Charter
does not necessarily provide the Security Council with
the competence to address issues that fall within the
functions and powers of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council, including in the areas of
norm-setting, legislation, administrative and budgetary
matters, and establishing definitions, bearing in
mind that the Assembly is primarily tasked with the
progressive development of international law and its
codification.

In this regard, the meeting expressed its
grave concern over the increasing and continuing
encroachment by the Council on issues that clearly
fall within the functions and powers of other principal
organs of the United Nations and their subsidiary
bodies. It further stressed that close cooperation
and coordination among all principal organs are
indispensable in order to enable the United Nations to
remain relevant and capable of meeting the existing,
new and emerging threats and challenges.

The NAM. Summit also recommended, inter alia,
the following. It urged all States to uphold the primacy
of and full respect for the provisions of the United
Nations Charter pertaining to the functions and powers
of the Assembly and called on the Presidents of the
General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and the Security Council to conduct regular discussions
and coordination among themselves regarding the
agenda and programme of work of the respective
principal organs that they represent in order to establish
increased coherence and complementarity among those
organs in a mutually reinforcing manner, respectful of
each other's mandates, and with a view to generating
a mutual understanding among them, in whom the
members of the respective organs that they represent
have vested in good faith their trust and confidence.

It also welcomed as a step forward the informal
meetings between the Presidents of the Council and
Member States regarding the preparation of the annual
report of the Security Council, including those convened
by Viet Nam in 2008, Uganda in 2009, Nigeria in 2010,
Germany in 2011 and Colombia in 2012, and called
for more regular interaction between presidencies of
the Security Council and the wider membership of the
United Nations, which could help enhance the quality
of such reports.

It called on the Security Council to submit a more
explanatory, comprehensive and analytical annual
report to the General Assembly, assessing the work of
the Council, including in such cases where the Council
has failed to act, and the Views expressed by its members
during the consideration of the agenda items under its
consideration. It further called on the Security Council

to elaborate on the circumstances under which it adopts
different outcomes, whether resolutions, presidential
statements, press statements or remarks to the press.
It called on the Security Council, pursuant to
Articles 15 and 24 of the Charter of the United Nations,
to submit special reports for the consideration of the
General Assembly. It further called on the Security
Council to ensure that its monthly assessments are
comprehensive, analytical and issued in a timely
fashion. The General Assembly may consider proposing
parameters for the elaboration of such assessments.

It called on the Security Council to fully take into
account the recommendations of the General Assembly
on matters relating to international peace and security,
consistent with Article 11 of the Charter.

The Security Council should avoid resorting to
Chapter VII of the Charter as a tool for addressing issues
that do not necessarily pose a threat to international
peace and security. It should fully utilize the provisions
of other relevant chapters, including Chapters VI and
VIII, before invoking Chapter VII, which should be a
measure of last resort.

The Non-Aligned Movement notes the presidential
note of 5 June (S/2012/402), which expresses the
commitment of members to several efficiency-
enhancing measures with regard to the working
methods, including on the management of the Council's
programme of work, its meetings and their periodicity,
conference resources and interactivity, in maintaining
closer contact between the Security Council and United
Nations missions in the field.

The Security Council has taken some positive
steps pursuant to note 507. The Movement notes
the increase in the number of public meetings, and
expects that such an increase will be accompanied by
a qualitative improvement through the provision of
real opportunities and more meaningful exchanges of
view in order to take into account the contributions
of non-Council members, particularly those whose
interests are or may be directly affected by possible
decisions of the Council. Furthermore, the concerned
non-Council member should be given the opportunity
to express its views and position on such briefings.

The general observations and positions formulated
by numerous non-members of the Security Council
during its debates, including open debates, should be
properly taken into account in any possible outcome of
those debates and should be reflected in the Council's
annual report. NAM. appreciates the more frequent
convening of Arria Formula meetings as a practical way
to ensure more interaction with non-Council members
and regional and subregional organizations. It also
appreciates the holding of informal wrap-up sessions
at the end of each presidency to evaluate what has been
achieved.

The Non-Aligned Movement welcomes the
continued briefings and consultations of the Council
with troop-contributing countries (TCCs) as part of the
effort to plan and to execute peacekeeping operations
more effectively and with clearer mandates. The
Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations should
involve TCCs more frequently and more intensively in
its deliberations through sustained, regular and timely
interaction.

To increase the transparency of its work, to achieve
a balanced approach in interaction with non-members
and to improve the efficiency of its working methods,
the Council should seriously address the shortcomings
and take into consideration the relevant provisions of the
Charter and the resolutions that clarify its relationship
with the General Assembly and other organs of the
United Nations.

Finally, the Movement believes that more steps
are needed, along with the necessary political will on
the part of Member States, particularly the permanent
members of the Council, to improve the working
methods of the Council through both the General
Assembly and the Security Council. Transparency,
accountability and consistency are key elements that
the Security Council should observe in all its activities,
approaches and procedures. Every effort should be made
to render the Council more democratic, representative
and accountable. In that way, the Security Council can
deal more efficiently and effectively with its increasing
workload and with the multiplicity and complexity of
the issues on its agenda in maintaining international
peace and security. The Non-Aligned Movement stands
ready to contribute to the achievement of those goals.

