Mr. Cohen (United States of America): At the
outset, the United States is compelled by the urgency
of the humanitarian conditions in the Rukban camp
to reiterate in the strongest terms our call on the
Al-Assad regime and the Russian Federation to permit
deliveries of United Nations assistance from Damascus
and lift its restrictions on commercial routes to the
encampment immediately. The last United Nations-
Syrian Arab Red Crescent convoy delivery reached
the camp in February. People are starving. We count
on Special Envoy Pedersen's assistance to secure the
approvals from Damascus and Moscow as soon as
possible. A third convoy to Rukban could represent
a gesture by Damascus and its allies of goodwill and
seriousness towards United Nations efforts to relaunch
the political process.

Unfortunately, and despite the Special Envoy's
intense diplomacy, the political process remains
stalled by the Russian Federation and its supporters,
as evidenced by the latest round of Astana process
meetings held in Nur-Sultan on 25 and 26 April. Once
again, the so-called Astana process has failed to produce
tangible steps towards securing serious commitments
to advance the political process, the release of civilian
detainees, the approval of a humanitarian convoy to
deliver food and medicine to thousands of starving
people in Rukban or a nationwide ceasefire.

The Russian Federation and the Al-Assad regime
have consistently sought to stall United Nations efforts
to launch a credible political process. The Al-Assad
regime seems determined to end the conflict by waging
war on the Syrian people, rather than by implementing
principled political reform. The Security Council and
the international community are united, and must
remain united, in our recognition of the United Nations-
led political process in Geneva as the sole legitimate
forum for achieving a lasting, inclusive and credible
political solution to the conflict. That is why the United
States and our Syria small group partners - Egypt,
France, Germany, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and the
United Kingdom - will convene in Geneva on 3 May
for consultations with the Special Envoy on the way
forward towards implementing resolution 2254 (2015).

The United States also continues to support
Special Envoy Pedersen's focus on constitutional
reform. We commend the Special Envoy and the
Syrian opposition for their efforts to ensure that any
committee formed to draft a new constitution will be
balanced and credible. The United States position on the
constitutional committee is clear. First, the committee,
if formed, would represent only a symbolic first step
towards achieving the political solution envisioned in
resolution 2254 (2015), and could potentially serve as
a confidence-building measure upon which the parties
could secure progress on other benchmarks.

No matter how close the parties may be to agreement
on a constitutional committee, the United States
expects United Nations diplomatic efforts to continue
along the other tracks established for detainees and
missing persons, counter-terrorism, elections and the
creation of a safe, calm and neutral environment. The
United States insists that the Syrian opposition and the
United Nations reach agreement on the membership and
procedural elements of the constitutional committee
before it is formally established, which is the only way
to ensure its credibility and legitimacy.

The political transition outlined in resolution 2254
(2015) cannot succeed as long as violence remains an
ever-present threat in northern Syria. The United States
reiterates its calls on Russia and the Al-Assad regime to
halt their recent military escalation in Idlib province and
uphold the September 2018 Russian-Turkish ceasefire.

Despite Russia's claim to be targeting terrorists,
since February those operations have killed more
than 200 civilians and targeted first responders as
they attempted to save lives on the ground. More than
120,000 people have fled their homes, moving closer
to the Turkish border in order to seek safety. That
must end.

In north-eastern Syria the United States is working
hard to guarantee the security of our NATO ally
Turkey, while also securing the enduring defeat of
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). It is
vital that security conditions remain stable in order to
consolidate our hard-won gains and ensure that ISIL
is not able to regain momentum or control of territory.

Finally, progress on the release of civilian detainees
and missing persons is a vital component in achieving a
political solution under resolution 2254 (2015). However,
the token prisoner swaps between the Al-Assad regime
and Syrian opposition groups brokered by the so-
called Astana guarantors do not represent credible or
significantly meaningful steps towards building the
trust and confidence necessary to achieve a political
solution. Hundreds of thousands of innocent men,
women and children remain imprisoned without cause,
and the regime continues to arbitrarily arrest, torture
and execute detainees. The United States believes
that the United Nations is the only appropriate arbiter
for ensuring progress on the release of detainees and
missing persons from the Al-Assad regime's prisons.

