Mr. Barbalie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I would
like to thank Ms. Judy Cheng-Hopkins, Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacebuilding Support, for her

comprehensive briefing on the overall peacebuilding
agenda. I also thank Ms. Sylvie Lucas, Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission configuration for Guinea,
for her remarks.

We have emphasized many times that clear
mandates, strategic planning, coherent implementation
and timely and predictable funding are critical
elements of peacebuilding. The thematic debate
organized during our presidency of the Security
Council in January (see S/PV.6472) highlighted the
importance of national ownership and institution-
building for peacebuilding efforts and ensuring
sustainable peace.

Building domestic capacities and strengthening
domestic institutions are both included in the
recommendations of the civilian capacities review.
Moreover, comprehensive domestic peacebuilding
strategies are developed in close cooperation between,
on the one hand, the international community, which
often provides its technical and financial expertise in
the process, and post-conflict Governments, to ensure
domestic ownership and leadership, on the other hand.

The contribution of United Nations peacekeeping
to early peacebuilding is undeniable. For that reason, it
is important to clearly define what kind of
peacebuilding activities can be developed at the early
stages of a peacekeeping mission and which should be
part of short-term or long-term priorities. Therefore,
the integrated mission planning process needs to be
improved in order to assist United Nations field
missions and country teams to prioritize, while
domestic capacity assessment should be taken more
into account.

The United Nations must improve its expertise in
working with civilians on peacebuilding. Implementing
measures that support domestic capacity development
and developing policy dialogue with donors on
innovative approaches to the programming and funding
peacebuilding is of vital importance. The United
Nations system must clearly organize the roles and
responsibilities it carries for dealing with core
peacebuilding functions.

The Peacebuilding Commission and the
Peacebuilding Fund play an important role, in
particular for country-specific configurations, since
their peacebuilding strategies support activities related
to creating environments conducive to sustainable
peace and development. We are convinced that the

high-level stakeholders meeting of the Peacebuilding
Fund to be held in November will bring about concrete
recommendations on how better to utilize existing
domestic resources for economic recovery in post-
conflict situations.

The role of the Peacebuilding Fund is significant
with regard to providing a quick response to immediate
peacebuilding needs and post-conflict peacebuilding
opportunities. The recent debate on security sector
reform (see S/PV.6630) emphasized the important role
of the Peacebuilding Fund and funds allocated for this
purpose, not only in United Nations field missions but
also in non-mission settings.

We acknowledge the importance of the World
Bank-United Nations Fragility and Conflict Partnership
Trust Fund. Although it has been operational for just
over a year, the Fund continues to support
peacebuilding initiatives in the field as well as
exchanges of personnel between the two sponsoring
institutions.

We emphasize that timely, predictable and
sustainable funding for peacebuilding is the key to
success. Innovative approaches to peacebuilding
funding need to be explored and supported. Last year's
review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture brought to light new possibilities for the
work of the Peacebuilding Commission. Improved
methods of work contributed to better interaction
aimed at strengthening impact in the field.

To that end, cooperation between conflict-
affected States and donors in terms of support for
peacebuilding needs to be more structured, and
efficiency needs to be supported. Lessons learned and
previous experiences should be taken into
consideration. One-size-fits-all solutions should be
avoided, while the specificity of each country must be
taken into account.

This year's annual debate on women and peace
and security (see S/PV.6642) stressed important issues
related to peacebuilding, namely, ensuring and
increasing the role of women in peace processes,
conflict mediation and resolution, providing women
with a role in post-conflict needs assessment and
planning, granting women access to justice and
including women in economic recovery processes.
We are therefore of the view that UN-Women and
the Peacebuilding Support Office should cooperate

closely on implementing activities on the ground. The
comprehensive economic engagement of women in
economic recovery is not enough. The political
participation of women needs to be a high priority,
while more peacebuilding funds for women's
empowerment and gender equality should be allocated.

In conclusion, we firmly believe that only the
sustained and concerted efforts of all relevant actors
can provide meaningful and tangible results in the
peacebuilding arena. We should spare no effort in that
endeavour.

