Mr. Hosni (spoke in Arabic): It gives me great
pleasure to make a statement on behalf of Mr. Amre
Moussa, Secretary General of the League of Arab
States, who is unable to participate in this important
and historic meeting.

Given the great importance of this issue to our
member States and to Arab security, the League of
Arab States is resolved to promote peace and national
reconciliation in the Sudan. This issue has long been
on the agenda of the League, which is actively working
to find a comprehensive peaceful solution to the
situation in the Sudan. With regard to the issue of the
southern Sudan, following the signing of the Machakos
Protocol in July 2002 - which was welcomed by the
League of Arab States at the time - the League has
been focusing on a number of areas.

First, at the political level, we have been
promoting the peace process and the negotiations
between the Sudanese Government and the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement (SPLM), and urging
them promptly to conclude and sign a comprehensive
peace agreement. The Secretary General of the League
of Arab States participated in the signing last June of
the Nairobi peace declaration. He also visited the city
of Rumbek in southern Sudan last year as a guest of the
SPLM, and reaffirmed the commitment of the League
and its member States to the peace process, as well as
its determination, together with that of its institutions,
to actively participate in developing southern Sudan,
particularly the war-affected areas, in order to make
Sudanese unity an attractive, voluntary option.

Secondly, we have concentrated our efforts on the
development of southern Sudan. Those efforts have led
to significant pledges of financial support by member
States - Arab funds that are awaiting the signing of
the final comprehensive peace agreement. It gives me
great pleasure to inform the Council that the monetary
value of development projects now under way in
southern Sudan amount to over $200 million. These
projects are focusing on rebuilding the infrastructure,
particularly the road network connecting the north and
the south, as well as on skill-development programmes
in southern Sudan, in cooperation with Arab civil
society organizations.

Thirdly, in order to promote peace, reconstruction
and development efforts in all parts of the Sudan, the
Arab Summit meeting held last May in Tunisia called
upon Arab States and Arab financing funds to address
the heavy debt burden of the Sudan. That burden has
now reached over $65 billion, 40 per cent of which is
owed to Arab countries and funds.

Fourthly, the League of Arab States is working
through one of its specialized agencies, the Inter-Arab
Investment Guarantee Corporation, to finance an
investment project guarantee fund in southern Sudan to
expedite Arab efforts to develop that part of the
country and to provide the necessary guarantees for
secure investment.

Ending the long-standing conflict in southern
Sudan is now more of a concrete reality than ever
before, especially after today's signing of a
memorandum of understanding between the
Government of the Sudan and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement (SPLM). We call upon the
parties to sign a comprehensive peace agreement by the
end of this year. We also reaffirm our readiness to
provide the necessary support through our agencies to
guarantee the full implementation of the expected
agreement.
Fifthly, the time allotted to me here does not
make it possible to enumerate the various political and
humanitarian efforts being undertaken by the League of
Arab States with regard to the crisis in Darfur.
However, last August we discussed the situation in
Darfur at the ministerial level against the backdrop of
the report prepared by a fact-finding mission of the
League of Arab States to Darfur and eastern Chad. The
Chairman of the Commission of the African Union and
the Secretary-General's Special Representative for the
Sudan, Mr. Jan Pronk, and the Foreign Minister of
Nigeria, acting as the representative of President
Obasanjo in his capacity as the Chairman of the
African Union, all participated in the ceasefire
monitoring group and in the protection forces sent to
Darfur. In that context, we have also participated
actively in mediation efforts between the Government
of the Sudan, the SPLM. and the Sudan Justice and
Equality Movement. That led to this month's signing of
the two protocols on security and humanitarian issues.
We are also part of the joint mechanisms between the
Sudanese Government and the United Nations that are
carrying out the necessary assessment of the security
and humanitarian situation in Darfur.

Sixthly, addressing the crisis in Darfur requires
full compliance on the part of all parties with the
ceasefire signed in N'Djamena last April, as well as
with the two protocols on security and humanitarian
issues signed recently at Abuja, in order to produce the
necessary positive effects that will lead to an
improvement in the humanitarian and security situation
in Darfur. Dealing with that crisis also requires positive
cooperation with the African Union mission in order to
conclude the necessary agreements in the upcoming
negotiations, which seek to pave the way to a final and
comprehensive settlement of the issue. However, that
will require full and strong financial, technical and
logistical support for the African Union's efforts from
the international community. The humanitarian
situation in Darfur makes it incumbent upon all of us to
provide the necessary support. The League of Arab
States will spare no effort to provide all forms of
support to the African Union, in particular in the
humanitarian field. We would also like to convey our
readiness to take part, through our member States and
the various Arab financial and investment funds, in the
reconstruction of what has been destroyed in Darfur.

In conclusion, I must also welcome the positive
developments in the national reconciliation process in
Somalia, in particular the establishment of a
transitional Parliament, the election of Mr. Abdullahi
Yusuf Ahmad as President and the appointment of
various ministers. Those are all necessary steps
towards realizing peace and stability in Somalia in a
way that preserves the unity, territorial integrity and
independence of the country. We call upon all factions,
stakeholders and segments of Somalia's population to
work in good faith and cooperate positively with the
President-elect and the upcoming Government so as to
establish peace, security and prosperity and help regain
the country's status in the international community. We
call upon all Somali factions to behave responsibly,
and to put the interests of their country first. We warn
that, in the absence of commitment, the agreements
will not be implemented.

Finally, I would like to thank all the members of
the Council for their invaluable contributions.

