Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): I would like to
express our congratulations to Australia for assuming
the presidency of the Security Council. Additionally,
Mr. President, I would like to express my appreciation
for your continuing to preside over this meeting in spite
of the fact that your other colleagues, members of the
Council, do not find it attractive at this time ofthe day to
remain in the Chamber. It shows personal commitment
on your part, Sir, to the work of the Council and the
subject that we are considering today, and I thank you
for it.

Recent acts of terrorism on our continent and
further afield suggest that, despite concerted efforts by
Members States, the phenomenon continues to grow and
evolve, creating instability and untold consequences
for innocent populations and the regions they inhabit.
No country or continent is immune from the threat.
Given terrorism's global reach and its changing nature,
international cooperation has become even more
important in Member States' efforts to counter it.

International efforts should support a comprehensive,
multifaceted and integrated approach to address, inter
alia, the abuse of financial systems by terrorists,
cybersecurity, the increasing use of social media and
the Internet in radicalization, including incitement to
hatred, the merging of the link between ideological
extremism and transnational organized crime, and
kidnapping and hostage-taking for ransom. Terrorism
poses a threat to international peace and security and
to the enjoyment of human rights and fundamental
freedoms. It is imperative that the international
community adopt adequate measures to counter it.

The South African Government continues to
pledge its support for the global campaign against
terrorism within the framework of the United Nations,
which my delegation regards as pivotal in coordinating
and facilitating international efforts to that end,
particularly when dealing with the emergence of new
threats. South Africa supports the strengthening of
the multilateral system to deal with such efforts and
acknowledges the work being done by the General
Assembly and the subsidiary structures of the Security
Council in that regard. We also welcome initiatives and
efforts that promote dialogue, tolerance, diversity and
understanding among peoples, cultures and religions.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy remains a useful collective and flexible tool
for guiding the international community's response
to terrorism. It provides a holistic and multifaceted
response to the challenge and is premised on respect
for human rights and fundamental freedoms and the
rule of law. It is up to each country and subregion to
put the Strategy in its respective context and make it
meaningful to the diverse range of local stakeholders,
which is necessary for its successful implementation.
The growing threat ofterrorism has also highlighted
the need for the international community to reach
agreement on a definition of terrorism. It is therefore
important that we continue our efforts to finalize the
comprehensive convention on international terrorism.

South Africa reiterates its view that terrorism
cannot be defeated militarily and cannot be dealt with
solely through the use of force or coercive measures.
In the medium term, international cooperation must
also address the root causes of terrorism. There is
a need to understand and address the conditions that
make terrorism an attractive option to the disaffected.
Engagement, including through education, eliminating
inequalities and working with disadvantaged groups
in society, particularly young people, and developing
appropriate strategies at the national, regional and
international levels, remains critical.

In that context, it also becomes important to resolve
conflicts in all parts of the globe, including the search
for lasting peace in the Middle East. Illegal occupation
and the denial of freedom and the right to self-
determination create fertile ground for recruitment.
Political solutions aimed at resolving conflict and
creating the conditions for a better future over the long
term are required.

International cooperation in combating terrorism
should also include a joint commitment to eradicate
poverty and underdevelopment. Countermeasures can
never be sustainable if these factors are not addressed
in tandem with counter-terrorism initiatives.

South Africa stands firm in its condemnation of
terrorism in all its forms and believes that terrorist acts
and attacks against civilians cannot be condoned. That
approach is integral to the humanitarian values that
inspired our struggle for freedom and governed our
conduct during that period.

South Africa has taken note of the proposal
to establish the post of a Special Representative
on extremism within the United Nations system.
In considering this option, it is important that the
mandate and scope of the Special Representative's role
be clarified, as well as the relationship between the
Special Representative and the existing United Nations
structures dealing with terrorism, each of which each
has its own specific mandate. My delegation is of the
firm view that the creation of any new office should
be measured in terms of its contribution to facilitating
international efforts to counter terrorism, rather than
duplicating work already being done or by placing
additional burdens on Member States, especially those
in the developing world.

In conclusion, we wish to take this opportunity to
thank you, Mr. President, for including this important
debate in the Council's programme of work.

