Mr. Mekdad (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): We wish to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption to the presidency of the Security
Council for the current month, and we wish you
success. We pledge our full cooperation, and we thank
you for convening this meeting. We express our
appreciation for the efforts made by your predecessor,
the Ambassador of Guinea, for his successful
stewardship of the Council last month.

Today we are meeting, one and a half years after
the establishment of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC). In the course of that period, the CTC worked
intensely and achieved substantive success in alerting
United Nations Member States and in enhancing their
capacity to bring their national legislations into line
with the provisions and requirements of resolution
1373 (2001) and to combat international terrorism.
Evidence of this success is demonstrated in the
interaction between Member States and the CTC, and
in the number of reports the CTC has received, now in
excess of 340, for the first and second stages, in
addition to a good number of reports submitted for the
third stage.

The CTC has been able to create an open and
transparent dialogue with States and has managed to
provide assistance to those States who have sought
such assistance in order to enhance their capacity in
combating terrorism. My delegation would like to take
this opportunity to express its deep appreciation to the
Committee's Chairman, Ambassador Jeremy
Greenstock, his Vice-Chairmen, other members of the
CTC and the experts, who exerted immense efforts to
examine and discuss States' reports. We would also
like to thank the Secretariat for its effective
contribution to the success of the CTC's work.

Today we would like to pay special tribute to the
contributions of Ambassador Greenstock, who chaired
the CTC over the past 18 months. He showed great
diplomatic skill, ability and robust work. Sir Jeremy
paid attention to the most minute details, culminating
with the current status of the Committee. Credit is due
to him for acquainting the international community
with the machinery and work of the Committee and for
creating interactive cooperation between the CTC and
international, regional and subregional organizations,
as demonstrated at the successful Special Meeting
convened by the CTC last month.

As we bid a fond farewell to Ambassador
Greenstock in his term as Chairman of the CTC, having
successfully fulfilled his mandate, we welcome
Ambassador Inocencio Arias, the Permanent
Representative of Spain, as he assumes his new
function as CTC Chairman. We trust that he will fulfil
this mandate successfully. My delegation pledges its
full cooperation with him, as we had done with
Ambassador Greenstock. Also, we welcome the
composition of the new membership of the Bureau, and
we support the next suggested 90-day plan of work,
which runs from 1 April 2003 to 30 June 2003. The
Syrian delegation reaffirms its intention to spare no
effort in order to carry out the plan of action so as to
meet the aspirations of all United Nations members.
Here we would like to place on record that the active
role of the Syrian Arab Republic within the work of the
CTC during the past period will continue in the
forthcoming period. As all are aware, Syria has been
fully cooperative with the CTC in submitting the
required reports.

Building a solid legislative foundation for
combating terrorism is essential, especially at the
international, regional, subregional and national levels.
For progress to be achieved, international terrorism
needs to be confronted and combated within the
framework of international legality, the United Nations
Charter and international law, while maintaining full
respect for human rights, the civil and political rights
of the individual, and without compromising these
rights under the pretext of combating terrorism.

In closing, we must reaffirm, in no uncertain
terms and without any ambiguity, that we should not
undermine those who are defending their occupied
territories and desist from labelling them as terrorists.
Resisting foreign occupation is a legitimate act,
guaranteed under international norms and treaties. This
act of resistance is quite different from despicable acts
of terrorism, which we categorically condemn and view
as absolutely criminal. We must once again emphasize
that we should be cautious and refrain from making
accusations against specific faiths or nationalities.
Terrorism is not exclusive to any religion or
nationality; it makes no distinction between East and
West and is a global threat that must be combated
everywhere it occurs.

The Syrian Arab Republic calls for further
effective international cooperation within the United
Nations and in keeping with the principles and
purposes of the Charter and established norms of
international law and treaties. Such cooperation is
needed to stem the tide of international terrorism,
which is plaguing the world, in all its forms and
manifestations.

