Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): Like others, I thank
the Rwandan delegation for organizing this timely
debate on United Nations and regional partnerships,
with a focus on Africa. Africa's regional and
subregional organizations have been actively involved
in seeking solutions to conflicts on the continent, and
their cooperation with the United Nations and other
regional partners, such as the European Union (EU),
has evolved significantly over the years.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the representatives of the African Union (AU) and
the European Union for their briefings. We welcome
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2167 (2014) on
regional partnerships in peacekeeping, and appreciate
the efforts of the Rwandan presidency in leading the
negotiations.

Lithuania aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union.

Whether through troop deployment, the provision
of logistical and financial support, or working side
by side in implementing multidimensional mandates,
the participation of regional and subregional actors
today is an indispensable and increasingly regular
part of modern peacekeeping. Regional peacekeeping
frequently offers faster deployment timelines and
much-needed troop numbers that can literarily make
a difference between life and death. Such involvement
strengthens regional ownership of the peace efforts and
bolsters the continued commitment of the countries
of the region, which share a strong interest in the
sustainability and success of the peacekeeping effort.

The involvement of regional or subregional actors,
as noted in the presidency's concept paper (S/2014/478, annex), also brings better understanding of the context
and root causes ofa specific conflict, thereby enabling
us to address the situation in a more specific and
effective manner. The active engagement of the African
Union, as well as of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS), the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD), the Southern
African Development Community and the Economic
Community of Central African States with the United
Nations in bringing peace to conflict torn areas speaks
for itself.

These organizations, in close cooperation with
the United Nations and other regional actors, perform
an essential function in peacekeeping itself, as well
as in conducting critical mediation efforts in times
of crisis. IGAD's role in the case of South Sudan, one
example among many, is an excellent case in point. In
the case of Mali, again, a number of regional actors,
including the AU, ECOWAS, the EU and others, have
been continuously engaged in searching for durable
solutions.

Regional partnerships, however, are not immune
to the most critical obstacles faced by United Nations
peacekeeping operations in general, including clarity
of the mandate, capability and training gaps, logistical
hurdles, a lack of critical enablers, or insufficient
coordination among mission components. Close
cooperation, coordination and synergies between
and among regional actors and the United Nations
therefore play an essential role in ensuring mission
success. Drawing and applying lessons from such joint
undertakings for the sake of mission effectiveness and
success is therefore key. As seen from the assessment of
existing missions involving United Nations and regional
components, the experience to date, although generally
positive, definitely offers room for improvement.

The African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) is an important case
in terms of lessons learned. The African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur replaced the
African Union operation in 2008, with the aim of
bolstering the protection of civilians and supporting
the overall peace process by deploying additional
troops and increasing financial resources dedicated to
the task. Six years later, it is the second-largest United
Nations mission, with almost 23 ,000 personnel, and its
most expensive one, at a cost of $1.3 billion annually,
drawing criticism from various sides.

While undoubtedly UNAMID has had a positive
impact on the situation in Darfur, it has also suffered
from a number of problems, including a high number of
casualties among peacekeepers, a lack of cooperation
from the host Government, chronic shortages
of equipment and enablers, as well as capability
deficiencies and internal coordination issues.

Its record of protecting civilians has been
subject to criticism. The Office of Internal Oversight
Services described it as "highly ineffective" and
"generally passive", while other reports highlight an
unwillingness to report human rights abuses, and the
Khartoum Government's involvement in supporting
armed groups. That prompted some serious thinking
about the mission's future and refocusing of its
mandate, which will, hopefully, result in more effective
mandate-implementation. In that respect, this particular
mission can offer useful lessons for the future that could
enable new missions to avoid some of the difficulties
UNAMID had to go through.

The African Union Mission in Somalia, with
logistical and financial support from the United Nations,
the European Union and other partners, has been
instrumental in making considerable advances against
Al-Shabaab militants. Its transition from maintaining
an essentially defensive posture to mounting an
offensive against militants was possible largely due to
an increased number of troops and, most important, the
willingness by the main troop contributors to robustly
implement the mandate.

The sustainability of military gains against
Al-Shabaab needs to be reinforced through the
establishment of effective local governance and
addressing the security and economic needs of the
population. That enormous task will continue to be
undertaken by a number of United Nations system
entities, as well as through regional efforts such as those
by the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and the EU mission, which provides training to the
Somali National Armed Forces, including on the
protection of civilians, international humanitarian law
and human rights.

Turning to the Central African Republic, the
stepping in of the African Union Mission for the
Consolidation of Peace in the Central African Republic
prevented even greater atrocities from happening.
Its successor, the African-led International Support
Mission in the Central African Republic (MISCA),
in cooperation with the French Operation Sangaris,
made a critical difference in protecting civilians and
restoring basic security. In view of the complexity of
the tasks ahead, MISCA will transition to a United
Nations operation by mid-September to benefit from
the experience of the United Nations in deploying
multidimensional operations directed at addressing the
root causes ofthe conflict. Joint United Nations and AU
efforts in the Central African Republic will continue to
be complemented by an EU force aimed at ensuring a
secure environment in the Bangui area.

Those are but a few examples of the ever more
complex and multidimensional peacekeeping missions
with the involvement of regional actors, each offering
specific lessons for future missions of the kind. A key

element is to advance cooperative planning and early
consultations on mission types, political strategic
objectives, the desired end state, tentative timelines and
exit strategies. Adequate training for troops, especially
as mandates become more robust, with the critical tasks
of the protection of civilians, is essential, as well as
on international humanitarian law and human rights
law. Targeted training on gender sensitivity, protecting
women and children in armed conflict and combating
rape as a tool of war must remain at the core of all
peacekeeping training.

To make United Nations and regional partnerships
work better, the comparative strengths and requirements
of all actors should be identified, mandates and
responsibilities clearly defined, clear command and
control structures put in place and resources ensured.
As the concept paper rightly points out, the current
planning processes of the regional partners in Africa
could benefit from improvement. To address that,
the EU, through its African Peace Facility capacity-
building component, is working to increase the capacity
of the AU and of the regional economic communities in
the planning and conduct of peace operations.

However, we are also keenly aware that as effective
as peacekeeping cooperation may be, it can deliver only
up to a point. However effective and well-coordinated
a peacekeeping operation might be, comprehensive
efforts are required, including putting an end to
impunity, justice and reconciliation processes, the
strengthening of the rule of law, institution-building,
solid good governance and a human rights framework,
as well as creating a solid framework for long-term
economic development.

While those peacebuilding processes can be
started by the United Nations and regional actors, their
sustainability can succeed only if national capacities
are developed and national ownership of the processes
is ensured. With the aim of assisting in developing such
national capacities, the EU has established a number
of military and civilians training missions in Africa
and elsewhere, working in the areas spanning from
enhancing border security and maritime capacities to
combating terrorism and organized crime.

Lithuania is proud to contribute to those efforts - in

Mali, for example, where our military advisers are part
of the EU training mission aimed at improving the
military capacity of the Malian Armed Forces. In 2013,
Lithuania also deployed troops to the EU anti-piracy
Operation Atalanta. We now participate in the NATO
Operation Ocean Shield to combat piracy off the Horn
of Africa. In each case we are able to appreciate the
value and effectiveness of cooperation between the
United nations and regional organizations. Once again,
we thank the Rwandan presidency for giving us this
opportunity today to review the related successes as
well as the concerns, especially in View of the larger
review announced by the Secretary-General.
Let me conclude by expressing our deepest
appreciation and respect to the thousands of men
and women peacekeepers - military, police and
civilians - who dedicate themselves to the noble goal
ofprotecting others and who all too often sacrifice their
lives in the line of duty.

