Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): It is
an honour to once again see you, Mr. Minister, presiding
over our deliberations. We appreciate the convening of
this meeting and the briefing by Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
whom we congratulate on his appointment. We assure
him of our cooperation. We welcome the participation
of Mr. Carlos Holmes Trujillo Garcia, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and Mr. Emilio Archila,
High Counsellor for Post-Conflict. I would also like
to take this opportunity to acknowledge the efforts
undertaken by Mr. Jean Arnault and his important
contribution to the peace process in Colombia.

Allow me to begin by reiterating our strongest
condemnation of the heinous terrorist attack by the
National Liberation Army in Bogota last week, as well
as our most heartfelt condolences to the families of the
victims. Peru reiterates its full support to Colombia and
commends the resilience of the Colombian people and
their unquestionable commitment to peace.

Last November marked two years since the signing
of the historic peace agreement, which put an end to
more than 50 years of conflict. In a short period oftime,
enormous progress has been made in consolidating the
agreement. It is important to continue to move towards
its full implementation.

We would like to highlight the measures adopted
by the Government of Colombia in order to improve the
coordination of the actors involved and strengthen the
presence of the State throughout the territory. We will
focus in particular on the efforts required in the areas
of security, the reintegration of former combatants and
national reconciliation.

Despite the progress with regard to security, we
regret the ongoing killings of social leaders, human
rights defenders and former combatants. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1159),
coordinated action by all actors on the ground is
required, in particular in the most vulnerable rural areas.

In that regard, we wish to welcome the adoption of
the "Peace with legality" plan, which seeks to protect,
stabilize and develop the former conflict areas and
should be complemented by the Action Plan for the
Protection of Social and Community Leaders, Human
Rights Defenders and Journalists.

We also highlight the importance of the early
warning mechanism of the Ombudsman's Office,
which, among other elements, highlights the threat
posed by the criminal groups competing for the control
of the former conflict areas used to transport illicit
goods, such as drug trafficking.

With respect to the reintegration of former
combatants, we would like to acknowledge the
commitment and efforts of the Government in tackling
the complex challenges of that aspect of the agreement.
In that context, we believe that it is important to
strengthen inter-institutional coordination and the
participation of the local authorities and to take into
account the allocation of the necessary resources.
In that regard, we believe that the new "Peace with
legality" plan should also be linked to development
programmes with a territorial approach, the crop
substitution programme and rural reform. All the
above must take into account the gender perspective
towards the economic empowerment of women and the
role of young people. In that process, we acknowledge
the contribution of the territorial areas for training and
reintegration and the monthly allowances. We believe
that it is important to have an inclusive reflection
process concerning their future after August that takes
into account the access of former combatants to land
and alternative sources of income.

In that vein, we highlight that more than 90,000
Colombian families have signed voluntary agreements
for the substitution of illicit crops. Our own experience
with regard to alternative development programmes
bear witness to their effectiveness, and we believe
that it is important that the new national strategy to
fight drugs "The future path" continue to promote
such measures.

Finally, we would like to highlight the importance
of the Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice,
Reparation and Non-Repetition to ensure the rights of
victims and to promote access to justice and national
reconciliation in Colombia, in particular the role of the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace.

In conclusion, I reaffirm Peru's commitment
to sustaining peace and development in this sister
country, based on the unity of the Council, with a view
to consolidating Latin America and the Caribbean as a
region of peace.

