Mr. Engel: My name is Richard Engel. I work for
NBC News as the chief foreign correspondent. I have
been working in this very bizzarre business of ours for
about 17 years. I usually go from one trouble spot to the
next. I know several ofthe people who are also speaking
today - Ghaith - and I just met Mustafa earlier. I
commend him for speaking today, because working
in Mogadishu is truly a very dangerous experience.
Hopefully, he is not a dead man walking.

What I want to talk about today is, who is a
journalist. I want to thank the people in the Chamber
for taking up this very important cause. I know there
are a lot of important issues going on in the world.
For us in this business, this is one that is dear to our
hearts and something we think about every day. It is
really important for freedom and democracy and the
spreading of information and knowledge.

For the past 17 years, I have been going from place
to place. I have had some bad experiences. About six
months ago, I was kidnapped in Syria. In a gunfight,
we managed to escape. Some of the people who were
holding us were killed in that gunfight. I have been
detained many times by different Governments, and I
have been denied visas. I am therefore familiar with the
environment that foreign journalists work in.

I had a moment of clarity, if you will - or a
moment of confusion, I think I should say - not long
ago. I was in Turkey, covering Taksim Square. There
were ongoing clashes between the people in the Square
and the police. We were there filming the clashes and
trying to talk to the activists and to talk to the police,
who actually did speak to us, despite all the tear gas.

As I stepped back a little bit, I looked around at
the scene. There were people with big cameras, there
were people with small cameras, and there were people
with cell phones. There were some people with cell
phones who wore gas masks who were clearly part of
the conflict and of the clashes that were ongoing. There
must have been a dozen or two dozen people filming the
clashes, which involved maybe a few hundred people.

As I looked at that very confusing situation, I
thought to myself, who are all these people? Are
they all journalists? And I thought, from the police's
perspective - which is not a perspective one would
expect journalists to think from - this must be very
confusing. They do not know who we all are; we are
wearing gas masks. Some people were wearing what
looked like professional gas masks, and some people
had just painters' masks on. And there were people
with cell phones, and some people, as I said, had stones
and cell phones in their hands. It was very confusing.

What I want to do today is to maybe offer some
concrete ideas about protecting journalists. I think in
order to do that one has to examine the question of
who is a journalist. With that preface, let me go to my
prepared remarks.

Protecting journalists these days is hard, perhaps
harder than ever, because one has the tackle the question
of who is a journalist and who is an activist in way that
never existed before.

If one goes back 50 years or even just 15 years,
journalists were well known. We carried badges that
identified where we worked. We were guests on the
diplomatic scene. We dined with ambassadors in garden
courtyards in Cairo and Bombay. I did that myself many
times; it was very pleasant. We were considered a league
of special people who needed to be protected because
ourjobs often upset powerful and dangerous people. We
were like diplomats in a way, posted to far-away places,
and we needed a kind of special status so we could stay
objective. Diplomats such as Council members have
immunity so that they cannot be tried in local courts,
because they will often tell Governments the kind of
information they do not want to hear. Journalists had a
more informal but generally understood status so that
we could do the same thing for our readers and our
viewers. That is the way it worked for over a century,
since the Battle of Little Bighorn.

Now, let us go back to that scene in Taksim Square.
There are bloggers. There are tweeters. There are
freelancers who see themselves as activists. There are
freelancers who actually join rebel groups, and some
of them carry guns. If the discussion today is about
protecting journalists, one must first decide who gets
that protection. Who deserves it, and who forfeits it?

Over the past couple of years, I have often spent
quite a bit of time with the opposition - the rebels - in
Syria, and many of them carry cameras. The ones who
carry the cameras call themselves journalists, but in
general they are not journalists; they are rebels with
cameras. They are part of the fight.

I have a general rule, which I think might be useful
for some here. If one cannot or will not write an article
that goes against one's cause, then one is not ajournalist
and does not deserve to be treated like one. What one
is doing should fall under the protection of free speech,
which is a much broader and an important discussion
to have. But today we are not talking about just free
speech; we are talking about protecting reporters. And
the test goes both ways.

Consider a reporter who works for a State television
station - a Syrian television station, since I used the
Syrian rebels as an example. That reporter most likely
cannot or will not write against his Government. If he
does not, then he probably fails the test as well. He is
not a journalist either. I am not saying that these two
people - the rebel with the camera and the State
broadcaster - deserve to be mistreated, but they both
are fundamentally different from journalists.

This is where it gets more complicated. What about
the freelancers and activists? Consider this case. It is a
hypothetical case, but I have seen many people just like
this. There is a young activist who uses Twitter and he
gets arrested in Egypt. This theoretical writer-activist
is anti-Government, anti-police. His tweets are full of
four-letter words telling the police exactly what they
should do to themselves. This is his life, this is probably
what he does all the time.

But this activist - and here is the key difference - is
good at what he, or she, does. They get good information,
and it is usually correct, and this person has some 15,000
followers on Twitter. They have a small audience, but
they do have an audience. Then they are arrested. What
do we do? Does one consider him or her a journalist,
does one offer them the protection ofajournalist? Does
one demand his release, perhaps on the grounds of free
speech or of political expression? I do not think just
because a person knows how to use Twitter he or she
is necessarily a journalist, but just because one does
use Twitter does not mean one is not a journalist. It is
a judgement call, but I think somebody needs to make
that call.

This is not just a theoretical judgement call. It has
real consequences. This why the distinctions are so
important.

These days Governments, tyrants, dictators and
even democracies seem to be happy with all of this
ambiguity because we can all be lumped into the
category of troublemakers. We are all bloggers and
punks and rebels with cameras. We are all lumped into
the same, generally negative, harmful category called
the media. There is absolutely no respect for career
journalists. We are arrested, we are detained, we are
harassed, we are kidnapped. We are killed. Before, if
a Government wanted to deport a major correspondent
from an American television network or a newspaper
or a news agency, it did so knowing there would be
consequences. Today, several Governments routinely
do that, and worse.

I think a big reason why is because we are all
just troublemakers. We are all part of the same
nebulous category, and the guild of professionals
is not recognized anymore. I think it should be. Just
as the representatives in the diplomatic community
need protection to be objective, if the international
community wants professionals who are also objective,
we need some protection as well.

I think it is important to pick one's battles. Perhaps
there should be two types of campaigns: one to protect
free speech for activists who use the media in order to
advance their causes and their beliefs, whatever those
causes may be, and the other for a renewed commitment
to defend dedicated and trained professionals who
take risks to deliver the kind of information Council
members need to make their decisions.

