Mr. Ochen: Congratulations to you, Mr. President,
and South Africa on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for October. I would like to thank
everyone in the Chamber, together with my fellow
briefers. It is a great honour. I send my warmest regards
from Kampala to all present, as I feel delighted to be
invited to contribute to the discussion.

On a day like this, we are also observing the
International Day of Non-Violence, and a subject of
that nature is quite befitting. In myriad ways, my story,
like many others of young people around the continent,
begins with a story of pain, unfortunately. When I was
growing up as a child, like any other child in the world,
I wanted to study and become a doctor or a pilot. My
dream was to become a teacher. Mostly, I anxiously
awaited when my parents would be able to build at
least a semi-permanent home. But, when war came,
everything, including all those dreams, was turned
upside down. My dreams were cut short; my vision for
the future was amputated. That is what I witnessed as
a child.

Since I was a child, after spending my life in
the camp for internally displaced persons (IDPs) in
Uganda, with millions of fellow Ugandan children
sharing my painful journey, we felt that the world had
forgotten us, and we asked ourselves who we could fight
against. Should we pick up a gun and fight somebody?
Ultimately, we wondered how we could work together
to fight against the disgraceful fate that we were living.
Every day, as a child, I had to struggle to survive
abductions and being killed. I had to struggle to not
get blown up by landmines. Every day, I painfully
struggled to find something to eat and somewhere to
sleep and worried that if I slept at all that I might not
wake up alive, or that I might wake up in the hands of
armed men. Worst of all was when my own brother was
abducted on 10 December 2003 - apparently, Human
Rights Day - which was the day that right for me was
violated, at best. Unfortunately, to date, my brother, as
well as my cousins and fellow community members
have never been seen again.

It has been quite an exhausting journey. I always
wondered whether it was enough to cry and criticize
war mongers or fighters, or was it too late when I
criticized or complained about them. But something in
me told me that my situation was an opportunity for
me to take responsibility, and instead of criticizing the
war mongers, I should create peacebuilders and achieve
what the continent was thirsty for, in that case, peace.

At the peak of the conflict, I was at a crossroads,
pondering whether picking up a gun to fight was the
way to go. But something in me kept on telling me that
war was not an option, that suffering needed to end and
that picking up a gun would escalate the suffering. I
chose peace. At the age of 13, I started a peace club in
the IDP camp where I was living in northern Uganda.

The objective was primarily to discourage and
challenge the child soldier recruitment that was
happening in my region. We went on to build up our
momentum, while we struggled with meeting our own
education and health needs and worrying about the
future. In 2005, I formed the African Youth Initiative
Network, aimed at mobilizing young people - fellow
youth suffering like I was - to transform our trauma
and pain into an opportunity for leadership and
peacebuilding. That has been key in developing our
leadership in the direction of peacebuilding.

I can say that it is very difficult for something good
to come out of a life of conflict. I admire the momentum
and commitment by the African Union to saying that
we have to silence the guns in Africa by 2020. The year
2020 is not so far away, and there are gun shops all over
the continent. That is a vision that we must embrace and
ensure that we commit and deliver on.

I have met with young people in South Sudan,
Burundi and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
One young man, from a country I will not name, asked
me how it was that I could tell him to put down his
gun, because his gun was his life, security, livelihood,
father, mother and Government - how could he lay
down his gun? That was his question to me, and I did
not have an answer.

But our background and our work over the years,
which has helped us move forward, have been guided
by the following four questions, which I humbly ask the
members of the Security Council to help me answer.
First, how can we make peacebuilding rewarding, and
peacebuilders rewarded, so that peace is chosen by
the young people in Africa? Secondly, how can we
build trust among Africans, and towards the African
people? Thirdly, how do we reduce the flow of guns to
Africa? The continent is littered with them. Fourthly,
how do we deal with the systemic marginalization of
Africans by fellow Africans, as well as international
norms? Allow me to present the key challenges from
my recent trips across the continent, made with the
support of the African Union, in an effort to mobilize
youth momentum towards peace in Africa.

One thing that is common is the lack of critical
positive momentum across the continent. We found
an absence of a transformative leadership agenda
aimed at empowering young people as leaders in
peacebuilding. The streets throughout the continent are
full of young people chanting that someone must fall
and that someone must go. Everyone who chants those
sentiments is conveying so much pain and anger, and
one can feel that, from their hearts, they are ready to
strike back. They are feeling the urge to take revenge.
That is a challenge.

The next challenge is migration. There is growing
uncertainty among youth on the continent, with
thousands seeking jobs abroad. We are seeing them die
in the Mediterranean Sea on a daily basis, as well as
the suffering of Africans around the world. But also,
for those who decide to stay home, they are sometimes
forced to settle for low quality livelihoods, which tends
to increase the range of risks and vulnerabilities.

The third challenge is hierarchies and the state of
mind. Over our time together, we have talked about
youth inclusion and participation. It is true that the
language has changed, but the power has not. Power
remains the same. We are stuck in a non-progressive
mindset of power, which says that we are including
youth, but that is a mere sentiment; it is not really meant.
The question we have to answer is how to include in the
discussion every young person and key player for the
right mind-change.

The fourth challenge is that there are too many war
profiteers, both at home and abroad. Think about what
would happen if Africa were to close its borders for
one day or one year - how many industries would fail
around the world? We have so many resources at home,
but they are taken at the expense of the African people.
How do we address that challenge of there being too
many war profiteers? The question is, who really
wants the wars to end? Is it African leaders and the
African people or the international community? Those
are concerns that the Security Council could help us
to address.

The fifth challenge, shared among many young
people whom I have met in different parts of the
continent, is a concern that, while there is increased
engagement from influential figures - what we
consider to be the "celebritization" of the peace
agenda - and while that is good in terms of raising
awareness, it does not do much justice to people who
are suffering and going hungry. Young people are
carrying guns on their necks every day, looking to
secure livelihoods. Young people are saying that most
initiatives do not align with their needs. They are not
living the lives they studied for, they are not living
the lives they researched, but they are living the lives
into which they were born, in which they survive and
continue to live. Therefore, identity matters, and whom
they identify with is important. Allow me to make the
following recommendations to the Council.

First, in order for us to tackle the big question of
what we can do to achieve our dream of silencing the
guns in Africa by 2020, I think the bedrock will be
the political will generated by both the weak and the
powerful people across the continent. That would mean
that theirjoint decisions to negotiate a collective future
supplied by the leadership will be necessary to create a
climate in which everybody can thrive. That is key. We
need that.

Secondly, I would like to make a recommendation
on gun Violence. It is my hope that, given the increased
gun flows to Africa, the Security Council will
understand that youth are genuinely lost. They are
wondering: who really wants the wars to end in Africa
if nations around the world are competing to militarize
the continent? Who really means well? What do they
mean when they say they are working for peace and
stability in Africa, with all these guns arriving on the
continent? If the rest of the world genuinely means well
to Africa, it should scale down its military cooperation in
Africa and scale up the partnership for peace. Let us
plant the seeds of peace.

Thirdly, most international interventions - whether
led by the African Union, the United Nations or other
platforms - have had a post-mortem approach to
peace. That has been Viewed in many different ways.
We are grateful for the support that comes in the form
of humanitarian assistance, peacekeeping missions
and peace operations. I think the time has come for a
pre-mortem approach whereby we mediate in conflict
situations from the outset to prevent suffering and
death. That is key.

The fourth recommendation I would make is on
mediation as a tool for conflict prevention. We must
seek to address the various grievances of ethnic groups
before we allow them to escalate into violent conflict.
That can be done only ifwe domesticate and bring about
solutions at the local level. Another recommendation
I would make based on my experience of travelling
to different countries around the continent - some
of which have endured sanctions for years - is that
States' development capacity should be prioritized
instead of imposing sanctions or cutting aid, because
it is the people who are suffering, and it is not just top
politicians being affected but the innocent, the poor,
children and women. Sanctions are not punishing the
State as intended, but rather they are punishing the
people. In as much as we are committed to putting
an end to guns in Africa, let us make sure that the
commitment to youth and peace and security is
matched by meaningful financing. Donors should give
money and provide the technical skills that are needed.
Youth have increased in numbers across the continent,
but we must move away from the numbers and towards
generating a positive impact.

My penultimate point is that we must focus on
addressing the root causes of violent conflict, such as
conflicts over land and mineral resources. Imagine ifwe
had shared African resources with the rest of the world
in a way that benefited Africans - where would Africa
be by now? And of course, questions have been arising
on issues of growing concern among young Africans.
The United Nations is key, and we need to promote the
United Nations and bring it closer to the people. Let
them understand the values and principles as well as the
declarations and treaties signed, which will mean they
will be able to respect the rules of engagement. The big
question that everyone is asking is: when will we have
a permanent African member on the Security Council?
It is a question that the Council must look at now in
order to maintain the legitimacy of such an important
institution in the minds of young Africans.

Finally, based on our 15 years of active
peacebuilding work across the continent and also from
our childhood, we have moved on to build an African
peace academy. That is a locally led vision for the region
that will have an impact on world peace. Through that
facility, we will opt to put in place home-grown efforts
for peacebuilders, conflict preventers and conflict
mediators. Through the web network of peacebuilders,
we hope we will have a continent-wide peace movement.
That is a commitment that could help us to make
collective achievements together.
Another goal we intend to achieve through the
peace academy is to support the principles of adherence
to and tolerance of different opinions among young
people, without being compromised. We will also
support the partnership between youth and donors with
the intention of harmonizing strategies to look at the
long-term aspects of peacebuilding, which will be key
to strong institution-building.

With all of that said, I wish to say that we must be
aware that the African youth has grown up, and now they
are many in number. They are becoming a force. It will
either be a positive or a negative force on the world. But
it will be a force. We must do the right thing, right now.
It would be in our best interests to step up now to help
redirect the pace of change towards a positive change.
We want to have a model African-led peacebuilding
missions and operations to complement the existing
United Nations and African Union peace operations.

By implementing all of the above, we will accelerate
innovation for a lasting peace in Africa. I pray that
peace may prevail in Africa and the world.

