Mr. Hardeep Singh Puri (India): It gives me
great pleasure to welcome Vice-President Riek Machar
Teny-Dhurgon and the other members of his delegation
to the Council on this historic occasion. I also wish to
welcome to the Security Council the Ministers from
Brazil, Bosnia-Herzegovina, South Africa, Germany,
France, Portugal, the Russian Federation and the
United Kingdom. Their presence in our midst today
underlines the importance we all attach to this
occasion. I would like to thank Under-Secretary-
General Le Roy and my colleague, the Permanent
Representative of the Sudan, His Excellency Mr. Ali
Osman, for their comprehensive statements.
Sixty-four years ago, India's first Prime Minister
Pandit J awaharlal Nehru, declared,

"at the stroke of the midnight hour, when the
world sleeps, India will awake to life and
freedom. A moment comes, which comes but
rarely in history, when we step out from the old to
the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of
a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance".

Today is one such moment of a tryst being kept with
destiny when, after a long struggle, the voice of the
people of South Sudan has found expression.

Let me at the outset convey the Government of
India's warm welcome to the new State of South
Sudan, born on 9 July after a peaceful and transparent
referendum where the people of South Sudan voted to
form a new State. Our Vice-President, His Excellency
Mr. Hameed Ansari, participated in the joyous
celebrations in Juba on 9 July.

The Government of India commends the leaders
of both the Sudan and South Sudan, who have shown
exemplary patience and maturity in order to see the
fulfilment of this important Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (CPA) landmark, which India supported
from its very beginning in 2005. We therefore convey
our congratulations to both parties for successfully
marching to this day.

India and the Sudan share the most cordial of
relations. We are deeply committed to the
development, peace and prosperity of the Sudan. It is
in that context that India welcomes the developments
over the past year in the Sudan that have brought peace
closer to this troubled land. In particular, we welcome
the emergence of South Sudan as a new State, the
newest member of the international community and
soon the one-hundred and ninety-third State Member of
the United Nations.

As a member of the Security Council, it has been
our great pleasure to be associated with the adoption
today of resolution 1999 (2011), which will lead to the
General Assembly accepting the Council's
recommendation on South Sudan's application for
United Nations membership. We look forward to South
Sudan joining the United Nations as a full-fledged
Member as of tomorrow.
India and the Sudan have deep-rooted ties. For
over 100 years, people of Indian origin have made the
Sudan their home. Nearly 10,000 persons of Indian
origin live in Khartoum, Omdurman, Wad Madani and
Port Sudan. The economic interaction between our two
countries is substantial and our two-way trade amounts
to approximately $1 billion per year - the largest
among the countries of Africa. India was one of the
first Asian countries to open a consulate in Juba. It will
soon be upgraded to an embassy. We look forward to
the continued growth and diversification of these
relations as the two Sudans chart their independent
destinies.

There have recently been exchanges of high-level
visits from both sides. These interactions have
facilitated substantial exchanges of views for charting
the course of action and future road map for
intensifying our relations with both Khartoum and
Juba. For India, the two entities of Sudan taken
together remain a major force and partner in Africa.
The recent India-Africa Forum Summit held in Addis
Ababa testifies to our commitment to working together
with our African friends for the collective development
of Africa.

India was witness to the Naivasha Agreement of
January 2005, which established the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement. We have watched the progress made
in its implementation with keen interest and are happy
to see an important CPA landmark achieved with South
Sudan's independence. We are sure that outstanding
CPA issues, like the status of Abyei, among others, will
also be dealt with by both sides in the same spirit of
cooperation and mutual accommodation. In that regard,
we deeply appreciate the work done by Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Menkerios in
overseeing the implementation of the CPA and
maintaining peace in the region. We are happy to note
the agreement between both sides to demilitarize
Abyei, which demonstrates the will of the two sides to
jointly move ahead towards a negotiated settlement.

In keeping with this spirit of seeing a peaceful
and prosperous region, we also support all ongoing
efforts towards achieving peace in the Sudan, including
the Darfur issue. We would like this issue to be
resolved soon. Our appreciation is due to the State of
Qatar and the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel on the Sudan, led by Mr. Thabo
Mbeki, who has played a very significant role in that
regard.

India has been one of the largest troop-
contributors to the United Nations Mission in the
Sudan (UNMIS), in addition to the notable contribution
of Indian police officers to both UNMIS and the
Government of South Sudan.

We recently pledged $5 million for development
assistance to South Sudan as well as other capacity-
building projects under our aid to Africa and India-
Africa Forum Summit programmes. The Sudan is a
major beneficiary under India's technical and economic
cooperation programme. To continue our engagement
with South Sudan under this programme, 75 additional
positions have recently been announced for South
Sudan. The Pan-African e-Network Project undertaken
by India in Africa has been a huge success. We are
considering extending the entire package of Pan-
African e-Network, including its tele-medicine and
tele-education components, to South Sudan.

As already indicated by the Foreign Minister of
Brazil, India also intends to work alongside Brazil and
South Africa as part of the India, Brazil and South
Africa (IBSA) group and drawing on the IBSA Fund,
on projects that benefit the peoples of both the Sudan
and South Sudan.

We recognize that the Sudan and South Sudan
will face enormous challenges in the years ahead as
they chart their independent destinies. For its part,
India is ready to assist this process, both on a bilateral
basis and on the basis of its rapidly growing interaction
with Africa. On behalf of the Government and the
people of India, may I once again congratulate the
leadership of both the Sudan and South Sudan on their
statesmanship and their commitment to peace and to
the welfare of their peoples. India stands ready to
extend all possible assistance on their path to progress
and prosperity.

