Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council and on France's able guidance
and leadership of the Council this month. I also thank
Mr. Jaroslav Jenca, Assistant Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for his briefing and updates to
the Council.
We meet at a moment of significant and rapidly
evolving dynamics, as we are witnessing important
steps being taken for healing the painful Palestinian
political division and achieving genuine reconciliation
and national unity in Palestine. Here in the Chamber,
we reaffirm our abiding gratitude to Egypt, a member
of the Security Council and a fraternal Arab country,
for the efforts exerted to help bring about the agreement
signed in Cairo on 12 October by the leaderships of
Fatah and Hamas, to support its implementation to
restore a unified, legitimate Palestinian Authority to the
Gaza Strip, based on past agreements and the Palestine
Liberation Organization's political platform, and to
ensure the effective functioning of the Palestinian
National Consensus Government in Gaza in all aspects,
including Government institutions and at all crossings.

The reunification of our people, land and political
system is among our highest national priorities. We
are fully aware of its centrality to the achievement
of our national aspirations for independence and
the realization of our people's inalienable rights and
justice. We are therefore undertaking the necessary
steps, with due responsibility, in response to the calls
of our people, first and foremost, as well as the regional
and global calls for unity.

The international community's endorsement
of those important developments and offers of
cooperation are vital for ensuring their success. Of
course, that should include efforts aimed at achieving
the speedy lifting of the illegal and inhumane Israeli
blockade that has been imposed on the Palestinian
people in the Gaza Strip for more than a decade. It
should also include meaningful steps to expedite the
reconstruction and recovery urgently needed to reverse
Gaza's de-development and restore humanity and hope
to our people there, especially our young people, for
whom hope and opportunity are in such short supply
these days. We therefore welcome all statements in
support of Palestinian reconciliation, as well as Egypt's
role in that regard, including the Quartet envoys'
press statement of 28 September and the statements
and efforts of the United Nations Special Coordinator
and the Secretary-General himself, as well as those
of the United Nations system as a whole, along with
other regional and international partners, in support of
the current efforts, with a view to alleviating Gaza's
dire humanitarian and socioeconomic conditions and
empowering the Palestinian Government to carry out
its duties there.

Palestine is doing its part. Internally, regionally
and internationally, we are upholding our obligations
and implementing our responsibilities in line with
international law, including humanitarian law and
human rights law, in full respect for our adherence to
the core international legal instruments, and in line
with the relevant United Nations resolutions. We are
doing this to the extent of our capacity and in spite
of the enormous constraints, obstacles, hardships
and setbacks imposed on us by Israel's occupation of
Palestinian lands, including East Jerusalem, for more
than 50 years, since 1967. That includes our active
efforts to implement the Security Council's resolutions,
including resolution 2334 (2016), a landmark that
holds the keys to a peaceful, just solution. In word and
deed, we are complying with its provisions and the
Council's clear demands. I would now like to make the
following points.

First, as President Mahmoud Abbas reaffirmed
yet again when he addressed the General Assembly on
22 September (see A/72/PV.8), despite the great odds,
we remain committed to a two-State solution, based
on the pre-1967 borders, and to securing it based on
the relevant United Nations resolutions, the Madrid
principles, the Arab Peace Initiative and the Quartet
road map.

Second, we will continue to rely and insist on using
peaceful, political, legal means to bring an end to Israel's
occupation of our land and oppression of our people,
and to finally realize the Palestinian people's rights
and national aspirations. That includes the right to live
in freedom, dignity and prosperity in an independent
State of Palestine, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
along with a just solution for the Palestine refugees.

Third, we continue to call for an end to all Israeli
settlement activities in occupied Palestine, in line
with resolution 2334 (2016) and all the relevant legal
provisions. Our approach, which is consistent with the
international consensus and appeals regarding the issue,
is adamant that only an end to Israel's colonization of
our land and reversal of its illegal actions can salvage a
two-State solution based on the 1967 lines and advance
the cause of peace and security.

Fourth, therefore, we continue to appeal to all
States to take practical measures to back up their
calls for a complete and immediate end to Israel's
settlement campaign and their commitment to a two-
State solution, including on the issue of distinction,
as called for in paragraph 5 of resolution 2334 (2016).
Israel has been the occupying Power - but not in any
way the sovereign Power - in the Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, since 1967, and should be
treated as such.

Fifth, since Israel has persisted with its flagrant
violations, as documented to date in the Secretary-
General's three reports on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016), it is essential that States,
organizations and the Council itself take such measures
in order to ensure accountability and rescue the
remaining small potential likelihood of achieving a
two-State solution. An attitude of continued contempt
on the part of the occupying Power must not be cost-free.

Sixth, we are committed to a non-violent approach
and have abided by that commitment for years, as has
been evident in our continued political and diplomatic
engagement in the quest for a just solution, our
documented efforts on the security front, our calls for
an end to provocations, incitement and inflammatory
rhetoric and our clear rejection of terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations.

Seventh, we recognized the State of Israel on a
basis of the 1967 borders more than two decades ago,
despite the Israeli Government's refusal to this day to
recognize the State of Palestine, or even at a minimum
to recognize the Palestinian people's right to self-
determination and independence.

Eighth, in spite of Israel's intransigence and illegal
behaviour, we have continued to engage in good faith
with all regional and international initiatives for peace,
even in exceedingly difficult circumstances. Looking
back just over the past year, we have welcomed and
cooperated with efforts by the League of Arab States,
France, Egypt, Russia, China and the United States.
We will continue to do so based on our commitment
to a just, lasting, comprehensive solution, and we
have repeatedly affirmed our readiness to resume
negotiations, based on the long-standing terms of
reference, in order to achieve that solution.

We must all ask why there has been no progress
in implementing resolution 2334 (2016). What are
the continuing negative trends on the ground that are
destroying the possibility of a two-State solution? Why
has a political horizon not been established and why
have negotiations on all final status issues not been
revived? It is not because this conflict is insoluble or
intractable, as some Israeli officials would like us to
believe. The Security Council has repeatedly, clearly
and authoritatively outlined the solution's fundamental
parameters. The answer is clear. It is because of
the contempt of Israel, the occupying Power, for
international law and the Council's resolutions. The
Council is therefore paralysed. We do what is required
of us, while the Council does nothing to implement its
resolutions. And we wonder when it will act to do its
part in this equation.

Despite the clarity of the Council's demands, Israel
persists with its torment and collective punishment of our
people, its arrests and imprisonments, its colonization
of our land - where settlement activities have been
advancing at four times the rate of last year alone and the
thefts of land and demolitions of Palestinian homes and
properties have continued unabated, forcibly displacing
thousands - and its obstruction of all peace efforts.
It does all of this unapologetically, systematically
and shamelessly. It is astounding that a State can openly
and proudly declare its intention to continue violating
General Assembly and Security Council resolutions
and committing war crimes, and boast about such
violations, thereby making a mockery of the Security
Council, the rule of law and the international system
as a whole. That is all being done blatantly by the same
State, Israel, which has the audacity to present itself as
a candidate for membership of the Council.

As we hear arrogant Israeli statements deriding
resolution 2334 (2016) and the non-stop, reckless
advancement of settlement and annexation plans
in occupied Palestine, especially in and around
East Jerusalem and Al-Khalil, further entrenching
the occupation, we cannot help but question the
international community's role in fostering and
allowing such impunity. Without question, the lack of
accountability for such defiance and violations is at the
core of that ongoing injustice.

As we witness the continuing inflammatory
rhetoric with regard to East Jerusalem and Al-Haram
Al-Sharif, fuelling religious sensitivities, and
escalating provocations, incitement and racism against
the Palestinian people and leadership by the Israeli
Government, fomenting even deeper hatred, violence
and terror by the Israeli occupying forces and extremist
settlers against our civilians, in grave breach of
international law and against all standards of decency
and morality, we cannot help but ask, when will enough
be enough?

When the Israeli Prime Minister himself states that
"[t]here was not and will not be a better Government
for settlement than our Government"; and that "[w]e are
here to stay forever; there will be no more uprooting
of settlements"; when the Agriculture Minister boasts
that "[t]here is not and will never be two States between
Jordan and the sea"; when the Knesset Member of the
Jewish Home Party states that "[t]he goal is to erase the
paradigm of Palestinian statehood, both on the ground
and as a concept"; when Minister Lieberman states:

"I do not know what a settlement freeze is; take
the data and go over it. Only this year we approved
8,500 settlement housing units in the first half.
What freeze are you talking about? Look at
the facts";

when a Likud Knesset member calls Palestinians
"Vile human animals" - I repeat, "vile human
animals" - and threatens that

"[i]f it were up to me, I would have entered the
terrorist's home last night, take him and his family
and execute them all. Yes, just like that, with
no shame",

then the Council must know that they not only say what
they mean, but they do exactly what they say.

In words and deeds, the Israeli Prime Minister
and his governing coalition are opposed to peace,
dismissive of international law, and work day and night
to entrench the occupation and make the two-State
solution impossible, thereby destroying the contiguity
and viability of the Palestinian State and the chances for
peace. Why does the international community continue
to give Israel the benefit of the doubt when Israel
repeatedly proves its ill intentions? The international
community looks the other way, instead of facing
the issue head-on and declaring to Israel that enough
is enough. Why does the international community
allow the Israeli Prime Minister and his Cabinet to
claim there is no partner for peace, deny Palestinian
rights and attempt to undermine or vilify Palestinian
reconciliation, including by making hypocritical
demands of Palestinian factions?

It is high time for the Security Council to stand
against such ridicule of international law and the
provisions of the Charter of the United Nations banning
the acquisition of territory by force. The Council must
stand firmly behind its resolutions and demand full
respect and implementation, without exception. Israel,
which has so methodically and deliberately trampled
on the Council's calls and decisions, cannot remain
exempt from the law. It must be compelled to comply or
face the pressure and accountability that is triggered by
non-compliance in all other situations. The Palestinian
Government is upholding its obligations, including in
respect of the Council's resolutions.

In the absence of Israel's respect, the Security
Council and all States must step up their efforts to
uphold their duties and obligations. No peace initiative
will succeed otherwise. A people's freedom and
independence are dependent on that, as are justice
and peaceful coexistence. As many have said in the
Chamber, the question of Palestine remains a litmus
test of the rule of law and the credibility and authority
of the Security Council. We continue to hope, and
believe, that the time has arrived for genuine collective
action to rise to the test, to make a peaceful, just and
lasting solution possible and, ultimately, sooner rather
than later, make it a reality.

