Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to begin by thanking the representatives of the
Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Shanghai
Cooperation Organization and the Commonwealth of
Independent States for their briefings on the actions
carried out by their respective organizations.

The concept note prepared by the Russian
presidency (S/2016/867, annex) invites us to focus on
the issue of regional cooperation in the light of the
challenges to international peace and security in Central
Asia. First, Central Asia is a region that continues to
face major economic and political challenges, as well
as security challenges. In particular, the situation in
Afghanistan and the various illicit forms of trafficking
that flourish in the area - in drugs, weapons and
human beings - are all destabilizing factors. The
terrorist threat spares no one today and often thrives in
the context of social frustration, among other factors,
and it should not be neglected.

That fragile context makes cooperation crucial
among all actors present in the region, including
States and regional and international organizations. To
complement the actions of regional organizations, the
mission of the United Nations Centre for Preventive
Diplomacy for Central Asia is crucial. Support for the
countries of the region in developing national responses
to these challenges and encouraging them to strengthen
regional cooperation is more needed than ever. I am
thinking in particular about the assistance provided
by the Centre to the implementation by the countries
of Central Asia of the United Nations Global Counter-
terrorism Strategy, whose tenth anniversary we are
celebrating this year. That is an excellent example of
value added.

France encourages any initiative that will allow
countries in the region to contribute nationally,
regionally and internationally to efforts to prevent
Violent extremism and to fight terrorism.

Lastly, beyond the action of regional and subregional
organizations, the European Union has also played a
crucial role in this region since the adoption by the
European Council of the European Union Strategy for a
New Partnership with Central Asia, in June 2007. The
total amount of assistance provided by the European
Union to the region for the period 2014-2020 amounts
to over 61 billion.

With respect to security issues in particular, a
high-level dialogue between the European Union
and countries in Central Asia was held on 18 May in
Brussels. Specific measures were adopted during the
meeting, such as the provision of expertise to bolster
the implementation of a common action plan for Central
Asia within the framework of the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, the development
of programmes related to European Union border
management and the fight against drug addiction and
the renewal and updating of a European Union-Central
Asia action plan to fight drugs. The ministerial meeting
of December 2015 made it possible to reaffirm the
commitment of European citizens to promote the rule
of law, stability, security and cooperation in the area.

