I would like to thank you, Mr. President. for convening this open debate, which could not be more timely given the challenges that the ongoing coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic creates for the Council's working methods. Liechtenstein appreciates the Council's efforts to ensure business continuity, notably the work of the Dominican Republic last month, continued by your delegation this month. The Arria Formula meeting marking 75 years since the end of the Second World War on European soil was a welcome example of creative working methods, demonstrating how online technologies can bring together arecord number of high-level participants, and proving that these challenging times can be used for innovation and lasting positive change. Liechtenstein's broad priorities for improved Council working methods remain the same as the Council adapts to new circumstances. Liechtenstein expects to see at least the same standards of transparency and inclusion applied. The Council should agree on a mechanism to allow its video-teleconference meetings to be entered into its official records so that its public deliberations are not lost to history, and on a streamlined voting mechanism to enhance its efficiency. While it is good to see initial progress on restarting the work of some of the Council's subsidiary bodies, they all should become fully operational as soon as possible. The commitment of some Council members to continuing to brief the broader membership on its deliberations, as well as the holding of wrap-up sessions and briefings on the programme of work, are particularly important during this time. The interactivity of wrap-up sessions could be enhanced by inviting questions to be submitted in advance by the membership, as took place with this month's briefing on the programme of work, and result in opening remarks that address the questions of the membership rather than offering an overview of the past month. With regard to inclusion, the Council should build on the progress demonstrated in the aforementioned Arria Formula meeting to open it to the increased participation of civil society briefers. Emphasis should be given to hearing from those who may have difficulty accessing the Council during normal times, in particular women, young people, persons with disabilities and indigenous persons. This is just one way that that the Council can build back better. Unfortunately, the present pandemic is unlikely to be the last time that the Council is faced with the need to resort to virtual meetings. Forging consensus on inclusive and transparent working methods now will help to ensure the future resilience of its work. The Council's response to COVID-19 is also an opportunity to consider broader questions. Chief among these is the need to take on a perspective of peace and security that is human-centred. The prevailing notion of peace and security in the Council implies the need to ensure hard security, through an often heavily militarized response. This approach, while a necessary element of peace and security, leaves many of the largest causes of insecurity around the world unaddressed. It is evident that there has never been a time when more people have felt insecure than during the current pandemic. Our warming climate and rising sea levels threaten to destroy the livelihoods and wash away the homes of millions. The international wildlife trade is a proven threat to public health and human security. Human rights violations continue to create mass insecurity among the world's most marginalized people. The key lesson for the Council is this: addressing human security is no less important to the maintenance of international peace and security than preventing and ending the outbreak of armed conflict, and both are intimately linked. Yet the Council is certainly less prepared to deal with that fundamental dimension of security. The Council's inability to find consensus on a resolution addressing the pandemic is the most obvious proof of that. Liechtenstein commends the work of Kuwait in leading the Informal Working Group on Documentation and other Procedural Questions, applauds its success in forging consensus on many important amendments to presidential note S/2017/507, and welcomes the resolve of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to take this vital work forward. One area that requires continued consideration is the extension of the Ombudsperson mechanism, with the aim of ensuring due process in the work of all the Council's sanctions bodies. Finalizing the outstanding note on penholdership should also be urgently addressed so that the responsibility for drafting products can be more equally shared between the permanent five and the elected ten. The question of penholdership is also one expression of a wider need for the Council to facilitate the participation of its elected members on an equal footing with the Council's permanent members. Their role has significantly increased in the past months, and Liechtenstein welcomes that trend. The veto continues to prevent the Council from adopting resolutions on key topics, not least with respect to the COVID-19 pandemic. Delays inherent in the Council's written voting procedure give even more weight to the use or threat of use of the veto, and consequently discourage Council debate on politically sensitive issues, thereby reducing its effectiveness. Liechtenstein remains convinced that the use of a veto should automatically result in the convening of the General Assembly to discuss the matter. Such a discussion would take place without prejudice to any possible outcome and irrespective of the substance of the draft resolution subject to a veto. Liechtenstein will resume activities in that respect as soon as the circumstances allow. In addition, Liechtenstein encourages all States, in particular those running for a seat on the Council, to sign the Accountability, Coherence and Transparency group code of conduct, now supported by 121 States, including two-thirds of the current Security Council membership, for timely and decisive Security Council action to prevent and end mass atrocity crimes, Preventing such crimes remains a core duty of the Security Council, on which it, however, consistently fails to deliver.
