Mr. Quinlan (Australia): Australia very much
welcomes this debate on the Council's role in
promoting and strengthening the rule of law, and I
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for your
leadership in bringing it before us.

It is, of course, self-evident that the absence of
the rule of law can be a driver of conflict. Peace is
threatened by corruption, the abuse of power,
discrimination and exclusion. Injustice obviously can
drive people to take up arms. It is therefore important,
indeed expected, that the Council periodically reflect
on its performance in the promotion and strengthening
of the rule of law as a central component of its mandate
to prevent conflict and maintain peace and security.

The Security Council clearly has a range of
powerful tools at its disposal to promote and strengthen
the rule of law, from the imposition of sanctions to the
mandating of United Nations missions with rule of law
tasks and the use of judicial mechanisms to combat
impunity. In utilizing those tools, it is again obvious
that the Council itself must demonstrate respect for the
rule of law. Consistent with the Secretary-General's
exhortation that the United Nations as a whole must be
the model of the rule of law if it is to be effective in
promoting it, axiomatically the Council is most
legitimate and most effective when it too, of course,
submits itself to the rule of law.

There are three areas on which I would like to
focus my remarks, guided by the very helpful concept
note that Mexico has prepared (S/2010/322).

The first is the issue of targeted sanctions.
Member States have a legal obligation under the
Charter to accept and enforce sanction measures
created by the Council, pursuant to Chapter VII.
Australia takes that obligation very seriously. However,
as we have seen in recent years, the legitimacy and
effectiveness of such measures depend in large part on
perceptions of procedural fairness.
8

As such, we welcome the major improvements
that have progressively been introduced in that regard,
first in relation to the Al-Qaida and Taliban sanctions
regime through resolutions 1822 (2008) and 1904
(2009). In particular, we welcome the appointment of
Judge Kimberly Prost of Canada as the Ombudsperson
for the Al-Qaida and Taliban regime. The creation of
that function, the ongoing review of the listings and the
publication of narrative summaries are vital steps in
improving the listing and de-listing procedures and the
legitimacy and overall effectiveness of the sanctions
measures.

Secondly, Security Council peacekeeping
mandates continue to develop in recognition of the
importance of the rule of law. Rule of law components
are now a familiar aspect of peacekeeping operations,
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo to Haiti,
from Liberia to Timor Leste. Such rule of law tasks are
an illustration of the early peacebuilding activities that
are increasingly being undertaken within peacekeeping
missions and must progressively become a much more
decisive part of them. That is in recognition of the fact
that a sustainable peace must be firmly grounded in
respect for the rule oflaw.

The challenge, however, is of course to ensure
that effective implementation of such mandated tasks
actually happens on the ground. We understand that
work is under way within the Secretariat, in the context
of implementing the Secretary-General's 2009 report
on peacebuilding in the immediate aftermath of
conflict (S/2009/304), to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of the various United Nations actors in
the rule of law area. This is clearly an important step
towards improving coherence and predictability in the
delivery of such mandates, and we would very much
encourage the very early completion of that work.

Finally, Australia is firmly committed to the need
to end impunity for the most serious crimes, and is a
strong supporter of the central role of the International
Criminal Court in this regard. The relationship between
the Court and the Council clearly has the potential to
develop into a very powerful and mutually supportive
alliance for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Where the Security Council refers a situation to
the Court, it is beholden on the Council to use the tools
at its disposal under Chapters VI, VII and VIII of the
Charter to encourage, cajole and, if necessary, find a

10-4285]
way to compel Member States to cooperate with the
Court. This is obviously very much a current challenge
for the Council.

