Mr. Gold (Israel): Fifty years ago the Jewish quarter
of the Old City of Jerusalem surrendered. Its Jewish
inhabitants were expelled. Fifty-eight synagogues,
including the 700-year-old Hurva synagogue, were
destroyed and desecrated. Free access of the Jewish
people to their holy places, particularly the Western Wall,
was denied. Even Israeli Muslims were precluded from
gaining access to the mosques of the Old City. During all
those years, from 1948 until 1967, the Security Council
never met once to consider the denial of Israeli rights or
Jewish rights in Jerusalem.

With Jerusalem's reunification, the State of Israel is
determined never to let this happen again. Israel's
position in Jerusalem is not a product of these recent
events alone, but emanates from a continuous historical
link between the Jewish people and their eternal capital,
which has endured from the Roman destruction of
Jerusalem to this century. Equally, the Jewish people's

 

majority in Jerusalem is not a present-day demographic
development, but had already been restored by the middle
of the previous century, in 1864, when Jerusalem was under
the rule of the Ottoman Empire.

Today, Israel has a special responsibility to preserve
and protect Jerusalem as a city that is holy to each of the
great faiths in our region: Christianity, Islam and Judaism.
Israel undertook in the 1994 Washington Declaration to
respect the special role of the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan in the Muslim holy shrines in Jerusalem and to give
high priority to this historical role in permanent status
negotiations.

Besides safeguarding the access of all faiths to the
holy sites, Israel has carefully sought to ensure the
development of Jerusalem for all its peoples. While the
total population of Jerusalem grew after unification from
266,300 in 1967 to 603,000 in 1996, the Palestinian Arabs
did not find themselves losing their relative position in the
city. Indeed, if the Palestinians constituted 25.8 per cent of
the population in 1967, by 1996 they made up 30 per cent
of Jerusalem's population.

Preserving Jerusalem requires planning. Across the
Middle East, and in many parts of the world, cities face
very different alternative courses of development. Rapid
urbanization can overwhelm cities, leading to an exhaustion
of all land reserves, as downtown areas become enveloped
with shanty towns, substandard housing and increased
poverty. Alternatively, cities can lose population: a lack of
adequate housing and employment opportunities can force
residents to relocate to more prosperous suburban areas,
leaving the core city to decay. Indeed, during the period
prior to 1967, thousands of Palestinian Arabs left
Jerusalem, seeking better opportunities in the city of
Amman.

The Government of Israel is determined to protect
Jerusalem for all its residents and has therefore taken a
ministerial-level initiative to strengthen the city. This is not
a new political programme affecting the political status of
Jerusalem. This is not a plan to gerrymander district lines
in order to affect political outcomes. It consists of a
municipal blueprint for bolstering the city's economy and
infrastructure. Israel's actions to preserve and protect
Jerusalem are fully in accordance with the Interim
Agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO), which provides that Jerusalem remain
under exclusive Israeli jurisdiction while remaining an issue
for permanent status negotiations. It is for this reason that
the Palestinian Authority undertook in the 1997 Note for

 

the Record to close all of its offices in Jerusalem, which
is outside of its area of jurisdiction. It is these clear
obligations of the Interim Agreement - witnessed by the
United States, Russia, the European Union, Norway,
Egypt and Jordan - that must provide the basis for
gauging the actions of the two sides. These obligations
were, after all, freely entered into by the parties and
represent binding undertakings.

Security Council debate on any issue must be based
on facts and not on unproven political argumentation or
claims. It should be recalled that in September 1996 the
Security Council was informed that Israel had opened a
tunnel under the Al-Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem. Of
course, Israel had opened a 30-centimetre wall of a pre-
existing archaeological tunnel from the Hasmonean period
that was over 2,000 years old. The tunnel itself did not go
under the Temple Mount, on which the Al-Aqsa Mosque
is situated, and the opening of the tunnel was not even
near the mosque. Nonetheless, the assertion persisted.
Today, Israel's municipal plans for Jerusalem have
equally generated waves of disinformation.

First, in his letter to the President of the Security
Council, the Charge d'Affaires of the Republic of the
Sudan states that Israel's Jerusalem plan comes

"in the context of annexing more occupied
Palestinian territory" [S/I998/558].

This is simply false. If a decision is taken to shift the
municipal boundary of Jerusalem, the Government of
Israel has stated that it will strictly apply to areas
westward of Jerusalem that are within the pre-l967 lines.
The planned adjustment is intended to provide land for
housing and high-technology industries, thereby creating
affordable homes and new employment opportunities for
Jerusalem residents. The populations of the major western
suburbs are not even being incorporated into Jerusalem,
according to this plan. A similar adjustment of
Jerusalem's western municipal border occurred in May
1993 without being the subject of United Nations debate,
for good reason: this is entirely an internal Israeli matter
on the municipal-administrative level rather than on the
international level.

Secondly, Israel's critics point to the proposal for an
"umbrella municipality" as a scheme to give Jerusalem
administrative powers over Jewish settlements in the West
Bank. The Palestinian Permanent Observer stated, in his
letter to the Secretary-General dated 22 June, that the
"umbrella municipality" is a

 

"concrete step towards...illegal annexation"
[S/I998/557].

This is simply not true. The "umbrella municipality" is
nothing more than a coordination mechanism between
Jerusalem and surrounding communities. It does not entail
a shift in municipal boundaries. It does not entail the
extension of municipal authority over any Israeli
settlements. It allows neighbouring communities to
coordinate services such as public works, sanitation, water,
public-health clinics and education, with the purpose of
creating economies of scale to reduce costs. These
coordination mechanisms exist in different forms
worldwide, without prejudice to formal municipal
boundaries: in Brussels, Lyon, Montreal, Toronto and San
Francisco.

Today, such patterns of regional coordination exist
between Jerusalem and Palestinian cities in the West Bank
that are under the complete jurisdiction of the Palestinian
Authority. For example, today Ramallah supplies water to
the Jerusalem neighbourhood of Kafr Aqab. Does Israel
believe that this is a conspiracy by the Palestinian Authority
to erode Israel's status in northern Jerusalem? No. It is a
practical solution to a local problem. Today, part of the
sewage of Bethlehem and Beit Jalla flows westward to
Jerusalem's waste-treatment plants. Does local cooperation
in sewage indicate that someone is planning to alter
Jerusalem's borders to the south? Nonsense. These are vital
forms of coordination between neighbouring municipalities
and have no international political implications.

Thirdly, in a letter to the Secretary-General dated 9
June 1998 that was distributed to the Security Council, the
Palestinian Observer claimed that Israel's Ministry of the
Interior had approved 58 housing units for Jewish settlers
in the area of the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem. These facts
are wrong. The Interior Ministry's Jerusalem District
Planning and Building Committee approved plans for the
construction of 100 housing units, not 58. But these 100
units are for the Palestinian Arab residents of the A-Tur
neighbourhood in Jerusalem, just next to the Mount of
Olives. The 9 June letter was being considered for the
preamble in a proposed draft resolution being considered
for the Security Council. Does the Security Council wish to
take any part in a PLO complaint against housing for
Palestinian Arabs?

The greatest problem for Jerusalem today does not
come from Israel's efforts to preserve and protect this city.
Presently, Israel faces massive Palestinian non-compliance
in fighting terrorism and preventing violence. From the

 

signing of the Oslo agreements to the last Israeli election,
nearly 250 Israelis have been killed in successive suicide
bombings that emanated from areas under the control of
the Palestinian Authority. When Israel signed the Hebron
Protocol on 15 January 1997, PLO Chairman Yasser
Arafat undertook in the Note for the Record to "combat
systematically and effectively terrorist organizations and
infrastructure." Yet in the last year it was disclosed that
bomb factories belonging to the Hamas organization were
operating in Ramallah and in Bethlehem, just outside of
Jerusalem. The bulk of the infrastructure used for
repeated suicide bombing attacks in the heart of Jerusalem
remains intact.

Additionally, in the Note for the Record, Chairman
Arafat undertook to prevent violence and hostile
propaganda. Yet on 19 January 1998, Mr. Arafat himself
appeared on official Palestinian television praising Yahya
Ayyash, the mastermind of the Hamas suicide bombings,
calling him "the example, the model and the goal" of the
Palestinians. This is simply unacceptable. Real peace
requires that Governments educate for peace rather than
legitimize hatred, violence and further bloodshed.

Israel has a long list of Palestinian Authority
violations in the West Bank and around Jerusalem. And
while it is useful to keep United Nations Members
apprised of these issues, Israel brings its complaints
directly to the negotiating table and not to the United
Nations. Israel is seeking to complete a new set of
understandings with the PLO, through the assistance of
the United States, that will provide a framework for
achieving Palestinian compliance with the Note for the
Record and the Oslo II Interim Agreement. Equally, the
place to address Palestinian concerns with Israeli policies
is at the negotiating table and not in every multilateral
body.

Israel is determined to make this peace process
work. No State has been more frustrated with the lack of
progress in the negotiations in recent months - for the
lack of Palestinian compliance in security places, first and
foremost, Israeli lives at risk. The international
community has an enormous responsibility in this regard;
it can support the existing framework for direct
negotiations between the parties or undermine it with
sterile political resolutions that have little factual basis.

