Mr. Salam (Lebanon): I would like to first thank
Mr. Robert Serry for his comprehensive briefing.
Allow me also to also warmly welcome His Excellency
Mr. Riad Malki, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Palestine. We are delighted that Mr. Malki is
here today, but we are even more delighted that the name
plate of State of Palestine is here for the first time, and
here to stay, as an expression of the international will to
recognize Palestinian statehood.

Indeed, it is a major leap in the uphill battle of the
Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable national
rights. However, we are not even half way there.
Palestine could only be granted observer status by
virtue of General Assembly resolution 67/19. But like
any other peace-loving State, it should be granted full
membership in the Organization. Therefore, we truly
hope that, sooner rather than later, the Council, based
on Article 4 of the Charter of the United Nations, will
recommend to the General Assembly the admission of
Palestine as a full Member of the United Nations.

Most important, the State of Palestine remains
occupied. It is our duty - the duty of the international
community - to help it put an end to occupation and
to achieve real independence. Then, and only then, can
we have a genuine and lasting peace in that part of the
world.

You, Mr. President, and your 14 colleagues around
this table all know that there is no greater obstacle
towards such a noble end than the unrelenting Israeli
policy of settlement in the territory occupied since
1967. Time and again, the question of the illegality of
settlement activity has been stressed in the Council. I
see no need to demonstrate it anew. Yet, for whoever
may still have any doubt on the matter, let me only
recall that one of the first people to recognize the
illegality of such activity was no one other than
Mr. Theodor Meron, a child survivor of the Holocaust
who became one of the world's most eminent
international jurists and was recently elected President
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. Mr. Meron was the Legal Counsel of the
Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs in September 1967.
He was asked by the Office of Mr. Levy Eshkol, then
Prime Minister of Israel, for his opinion on the legality
of civilian settlements in the West Bank, the Gaza Strip
and the Golan Heights. In a cover note dated September
18, 1967 to the legal memorandum that he submitted
on the matter, Mr. Meron summarized his conclusions
as follows: "civilian settlement in the administered
territories contravenes the explicit provisions of the
Fourth Geneva Convention."

In the text of his memorandum, the Legal Counsel
of the Israeli Foreign Ministry is unequivocally
clear that the Geneva Convention prohibition on the
occupying Power to deport or transfer parts of its
civilian population into the territory it occupies is a
prohibition that is "categorical and not conditional upon
the motives for the transfer or its objectives. Its purpose
is to prevent settlement in occupied territory of citizens
of the occupying state".

There is no need to dwell then any longer on the
legal aspect of settlements, I assume. Let me, then,
turn to the political effects of settlements and how they
prejudice the prospects for peace negotiations. To that
effect, most telling is a quote from Amos Elon, the
late Israeli journalist, essayist and author, who was
referred to in a New York Times obituary as a cultural
giant who was for many years Israel's "most renowned
public intellectual". Stressing how detrimental to the
prospects of peace the settlements could be, he wrote
in a 19 December 2002 essay in the New York Review
of Books:

"Imagine the effect on the peace process in Northern
Ireland if the British government continued moving
thousands of Protestants from Scotland into Ulster
and settling them, at government expense, on land
confiscated from Irish Catholics."

To help assess the magnitude of the ongoing
settlement activity, let me underline here that approvals
of settlement plans jumped 300 per cent in 2012, and
that, in just one week of December of that year, the
Israeli Government pushed forward plans for over
11,000 homes beyond the 1967 border - nearly as many
settler homes as were approved in the previous 10 years

combined, as clearly demonstrated by the Israeli Peace
Now movement. A copy of the alarming report released
by that group one week ago, on 16 January, detailing
the record of Prime Minister Netanyahu's Government
on settlements over the course of its full term in office,
that is from April 2009 to the present, can be found at
www.peacenow.org.
Yet, no less alarming than that unprecedented level
of settlement activity is the strategic location for the
recently approved construction plans. In that regard,
the case of the E-l area is most indicative. According
to the Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem, if
built, the 3,426 housing units that were approved on
5 December 2012 for the E-l area

"will exacerbate the isolation of East Jerusalem
from the rest of the West Bank, will interrupt
the territorial contiguity between the northern
and southern parts of the West Bank and will
create a physical and functional barrier between
East Jerusalem and the Palestinian population in
adjacent West Bank communities for which the
city serves as the main metropolitan and religious
centre".

For the Israeli non-governmental organization
Terrestrial Jerusalem, E-l

"is not a routine settlement. If built, it is a
game-changer, maybe a game-ender. E-l is the
binary settlement. If you support E-l, you cannot
possibly be in favour of the two-State solution; if
you are in favour of the two-State solution, you
must oppose E-l".

For those who brush off criticism ofE-l by insisting
that Israel is not pursuing construction and that it is
just planning, the non-governmental organization
Terrestrial Jerusalem is right to remind us that

"when approved, Israel asserts a plan is 'only
planning"; when implemented, 'it is not new". By
now, anyone hearing this refrain should immediately
understand: Israeli planning in settlements equals
Israeli construction in settlements, sooner rather
than later".

Surely the Council will recall that, on 11 January, a
group of around 200 young Palestinians set up tents in
parts of the E-l area and announced the establishment
of a village dubbed Bab Al-Shams - "Gate of the
Sun" - after the novel by the internationally renowned
Lebanese writer Elias Khoury, observing that "the time

has now come to change the rules of the game, for us to
establish facts on the ground - our own land". Before
their eviction two days later by the occupying forces,
Khoury addressed them from Beirut with the following
words:

"When you built your wonderful village you
gave back meaning to meaning. You became the
sons of this land and its masters
"You are the olives of Palestine that shine under
the sun ofjustice, and as you build your village, the
light of freedom flares up with you.

"Light upon light".

Borrowing the words of my fellow countryman, I
will conclude by saying that it is also high time for the
Council to give meaning to meaning by living up to its
responsibilities under the Charter and putting an end by
all legal means to the illegal settlement activity in the
occupied territory.

