Mr. Touray (Gambia): Please allow me to thank the
Secretary-General for his detailed report contained in
document S/1998/333.

The long suffering of the people of Angola should be
brought to an end as soon as possible. The United Nations
and the international community have been making serious
efforts in this direction. The conflicting parties in Angola,
in particular UNITA, should therefore comply fully and
without condition with their obligations under the Lusaka
Protocol.

My delegation is encouraged by the fact that there has
been significant progress in the peace process in Angola. It
is very pleasing to note that 11 out of the 12 pending tasks
have been completed. Although the deadline for the
completion of the tasks was not fully met, significant
strides have been made. Of these important achievements,
my delegation attaches particular importance to the
promulgation of the law granting special status to
Mr. Savimbi, the appointment of governors nominated by
UNITA and the termination of Radio Vorgan's broadcasts,
to name just a few.

My delegation is, however, disappointed at the slow
rate at which State administration is being extended. As
stated in paragraph 6 of the report, State administration has
been established in only 269 out of the 335 localities. Our
greatest disappointment on this front stems from the fact
that UNITA still controls five of its strategic strongholds
including Andulo and Bailundo. By maintaining these
strongholds, UNITA will not help the peace process. It is
desirable to call on UNITA to honour its obligations and
ensure the normalization of State administration throughout
the country, as is done in paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution.

The availability of arms to a large number of civilians
is a major concern, particularly considering the rise in
banditry in several areas in the country. My delegation
therefore agrees with the Secretary-General that the
collection of unauthorized weapons has become more
urgent than ever before. The draft resolution calls for the
disarmament of the civilian population. This is a step in the
right direction.
My delegation is very concerned about the
precarious security situation that continues to prevail in
many parts of the country. The draft resolution rightly
condemns the increasing armed attacks on United Nations
Observer Mission in Angola (MONUA) personnel and
property, on humanitarian workers and on members of the
Angolan National Police. The request made to MONUA
in paragraph 4 of the draft resolution to investigate this
issue is also a step in the right direction.

UNITA has consistently been indulging in a
deliberate ploy to further delay the peace process. This is
not beneficial to the peace process. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of
the draft resolution are therefore very fitting. We must
send a clear signal to UNITA that the international
community is not prepared to accept any steps that will
lead to the stagnation or reversal of the peace process.

The achievements of the peace process are fragile
and require further consolidation. As the mandate of
MONUA is coming to an end, we support its extension so
that the gains made so far will not be sacrificed.

My delegation also supports the follow-on
intervention recommended by the Secretary-General in
paragraphs 41 to 44 of the report. Without these
interventions, the successes of MONUA would be left in
a very fragile state. This is not desirable, as the problems
that may ensue may bring us back to square one. In that
context, my delegation encourages the Secretary-General,
as envisaged in paragraph 11 of the draft resolution, to
provide additional proposals about the modalities for
pursuing the vital peace-consolidating activities he
recommended.

We believe that the draft resolution points in the
right direction. My delegation expresses its support for it
and will vote in favour of it.

