Mr. Mahmassani (spoke in Arabic): Addressing
the phenomenon of piracy off the coast of Somalia
requires that we also address the root cause of that
phenomenon, which is, in effect, the dangerous and
deteriorating situation in Somalia, presaging a total
collapse. We therefore believe that we need to support
the process of peace and national reconciliation in
Somalia through the implementation of the Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement signed in Djibouti under the
auspices of the United Nations, the African Union and
the League of Arab States between the Federal
Transitional Government and the Alliance for the
Re-Liberation of Somalia. We call on all Somali
factions to settle their disputes and we appeal to the
parties that have yet to join the Djibouti Agreement to
do so as soon as possible and to commit effectively to
it.

The international community is called upon to
undertake speedy measures to contain the situation in
Somalia. We support the request of the Secretary-
General to deploy a multinational force, as mentioned
in his report to the Council (S/2008/709). We welcome
the readiness of the African Union to integrate its
mission into that force, so that stability can be
achieved on the ground.

The deterioration of the security, humanitarian
and economic situation in Somalia is among the root
causes behind the spread of lawlessness and chaos
from land to sea. That has had repercussions on
international navigation. Acts of piracy continue
unabated and now threaten maritime navigation in the
Gulf of Aden, which has resulted in billions of dollars
of losses for countries of the region.

Despite the fact that many naval vessels of
various nationalities are stationed off the coast of
Somalia, acts of piracy continue and are on the
increase and becoming more daring. In the past two
months alone, pirates attacked 30 vessels. The pirates'
take from the ransom of captured vessels in 2008 is
estimated at $120 million. Sixteen vessels, of the 40
that have been taken are still in the hands of pirates. It
is worth noting that the pirates released the crews after
they were taken hostage. Fighting piracy requires that
those who have committed acts of piracy be brought to
justice. There should be full coordination among
military vessels and international law, as set out in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
1982, must be respected.

Acts of piracy at sea are only symptoms of the
major problem of the deteriorating situation in
Somalia. They are the direct result of the absence of
any de facto authority on the ground. Therefore, any
action should be complemented by practical solutions
to address the situation in Somalia itself.
We call on the Security Council to shoulder its
responsibility and find a comprehensive solution to the
question of Somalia, to end acts of piracy and to work
on establishing the rule of law in Somalia itself and off
its coasts.

