Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): The fact that we
have been fortunate enough to have so many briefers
today testifies to the importance of this issue. I would
like to thank them and like to thank in particular
Minister Malanji and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for being with us. I would like to
make five brief points.

My first point, as many other speakers said, is that
this is a critical moment in the history ofthe Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo precisely because ofthe prospect
of the peaceful transfer of power. Therefore, there is a
lot at stake. This is a historic chance for the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

The second point is that the important thing is
that the democratic will of the Congolese people be
respected. As others have noted, these are provisional
results, so there is a chance for the Congolese people
to have the result that they voted for. To that end, it is
critical that the data and methodology of the voting be
examined. We noted the statement made on behalf of the
Conference episcopale nationale du Congo (CENCO)
that its data do not reflect the announced result, and
we therefore request both CENCO and the Commission
electorale nationale independante (CENI) to provide
further data and other analyses relating to the electoral
process. Like others, we would like to know if it would
be possible for CENI to publish the results at the level
of local polling centres and bureaax de vote. We believe
that that is a very important next step.

My third point is that, as we know, the electoral
process is ongoing. It will therefore be important
in the coming days that the Congolese people see a
process that delivers what they voted for and that any
disagreement is voiced through the proper channels,
peacefully and constructively.

My fourth point is to echo calls for lifting media
restrictions, including with regard to the Internet.

My fifth and last point is to support the African
Union's call for all stakeholders to act in a way that
consolidates democracy and preserves peace and for
violence to cease.

