Mr. Djedje (Cote d'Ivoire) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Mr. Michel Kafando for the
quality of his briefing on the sociopolitical situation in
Burundi. I also thank Ambassador Jiirg Lauber, whose
recent mission to Burundi has enabled us to follow
developments on the ground.

I will focus on the referendum held on 17 May
and the outlook for the political process in Burundi.
On 17 May, Burundian voters voted in favour of the
constitutional reform proposed by the Burundian
authorities. Cote d'Ivoire takes note of the provisional
results of the referendum, which unquestionably
remains a prerogative of the Burundian authorities.
However, we regret the lack of consultation with the
various sectors of Burundian society, which not only
risks widening the split between the ruling coalition
and the opposition but may also further undermine
the process of national reconciliation in Burundi. Cote
d'Ivoire therefore urges the Burundian authorities,
in the aftermath of the referendum, to work to create
a peaceful sociopolitical climate that will foster a
resumption of political dialogue on the basis of the
Arusha Accords. The Accords have been the main
pillar of peace and stability for more than a decade and
brought an end to the country's civil war by establishing
a system in which power is shared by Burundi's various
ethnic groups.

The stalemate in the inter-Burundian political
dialogue is of concern to the entire international
community. The fact is that more than six months
after the last session of the inter-Burundian dialogue,
conducted in Uganda under the auspices of the East
African Community, there has been no significant
progress in the political process despite the efforts
of the facilitator, Mr. Mkapa. Cote d'Ivoire urges
Burundi's stakeholders to resume their dialogue on the
basis of the Arusha Accords. We urge them to reject
preconditions and unilateral actions in order to create
the conditions necessary for a successful resolution of
the crisis, through a credible political process leading
to democratic and inclusive elections in 2020.

In conclusion, my delegation encourages the East
African Community and the mediator and facilitator of
the inter-Burundian dialogue to work for a resumption
of the political dialogue. We call on the international
community to support all regional and subregional
initiatives to that end. We support Special Envoy
Kafando and reiterate our readiness to support his
continued efforts to help end the crisis in Burundi.

