The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of India.

The important role played by the African Union
Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) in the remarkable
progress that Somalia has achieved this year in political
and security stabilization can hardly be overemphasized.
Thanks to AMISOM, Mogadishu is today firmly under
the control of the Somali authorities. Over the past few
months, AMISOM. and the Somali National Security
Forces have also made steady gains in other areas of
Somalia and have secured the strategic coastal town of
Kismayo from Al-Shabaab.

We commend all troop-contributing countries, in
particular Uganda, Burundi, Djibouti and Kenya, for
their commitment to the Mission and for the sacrifices
their troops have made. We also note the significant
contribution of the Ethiopian troops operating under
the AMISOM. Strategic Concept.

The support of the international community to
AMISOM. has been instrumental in these successes. It
is therefore necessary for the international community
to remain steadfast in its support and, in fact, to
enhance it in order to ensure that the new Government
of Somalia is fully supported in military and civilian
matters in its efforts to stabilize the areas liberated
from Al-Shabaab, establish administrative structures,
and launch socioeconomic development programmes.

We voted in favour of resolution 2073 (2012),
extending the mandate of AMISOM. for four months, as
requested by the African Union. While the resolution
extends the United Nations logistical support package to
cover an additional 50 civilian personnel, as requested
by the African Union, we are disappointed that it could
not respond to other critical requests made by the AU,
such as those concerning the maritime component
and the review of the arms embargo. We hope that the
Council will address these issues when it next considers
AMISOM's mandate after strategic reviews by the AU
and the United Nations.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Somalia.

