Sir John Sawers (United Kingdom): I would like
to join others in thanking Prime Minister Pierre-Louis
and former President Clinton - in his new role as
United Nations Special Envoy for Haiti - for their
presence here today. Their contributions are inspiring
great efforts to achieve our agreed goals in Haiti. We
welcome their vision and energy, and we are grateful to
you, Madam President, for giving the Council the
chance to hear from them in person today. I would also
like to welcome back to this Chamber Special
Representative Annabi and to thank him and the entire
team of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in
Haiti (MINUSTAH) for their ongoing efforts in Haiti.

The Secretary-General's latest report on Haiti
(S/2009/439) paints a picture that we recognized:
important progress and positive trends in certain areas,
yet continued challenges in others. In the area of
security, the relative stability and calm of the past six
months is encouraging, particularly given that this was
a period that saw two sets of closely fought senatorial
elections. One consequence of the improved security
environment is that MINUSTAH is much less likely to
have to conduct large-scale security operations of the
sort seen in Cite Soleil in 2007. That has allowed for a
modest reduction in troop levels, accompanied by an
uplift in police numbers.

We welcome regular reviews of this sort, which
are in line with the approach and the principles
captured in the presidential statement adopted by the
Council at last month's debate on peacekeeping
(S/PRST/2009/24). We encourage the Special
Representative and the Force Commander to continue
to keep MINUSTAH's force levels and posture under
close review in order to ensure the most efficient and
effective use of scarce peacekeeping resources.

Our goal is to create the conditions in which Haiti
can take responsibility for its own security, thus
enabling the United Nations peacekeeping mission to
complete its task. No one is saying that we are there
yet. We agree with the Secretary-General that
MINUSTAH's presence remains essential for the time
being. Equally, however, the United Nations
consolidation plan conveys a sense of progress towards
the objective of a Haiti able to guarantee its own
stability and security.

Perhaps the most crucial aspect of MINUSTAH's
work in the coming period is to build local capacity.
The efforts to train and mentor the Haitian National
Police, in line with the police reform plan, are vital in
order to extend and consolidate the authority of the
State. MINUSTAH and the wider international
community have to maintain and increase their focus
on building indigenous capacity in terms of the police,
justice and the rule of law generally.

Equally, we agree with others that
socio-economic development is essential for long-term
stability in Haiti. All of our efforts to nurture and

strengthen the institutions of the Haitian State will
come to nothing if we cannot give the people of Haiti a
stake in their future and the prospect of a better life for
them and for their children. For that reason, we warmly
welcome the Secretary-General's decision to appoint
former President Clinton as his Special Envoy for
Haiti. We have already seen, including in the
announcement of a major trade mission by private
investors last month, some of the results of the energy
and ideas that the Special Envoy brings with him.

As Prime Minister Pierre-Louis has remarked,
there is an opportunity to change perceptions about
Haiti and to encourage the sort of investment that will
change the socio-economic dynamic of the country.
There is scope to move Haiti onto a virtuous circle of
security, investment and development. Let us keep
focused on that goal so that, in the years ahead, we
shall be able to add Haiti to the list of countries that the
United Nations has helped transport from conflict to
self-sustaining stability.

