Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/772*) and Under-Secretary-General Herve
Ladsous for his briefing this morning. I would also
thank Mr. Staffan de Mistura for his valedictory
comments. My thanks also go to Deputy Foreign
Minister Jawed Ludin for his interesting and insightful
comments.
I will focus my statement today on the landscape
up to and beyond 2014, but let me begin by expressing
my condolences on the loss of innocent lives in the
suicide attacks of 6 December. The United Kingdom
strongly condemns such atrocities, but we are clear that
these acts of terrorism will not undermine the
international community's commitment to Afghanistan.

This year's achievements on Afghanistan were
brought together in the Bonn Conference. The
international community came together at Bonn to send
a strong signal of its long-term commitment to
Afghanistan beyond the transition process. We
congratulate Germany and Afghanistan for the
successful Conference.

I would like to highlight four of the key elements
of the blueprint that was agreed.

First, the international community reaffirmed its
readiness to support the Afghan Government in
developing the country's economy. International
partners will direct financial support to Afghanistan to
help it achieve self-sustainability. We will work with
the Afghan Government and international partners on
detailed plans, which we hope to discuss at the Tokyo
Conference in July 2012. Alongside that, we welcome
the Afghan Government's commitment to revitalize the
reform process agreed in Kabul last year and to
accelerate progress on the key development priorities.

Secondly, participants agreed to produce a clear
plan for the future structure and funding of the Afghan
National Security Forces beyond 2014, in advance of
the NATO Chicago summit next May.

Thirdly, the conclusions set out an agreed set of
guiding principles for the reconciliation process and its
outcomes. That builds on the recent traditional Loya
Jirga and the agreement there to an inclusive,
representative peace process.

Fourthly, the Conference also reinforced the
importance of regional engagement alongside wider
international support for Afghanistan, building on the
successful Istanbul Conference in November.

Combined, those elements provide a clear
framework for future partnership between the Afghan
Government and the international community beyond
2014. We must now ensure that we honour these
commitments as we enter the Transformation Decade
and enable Afghanistan to build on its hard-won gains
over the last ten years.
Underpinning the progress is the ongoing
transition process. The United Kingdom welcomes
President Karzai's announcement on 27 November that
the second set of provinces and districts are to begin
security transition. The Afghans are well on track to
take lead responsibility for security across the country
by the end of 2014.

The protection of the Afghan civilian population
is at the core of the military strategy, and the
International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) is
working extremely hard to reduce the levels of civilian

casualties. There are strict procedures in place, both to
minimize the risk of casualties occurring and to
investigate any incidents that do happen. The vast
majority of civilian deaths - some 77 per cent,
according to the latest figures - are caused by the
insurgents. There is a key difference: ISAF places a
high priority on reducing and preventing civilian
casualties; the insurgency, in contrast, targets civilians
indiscriminately.

A further step on the path to full Afghan
sovereignty is the importance of enabling key reforms
to support economic self-sustainability. We therefore
welcome the agreement between the Government of
Afghanistan and the International Monetary Fund on a
new programme of support. That decision shows that
the Afghan Government has made progress in
reassuring international donors and ordinary Afghans
alike that they are serious about providing a safe
economic and business environment.

As we go forward, it is critical that the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
continues to play a key role, supporting the emergence
of a secure and self-sustainable Afghan State. We look
forward to the results of the review of UNAMA and
associated United Nations activities. In particular, the
United Kingdom emphasizes the critical importance of
UNAMA's role in, first, supporting the Government of
Afghanistan in strengthening the electoral process and
framework; second, coordinating rule of law
initiatives; and third, encouraging regional
cooperation.

I would like to end by expressing the United
Kingdom's warm appreciation for the outstanding work
carried out by the outgoing Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Staffan de Mistura. We also
greatly welcome the appointment of the new Special
Representative, Jan Kubis, and look forward to
working closely with him.

We agree to the draft presidential statement.

