Mr. Messahel (Algeria) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to congratulate the Russian Federation
on its presidency of the Security Council this month
and for its initiative in organizing this debate on the
sensitive issue of resolving conflicts in the Middle East
and North Africa and the related issue of combating the
terrorist threat in the region. The relationship between
those two phenomena is a reality that challenges us
every day. In occupied Palestine, Syria, Iraq, Yemen,
Libya, Afghanistan, Somalia and the Sahel, the outbreak
and persistence of crises and conflicts have today a
direct impact on the worsening threat of terrorism and
the proliferation of terrorist groups. Those crises and
conflicts bring to mind three fundamental aspects.

First, the weakening of States affected by that
scourge benefits first and foremost those groups,
because it indirectly creates opportunities for them to
consolidate and develop their criminal activities.

Secondly, it offers them opportunities for
interaction and cooperation with major transnational
criminal groups, which obviously protect the terrorists
and enable them to conduct activities that now include
human trafficking, illicit trafficking in natural
resources, illegal migration, trafficking in ancient
cultural artefacts, kidnapping and drug and arms
trafficking. All those activities are now recognized as
facts, including by the United Nations.

Thirdly, the absence of negotiated political
solutions promotes the emergence of chaos and lawless
areas, which terrorist groups are quick to occupy and
exploit to their advantage.

The impasse in the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process is a good illustration. The continuation of the
policy of occupation, colonization and annexation of
occupied Palestinian territory, in flagrant violation
of international law and the relevant resolutions of
the Council, and the repeated attacks by Israel on the
Al-Aqsa Mosque, fuel frustration within the Muslim
community. That frustration is compounded by the lack
of meaningful consequences from the international
community to those violations and by the impunity that
the occupation authorities feel secure of. They have
also used terrorist propaganda to their advantage.
The crisis in Syria has been and remains dependent
on finding a sincere negotiated political solution among
the Syrians themselves in respect for the sovereignty,
the territorial integrity and the unity of the Syrian
people. The emergence and continuation of the conflict
has opened space for the rise and development of
numerous terrorist groups. They now occupy vast
swathes of territory, control natural resources, raise
taxes and impose their barbaric behaviour on innocent
people and their ancient cultural heritage. The same
thing is happening in neighbouring Iraq, where part
of its territory as well as its sovereignty, security and
institutional stability are threatened by the terrorist
hordes of Daesh and their associates.

In Libya, the terrorist threat continues to expand
and to take advantage of the lack of effective control of
the all the territory by a central Government authority,
which weighs on the stability and security of the entire
region. The demand to counter this threat requires a
rapidly negotiated solution based on respect for the
sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity and
unity of the brotherly Libyan people. The solution also
requires the urgent establishment of a Government of
national unity to enable the Libyan people to effectively
cope with terrorist groups, which are progressively and
dangerously establishing themselves in the country.

The scarcity of resources available to countries
in these regions and their porous and vast borders, as
well as poverty and lack of development, are factors
that provide terrorism with considerable room to
manoeuvre, develop and strengthen, despite the war
that the countries affected and threatened by this
scourge are legitimately waging.

Like the rest of the international community, my
country is very concerned by the aggravation of the
terrorist threat and the serious risks it poses to regional
and international peace and security. We believe that
efforts to counter this threat must be directed in three
complementary directions.

First, bilateral, regional and international
cooperation in the fight against this scourge must
be continuously pursued and deepened. The United
Nations and the Security Council have, in this respect,
a responsibility and a critical role, particularly in the
implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-
Terrorism Strategy.

Secondly, dialogue and peaceful means,
instead of the indiscriminate, disproportionate and
counterproductive use of force, must be promoted to
find political solutions to these crises and conflicts.
Such solutions are sure to encourage the suppression of
chaos and lawless areas and to mobilize the dedication
of greater and more important resources in the fight
against terrorism.

Thirdly and lastly, the efforts of the concerned
countries and the international community as a whole
must be coordinated in order to develop and strengthen
the institutional, human, technical and technological
capacities of these countries, which badly need
such capacities in their fight against terrorism. The
reinforcement and presence of strong and capable
States is today one of the condition for success in the
fight against terrorism.

These are some observations we wished to share
with the Council in context of this important and timely
debate, whose the conclusions concern us individually
and collectively.

