Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): I wish
to thank High Representative Inzko for his briefing
and for his tireless efforts in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The United States continues to support his mandate and
commends his work to encourage the Government of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to advance on a broad range
of issues related to the General Framework Agreement
for Peace. We remain steadfast in encouraging
Governments at all levels to focus on key priorities,
including capitalizing on positive civic engagement,
ensuring that general elections go forward as planned in
October, enacting reforms necessary for Euro-Atlantic
integration and refraining from disturbing secessionist
rhetoric. Today, I would like to touch briefly on each of
those four issues.

In February, thousands of protesters in cities across
Bosnia and Herzegovina joined together to express
dissatisfaction with the lack of long-term economic
and political progress in the country. Protesters noted
grievances about unemployment, corruption and other
social concerns. We regret that protests briefly turned
violent, resulting in injuries and damage to buildings,
and that some political actors attempted to use the
protests to discourage public discourse and to stoke
ethnic tensions. The United States recognizes that both
peaceful protests and democratic institutions, such as
plenums, can serve key roles. They allow the public to
express views that political leaders should listen to and
respect. We hope that Bosnian citizens will continue
active peaceful engagement in advance of and beyond
the October general elections.

Furthermore, we commend the Government
for adopting necessary amendments to the election
law. We hope that election preparations will move
forward smoothly. As preparations progress, we call
on politicians and political parties to campaign on
concrete proposals for economic and political reforms,
instead of attempting to distract the public with divisive
nationalist rhetoric.

The politicization of the regulation on residency
has been yet another concern in the lead-up to elections.
Although there is a need to amend existing legislation,
the rights of returnees and the freedom of movement of
all citizens must be respected. Attempts to address those
issues unilaterally at the entity level and to block the
functioning of State-level institutions are unacceptable.

In addition to holding general elections throughout
the country, authorities are to hold local elections in
Mostar no later than October. In that regard, we hope
that political parties and institutions will meet their
obligations to implement the ruling of the Bosnian
Constitutional Court on the electoral system for Mostar.

Looking beyond elections, we hope Bosnia and
Herzegovina will again focus on key reforms for Euro-
Atlantic integration, which the United States continues
to view as the surest and most expeditious path to the
country's long-term stability and prosperity. As the
High Representative notes in his report (S/2014/314, annex), authorities failed to make any concrete progress
on the outstanding "5+2" objectives and criteria. We
also share his concern over the Republika Srpska's
lack of compliance with its obligation to provide the
High Representative with timely access to officials,
institutions and documents.

Despite efforts by senior European officials,
Bosnian leaders failed to reach a final agreement on
implementing the European Court of Human Rights
decision in the Sejdic-Finci case, a key requirement for
European Union (EU) integration. A defence property
solution, which is also a "5+2" requirement, remains
the condition for activating Bosnia and Herzegovina's
NATO membership action plan.

Finally, the United States strongly supports the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as guaranteed by the Dayton Peace
Accords. We strongly condemn recent statements
calling for Republika Srpska's secession. Any action
taken by Republika Srpska towards the dissolution of
Bosnia and Herzegovina would violate Dayton as well
as the Bosnian Constitution. Secessionist statements
are nothing more than attempts to distract the public
from the economic and political stagnation of the past
four years.

We continue to support the EU-led peacekeeping
force Operation Althea and the NATO headquarters in
Sarajevo. We believe those institutions are essential in
sustaining a safe and secure environment in Bosnia,
provide essential capacity-building to the Government
and provide reassurance across ethnic lines that the
international community is committed to Bosnian
stability.

We are optimistic about the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and will continue to work with the
Bosnian Government to encourage progress and to
improve the lives of its citizens and to advance its path
to Euro-Atlantic integration.

