Mr. Kohona (Sri Lanka): At the outset, I wish to
join other speakers in condemning the attack on high
Government officials in Mogadishu and expressing our
sympathies to their families.

I take this opportunity to thank the presidency of
the Security Council for organizing this important
discussion. We would also wish to express our
appreciation to the Secretary-General for his report on
possible options for countering piracy through
prosecuting and imprisoning persons responsible for
acts of piracy and armed robbery at sea, including, in
particular, options for creating special domestic
chambers possibly with international components, a
regional tribunal or an international tribunal and
corresponding imprisonment arrangements
(S/2010/394). We also welcome his proposal for a
special adviser.

Piracy has become a major challenge in the
contemporary world, and its implications, especially to
sea-borne trade, are immense. We believe that it is
important in the battle against this scourge to share the
modalities and options for prosecuting and imprisoning
pirates, including for imprisonment in third countries
and for essential capacity-building in the States
concerned. As a matter of importance, we also believe
that the experience and the capacity to deter and
counter piracy can be effectively shared.

Piracy has had a dire effect on the political,
social, economic and humanitarian fabric of Somalia.
In addition to the Somali coast, piracy has made its
presence felt further afield, with the potential to spread
even further. Somali pirates have now become
extremely sophisticated and are operating deep into the
Indian Ocean, utilizing mother ships for launching
their attacks. If this threat is not effectively contained
now, it will encourage other criminals to engage in
piracy to achieve their own ends.

It also becomes a distinct possibility that
terrorists with naval capabilities could resort to piracy.
Due to gaps in the countermeasures undertaken at
present and to piracy's lucrative financial advantages,
piracy could soon spread its vicious tentacles to other
regions, endangering sea lanes and global
communications. International commerce will be
forced to bear an additional and costly burden,
including through the adoption of additional protective
measures, increased insurance coverage and the
diversion of ships to other, longer routes.

Today, countering piracy is central to nations
dependent on seaborne commerce, in particular those
dependent on the sea for their energy needs. Efforts to
counter piracy at the regional level and through
coalitions do not appear to have succeeded in
overcoming this menace. Despite the existence of a
24-nation naval task force, Somali pirates continue to
harass ships, although the number of incidents appears
to have decreased. A collective and more dedicated
international effort must be made to deal with this
problem and ensure that the global community is rid of
it.

We believe that there is much that can be done at
the national and international levels to achieve success.
Piracy originates on land, and anti-piracy measures
must begin on land as well. In addition to deploying
naval deterrence, anti-piracy laws need to be
strengthened and strenuously implemented. Improving
domestic laws and regulations, increasing the
efficiency of law enforcement, ratifying international
agreements and implementing them and practical
international cooperation will be essential. We call for
the full implementation of resolutions 1846 (2008) and
1851 (2008), on counter-piracy military operations.
Regional cooperation between navies and coast guards,
including technical assistance, must necessarily feature
prominently.

It is encouraging to note that many international
organizations and regional navies have been active in
hosting seminars and discussions and sharing
experiences. Just this month, Sri Lanka hosted the
Galle dialogue. As the threat scenario and the counter
measures at sea have evolved, it is time for us to revisit
all international legal instruments pertinent to this
challenge. Limitations in, or the absence of, definitions
may have posed difficulties when executing search
warrants, making arrests and conducting prosecutions.

Having successfully countered a flotilla of small
craft employed by a terrorist group and effectively
protected large vessels transporting cargo and
personnel by sea, we believe that the immediate answer
to piracy at the tactical level would be to place security
teams consisting of well-trained naval personnel on
board merchant vessels, as they would be a visible
deterrent. If required, they would react with much more
immediate effectiveness. For this, we consider that
United Nations involvement is important, particularly
since the pirate threat in Somali waters has now spread
to many adjacent areas. We consider that it is important
for the United Nations to take a lead role in this
respect.

I wish to put on record that the dense shipping
lane south of Dondra Head in Sri Lanka has been free
of any piracy or other criminal activity in spite of high
intensity maritime terrorist activity using very
sophisticated vessels in the seas around Sri Lanka over
a period of 28 years. Sri Lanka's success in keeping
this vital sea-lane safe for international shipping over
the years is a significant achievement. It must not be
allowed to be threatened by pirates or similar criminals
at any point due to complacency. Sri Lanka stands
ready to share its expertise and personnel in that
regard.

Addressing piracy around Somali waters in a
sustainable manner will require a combination of
domestic and international security strategies. We hope
that the United Nations will take a practical and
leading role in this endeavour.

