Mr. Monteiro (Portugal) (interpretation from Spanish): Portugal and Costa Rica are both part of the
Ibero-American family, and our two countries have been
taking advantage of our presence in the Security Council to
step up our cooperation. For this reason, it is with great
pleasure that I see Mr. Fernando Naranjo Villalobos
presiding over this meeting of the Security Council.

(spoke in English)

Considerable progress has been made in implementing
peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The holding of municipal
elections in September and the maintenance of an
environment of security culminated a year of combined
efforts by the international community to help the Bosnian
people establish a long-lasting peace.

But, while there has been progress, much still remains
to be done.

The United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and the International Police Task
Force (IPTF) play a crucial role in the implementation of
the Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and it
is clear that their tasks have been carried out effectively
over the course of this last year.

It is a difficult mission and a complex one, which
also requires essential input from other international
actors, in particular the Stabilization Force (SFOR) led by
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which
provides the security environment necessary for the
implementation of the Peace Agreement.

In the final analysis, however, the international
community's efforts in Bosnia will not amount to very
much if the Bosnian parties themselves are not fully
committed to peace and to cooperating fully with the
United Nations, SFOR, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and other international
organizations, as well as with each other.

This is the only way to establish a self-sustaining
peace in Bosnia. We urge the parties to make increased
efforts to address inadequate progress, including in the
following areas: the functioning of common institutions,
the protection of human rights, the return of refugees,
economic management and cooperation with the
International Tribunal. Furthermore, the implementation
of the results of the municipal elections must be
completed, and serious problems of local administration
must be addressed.

We welcome the conclusions of the Bonn Peace
Implementation Conference, which built on the work of
previous Peace Implementation Council meetings held in
London and Sintra, in setting out very clearly what still
needs to be done by the Bosnian parties. Taken with the
Peace Agreement, they represent the blueprint for peace
in Bosnia. And, as the Peace Implementation Council
confirmed in Bonn, there is no alternative to the Peace
Agreement. Therefore, the mandate of UNMIBH, and
thus of the IPTF, should be extended so that it can
continue its important work in the areas of police reform,
as well as the other tasks entrusted to it and to the
civilian unit of UNMIBH.

Without an adequate security arrangement, however,
the work of the United Nations and others in the
implementation of the civilian aspects of the Peace
Agreement will be compromised. This security
arrangement is currently provided by SFOR. But an

 

adequate security arrangement must be established after the
end of SFOR's mandate in order to ensure the continuity of
the international community's efforts in Bosnia.

Portugal has over 60 personnel serving with the IPTF
and over 300 serving with SFOR. We believe very strongly
in the need for adequate security.

The United Nations, in supporting the implementation
of the civilian aspects of the Peace Agreement, also
cooperates with the OSCE and with the High
Representative. Their work, and that of others, is crucial to
the process of consolidating peace in Bosnia. We pay
tribute to the High Representative, Mr. Carlos Westendorp,
as well as to United Nations and other international
personnel who are working hard to help bring lasting peace
to Bosnia, often in dangerous, if not fatal, circumstances.
Portugal regrets the loss of life in the helicopter crash of 17
September 1997.

The efforts of the international community in Bosnia
and Herzegovina have been significant, and we must not
forget that, not too long ago, there was open fighting in
Bosnia, and civilian populations were subjected to daily
bombardments.

The time for the withdrawal of the international
community has not yet come. For now, the international
community must remain in Bosnia and Herzegovina to help
consolidate peace. This will permit the intensification of the
process of economic reconstruction and development. It is,
above all, essential to ensure the true reconciliation of the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the rule of law
will replace the rule of war.

