Mr. Tiendrebeogo (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): At the outset, I should like to thank Presidents
Byron and Pocar, as well as Prosecutors Brammertz
and Jallow, for their briefings. My delegation has taken
note of the reports of both Tribunals, which very
precisely and clearly define the tasks that have been
entrusted to them, the efforts they have made to fulfil
those tasks, the difficulties that they have faced and
continue to face, and above all the challenges
concerning the deadlines they have been given by
which to conclude their work.

With regard to the work that has been
accomplished, we would like to congratulate the staff
of the Tribunals on the results that they have achieved.
They have made significant efforts in prosecuting
numerous accused and in handing down indictments
and judgements. We welcome and encourage those
efforts because they have thereby contributed
significantly to fighting impunity and ensuring the
supremacy of justice.

With regard to the deadlines established under
resolution 1534 (2004), in view of the fact that they
were set by the Council, it would be desirable that all
necessary measures be taken in order to respect those
deadlines. We congratulate both Tribunals on the
practical measures they have taken to accelerate
investigations and judgements, as well as to limit
delays in preparing the trials. We invite them to
continue to develop similar initiatives. In particular,
they should identify as soon as possible those trials that
should be referred to the competent national
jurisdictions. In that regard, my delegation invites the
international community to support the efforts of the
States concerned to strengthen their national judicial
systems. In any event, the Council will always be able,
when the time comes, to assess the situation and take
the necessary measures.

With regard to the crucial issue of fugitives, my
delegation believes that the work of the Tribunals, even
after the end of their mandates, will be effective only if
those fugitives are caught and brought to trial. People
who are suspected of having played a prominent role in
committing the most severe violations of human rights
and international humanitarian law should be brought
to justice. In that context, we are happy to see the
inclination of many States to cooperate with the
Tribunals. We would, however, state our concern at the
failings of some States in their cooperation with the
Tribunals. It is important for all States to cooperate
fully with the Tribunals, which were established by the
Council.
Finally, with regard to the legacy of the two
Tribunals and their residual functions, Burkina Faso is
following with interest the activities of the Council's
informal working group, which is seeking an
appropriate response. We congratulate the working
group, which has started a second reading of the
residual issues identified in the joint document of the
two Tribunals. Such important work that must continue,
and we await with interest the proposals that will be
made on such essential issues as the archives, witness
protection enforcement, the imposition of sanctions,
and the trial of fugitives who are yet to be captured.

