Mr. Mayoral (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like, first of all, to welcome the President of
Timor-Leste, Mr. Xanana Gusmao, and the Foreign
Minister of that country, our friend Mr. Jose Ramos-
Horta, to the Council. We would like to thank President
Gusmao for his important briefing, of which we have
taken careful note. We assure him that Argentina will
take into account the position of his Government
during the forthcoming negotiations on matters relating
to his country and in the Security Council, in particular
with regard to the establishment of a United Nations
political office in Timor-Leste.

I would also like to thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Sukehiro
Hasegawa, for his introduction of the most recent
report of the Secretary-General on the question. We
would like to commend Mr. Hasegawa and the entire
team of the United Nations Mission in Timor-Leste
(UNOTIL) for their work. We welcome the fact that
UNOTIL has continued to help to strengthen the
Timorese institutions and to transfer expertise with a
view to the development of endogenous capacity in the
areas of public administration, justice, human rights,
policing and other matters. We believe that those
advances will help to ensure the smooth transition to a
framework of assistance for sustainable development in
Timor-Leste.

In spite of all of the progress that has been made,
we should note that Timor-Leste still requires
assistance. It remains a poor country, and there are still
a number of areas with regard to which it will continue
to require international assistance beyond May 2006.
Although certain international agencies and bilateral
donors have been identified with a view to providing
support in some of those areas, as the Secretary-
General notes in his report (S/2006/24), some key
aspects have not been covered. My country believes
that we must keep all options open until May, since if
we cannot identify bilateral or multilateral donors to
assist Timor-Leste, the United Nations will have to do
so directly.

The question of international assistance for
parliamentary and presidential elections in 2007 is also
very important in that connection. In this regard, we
take note of the letter from Prime Minister Alkatiri
concerning the establishment of a special political
office. In principle, by delegation supports that. We
hope that in his next report the Secretary-General will
present specific proposals for the mandate and
composition of such an office.

We welcome the fact that relations between
Timor-Leste and Indonesia have continued to improve
and that the parties have made progress in the
demarcation of the land border. We hope that progress
will continue in that area and that a border
management agreement will be concluded as soon as
possible.

We also welcome the signing of an agreement
between Timor-Leste and Australia concerning the
sharing of resources from the Timor Sea. We hope that
it will be implemented for the benefit of the Timorese
people.

Lastly, we would like to emphasize that, as is
well known, we attach great importance to human
rights issues. President Gusmao has transmitted to the
Secretary-General the report of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation, which concerns
abuses committed between 1974 and 1999. We would
like to know what sort of action is envisaged in
response to the conclusions and recommendations of
the report and whether there are areas in which the
United Nations could assist. We also take note of the
activities undertaken by the bilateral Commission for
Truth and Friendship established by Timor-Leste and
Indonesia, and we hope that the utmost efforts will be
made in that regard to establish the truth about human
rights violations. In that context, we look forward to
receiving a report from the Secretary-General soon so
that we can consider practical ways and means of
administering justice that properly take into account
the rights of the victims of human rights violations and
of their family members.

