Mrs. March Smith (Norway): Norway aligns
itself with the statements previously made by Sweden,
on behalf of the Nordic countries, and Switzerland, on
behalf of the Group of Friends.

I have the honour to make this statement on behalf
of Argentina, Austria, Indonesia and my own country,
Norway.

The tremendous human suffering inflicted
on civilians in armed conflicts across the globe is
unacceptable. Much more can, and must, be done to
protect the civilian population. It is broadly agreed
that the provisions of international humanitarian law
afford civilians significant protection from the effects
of military operations, provided that they are faithfully
implemented. That said, the complexities of today's
armed conflicts raise a number of new challenges.

For that reason, we believe that it is necessary
to engage all relevant actors, including the military,
humanitarian organizations and civil society, in a
discussion on how the implementation of international
humanitarian law can and should be strengthened in
practice.

That is why our countries have taken an initiative
called "Reclaiming the protection of civilians under
international humanitarian law". The aim is not to
negotiate new legislation, but to agree on practical
measures that will effectively improve the protection
of civilians in armed conflicts. We believe that full
compliance with international humanitarian law is
essential and possible.

In order to identify practical measures and
recommendations so as to effectively address the
humanitarian challenges at hand, we believe that it is
necessary to build our discussions on experience from
the field in the different regions. To that end, seminars
have been held in Jakarta, Buenos Aires and Kampala.
Vienna will be the venue for the fourth regional
seminar on 21 and 22 February. An essential aspect of
the seminars has been contributions from individuals
and organizations with first-hand experience in dealing
with the protection of civilians in armed conflict.
Participants from the military, as well as the United
Nations, the International Committee of the Red Cross
(ICRC) and other humanitarian organizations working
in the field, have provided highly useful input.

The discussions in the regional seminars
conducted so far have identified a number of possible
recommendations. First, in order to fully implement
international humanitarian law, including its rules of
distinction and proportionality, it is important that we
focus, in practical terms, on how military operations
can be conducted with less risk for the civilian
populations concerned. Furthermore, it is essential that
practical and scenario-based training in international
humanitarian law be promoted at all levels within the
military.

Secondly, we need increased engagement and
dialogue with non-State armed groups in order to
increase respect for international humanitarian
law among such actors. International humanitarian
law is binding on every party to an armed conflict,
whether it be a State actor or a non-State armed group.
Ensuring respect for international humanitarian law on
everyone's part remains a key measure for improving
the protection of civilians.

Thirdly, in complex conflict situations, States
should strive to apply all the applicable law, including
international humanitarian law and human rights law,
in a manner that affords civilians the best possible
protection.

Fourthly, it is essential to ensure that the conduct
of military operations is properly documented and to
strive for increased transparency, both during and after
an armed conflict. This is necessary in order to prevent
further violations, protect civilians and promote
accountability in post-conflict situations.

Our initiative will culminate in a global conference
in Oslo on 23 and 24 May. All States, as well as the
United Nations, the ICRC and civil society, will be
invited. Our aim is to agree on strong and concrete
recommendations on how international humanitarian
law should be understood and implemented so as to
address the pressing humanitarian concerns at hand.
We hope the Council will join us in this urgent task,
which requires our continued and concerted efforts.

