Mr. Kariyawasam (Sri Lanka): Let me thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this debate on this
important issue, which begs for the attention of the
international community because of its impact not only
on peace and security, but also on the well-being of
societies in several parts of the world. The Secretary-
General's report on small arms, in document
S/2008/258, is a stark reminder of the adverse impact
of small arms and light weapons. It contains valuable
information and several worthy recommendations.

As stated in the report, most of the present-day
conflicts are fought primarily with small arms and light
weapons. Though the weapons may be small, they
cause mass destruction in terms of their effects in many
parts of the world. They are the weapons of choice in
several intra-State conflicts and are used by terrorists
and criminal gangs who gain easy access to those
weapons and connected ammunition.

In most situations, unbridled violence unleashed
by the use of those weapons affects civilians as well.
And it has become evident that one primary cause that
engenders and sustains conflicts resulting in violence
affecting civilians is the uncontrolled proliferation of
small arms and light weapons. We recall that in 2001,
in recognition of this fact, the Members of the United
Nations launched by consensus the Programme of
Action to Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit
Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons in All Its
Aspects. However, even that Programme failed to
recognize the one major cause driving conflicts and
spreading terrorism worldwide. That is the reality of
easy availability of, access to and illicit possession of
small arms and light weapons by non-State actors.

The involvement of non-State actors, who often
thrive on the power of the bullet to settle political
scores, ostensibly fighting for political aspirations, is
yet to receive adequate attention in most international
forums. For instance, the issue of non-State actors was
not adequately addressed by the United Nations at the
time the Programme of Action was adopted in 2001.
Therefore the 2006 Review Conference of the
Programme of Action was seen by a very large number
of States as an opportunity to strengthen the
Programme through further agreements that would
expand its scope on important issues, such as action
against non-State actors, that were left unresolved in
2001. Regrettably, however, the Review Conference
neither made progress in that direction nor was able to
agree on adequate global measures for the
Programme's full implementation, simply due to the
intransigence of a few, defying an emerging global
consensus.

The Secretary-General's report once again
provides useful information to enable us to address
several issues that could help the international
community come to terms with the scourge of illicit
trafficking and trade in small arms and light weapons.
This is the core issue in achieving success in any
endeavour to cope with and mitigate the adverse
impact of the proliferation of small arms. Illegal
possession of small arms and light weapons by
non-State actors is an attendant issue that cannot be left
out in any meaningful discussion of this issue.

Sri Lanka, like several other countries in Asia,
Africa and Latin America, suffers from violence and
terrorism perpetrated by a non-State actor using ill-
gotten small arms and light weapons and ammunition.
This terrorist group wreaks havoc in some parts of the
country, and their campaign of terror has continued
unabated despite all efforts by the Government to seek
a solution to the conflict by political means of dialogue
and democratic accommodation. All such efforts have
failed, primarily as a result of the phenomenon of illicit
trafficking and trade in small arms and light weapons,
which make it easy for this misguided terrorist group to
sustain their campaign of violence and keep faith in the
bullet rather than the ballot.
In this context, Sri Lanka joins other concerned
parties in appealing to the international community to

take urgent action by all available means to stem the
flow of weapons into the hands of non-State actors like
terrorist groups who do not respect internationally
accepted civilized norms and conduct. Unbridled
violence and abominable terrorist acts can be stopped
only if the supply of and access to such weapons can
be halted immediately.

Weapons and ammunition should be held only by
legal entities and States who are responsible to the
international community for their conduct under
international law and treaty regimes that govern good
conduct and respect for human rights and humanitarian
law. It is important, therefore, to ensure that any
measure taken by the United Nations and its Member
States to curb the proliferation of small arms and light
weapons does not affect the rights of a State to procure
and hold arms to ensure the safety of its citizens.

In this regard, while commending the Secretary-
General and the Office of High Representative for
Disarmament Affairs for their efforts so far, we urge
action by all States, together with the United Nations,
to fully implement the Programme of Action to
Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trafficking
and Trade in Small Arms and Light Weapons.
However, we are convinced that to make a difference
on the ground in terms of preventing or mitigating
conflicts and violence as well as for combating
terrorism, much more needs to be done in terms of
eradicating illicit trafficking and trade in small arms by
non-State actors. Therefore, the time has come for this
Council and the United Nations to expand their scope
of action towards preventing small arms and
ammunition ending up in the wrong hands. If we fail,
violence and terrorism will continue to affect several
vulnerable regions and societies worldwide. Our choice
is simple. Either we act meaningfully now, or continue
business as usual to our own peril.

