Mr. Vural (Turkey): There seems to be no end to the
tragic suffering of the Afghan people, and the recent
developments have compounded this painful situation. In
addition to the extensive human suffering and destruction,
the current situation poses a growing threat to regional and
international security. That is why my delegation and
Government share the grave concern expressed in the draft
resolution presented to the Security Council.

Turkey has deep-rooted historical and cultural bonds
with the people of Afghanistan and with its neighbours. The
painful situation on the ground and its implications are felt
very deeply in Turkey by the Turkish people and
Government.

Information regarding human rights violations,
especially against women and girls, in the area under the
control of the Taliban, the execution of civilians and
prisoners of war, efforts to change the demographic
structure of Afghanistan, and the displacement of
populations from North to South are extremely worrying.
These acts are deplorable. Crimes against United Nations
personnel and the situation of the members of the
Consulate-General of Iran in Mazar-e-Sharif must be
urgently addressed.

Turkey is also concerned for Afghanistan's neighbours.
Their suffering from drug trafficking, the influx of refugees
and political tension originating from the crisis in
Afghanistan seems to be increasing. The political
atmosphere in the region has begun to deteriorate. Such a
trend could impair overall stability in the region.

The recent military campaign of the Taliban cannot be
a substitute for a political solution. Military victories
achieved with external support are an illusion. They can
provide neither a lasting nor a viable solution. This is a
lesson learned from the history of Afghanistan over the last
few centuries. A political dialogue among the Afghan
people is as necessary as ever. A broad-based government
in which all groups are represented remains the only
instrument that can lead the country to a lasting peace.

Collective diplomatic efforts, with the United
Nations in the central role, continue to be the most
efficient instrument to encourage the Afghan parties to
participate in dialogue and achieve a solution. The failure
of the very valuable efforts made last spring by the
United Nations and by a number of interested countries
should not discourage the international community.
Enhanced bilateral diplomatic activity between the
interested countries can also contribute to the process.
The Organization of the Islamic Conference should
maintain its useful cooperation with the United Nations
regarding Afghanistan.

It is my delegation's belief that today's draft
resolution is a good framework on which future
diplomatic activities can be based. It includes almost all
the elements which can lead the Afghan parties to a way
out of the deadlock. Initial political dialogue among the
parties, aiming at a broad-based government, should be
followed by the consideration of concrete measures.
These should include the demilitarization of Afghan cities,
the prevention of the supply of arms, the assignment of
civilian police forces, and the dismantling of the camps
harbouring extremists and terrorist elements, most of them
non-Afghans.

The pledge of the international community to assist
in the reconstruction of Afghanistan once peace is
established is most valuable. The Afghan parties must
seize this opportunity. Turkey remains committed to
contributing to the future rehabilitation of Afghanistan.

