Mr. Serrano (spoke in French): Thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the opportunity to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).

(spoke in English)

The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Iceland and
Montenegro, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania
and the European Free Trade Association countries
Liechtenstein and Norway, members of the European
Economic Area, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of
Moldova, align themselves with this statement.

I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina and
European Union Special Representative Valentin Inzko
back to the Council and to reiterate the European
Union's full support for his Office and his work.

The European Union shares the concern of the
High Representative about the current political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina. More than seven
months after the elections of October 2010, we are still
waiting for the formation of a Government at the State
level. In addition, we have since seen a further
deterioration of the political climate and little progress
in key reform areas. It is crucial that a State-level
Government be formed without further delay, that it
restart the reform process and put the country on the
road towards European Union integration. The
European Union encourages the Security Council to
send a message of strong concern, urging all political
actors to find common solutions within the framework
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In that context, we deem the recent decision by
the Republika Srpska to hold a referendum challenging
the authority of State judicial institutions within that
entity and rejecting the authority of the High
Representative as a step in the wrong direction. In

recent meetings between EU officials and political
representatives of the Republika Srpska we have made
clear our strong concerns and our expectation that the
referendum will not be held. While concerns related to
the functioning of State institutions may be legitimate,
they but must be expressed through appropriate
mechanisms. It is clear that only mutually agreed
reforms would be acceptable.

The European Union regularly encourages
political representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
act with a greater spirit of compromise, to step up
consultations and to work for the long-term interests of
the country. The European Union has now called on
political leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina to engage
in a constructive, structured political dialogue on legal
issues and the judiciary. We also stand fully behind the
authority of the High Representative. Moreover, we
underline once more our firm commitment to the
territorial integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and urge all to refrain from divisive
rhetoric and actions that harm the interests of the
citizens.

It is the prime responsibility of Bosnia and
Herzegovina's political leaders to achieve concrete and
tangible progress, including on the road towards EU
integration, on the five objectives and two conditions
for the closure of the Office of the High Representative
and on constitutional reform. The European Union
believes that, as a matter of priority, Bosnia and
Herzegovina needs to bring its Constitution into
compliance with the European Convention on Human
Rights. The fulfilment of the obligations under the
Interim Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union would demonstrate commitment to
the EU integration process, be a key element for a
credible membership application and avoid Bosnia and
Herzegovina falling further behind the region on its
way towards European Union accession.

The European Union is in the process of further
strengthening its engagement in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to support its progress towards EU
accession through a comprehensive approach and
significant financial assistance and expertise. It will
soon enhance its political presence through a
consolidated single EU representative. In addition, the
European Union maintains two crisis management
missions on the ground - the European Union Police
Mission and the European Union Force Althea -
which, as the Foreign Ministers of the European Union
member States reaffirmed in March this year, are
important elements of the overall EU strategy for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Operation Althea supports
Bosnia and Herzegovina's efforts to maintain a safe
and secure environment and provides training to the
Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, while the
Police Mission's activities centre on supporting the
fight against organized crime and corruption.

The recent high-level Visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the President of the European
Commission, Jose Manuel Durao Barroso, underlined
our unequivocal commitment to Bosnia and
Herzegovina's European perspective and the
preparedness of the EU to assume the leading role in
that regard. Fifteen years after the signing of the
Dayton Paris Peace Accord, Bosnia and Herzegovina's
citizens deserve a qualitative step forward for their
country on the path towards European integration. As
the successful visa liberalization shows, when there is
political will and readiness to reach compromise,
Bosnia and Herzegovina is able to carry out reforms
and to deliver on commitments. With this in mind -
and on Europe Day 2011 - we encourage and appeal
to its political leaders to put Bosnia and Herzegovina
firmly on the way towards the European Union.

