Mr. Percaya (Indonesia): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this important and
timely open debate on new trends in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, and we appreciate your
well-rounded and realistic concept paper (S/2014/384, annex). We also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing.

Indonesia aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement.

Over the years, United Nations peacekeeping
has indeed evolved to meet the changing and
multidimensional demands of various conflicts.
Indonesia concurs with the observation of the concept
note that this evolution poses significant and higher
security threats to Blue Helmets and civilian staff
required to undertake a wide variety of complex tasks.
It is therefore crucial that the increased demands on
United Nations peacekeeping be met by adequate
capabilities and resources, and that those demands be
fully consistent with the agreed principles, guidelines
and terminology governing peacekeeping.

As peacekeeping operations continue to evolve
both conceptually and operationally, my delegation
emphasizes that the three basic peacekeeping
principles of the United Nations are indispensable.
While innovation and flexibility within reasonable
and safe parameters are required if we are to cope with
the operations' multidimensional tasks, adherence to
the basic principles will maintain the legitimacy and
credibility of United Nations peacekeeping missions
and support for them, ultimately paving the way for
their success. Nothing must be done to damage that
precious legitimacy and credibility, which has been
hard-earned over many decades.

It is in that context that we see the need for making
a clear distinction between peacekeeping and peace
enforcement, as two completely different things. The
Security Council's establishment of peacekeeping
operations should not be used to enable interventions
in other countries or to impose the interests of some
countries on them. The expansion of a mission's
mandate and its scope with regard to the use of force
in the absence of a carefully laid-out and adequately
supported comprehensive plan, constituting a credible
political process, consultation and coordination, will
jeopardize the mission's impartiality, along with its
peacekeepers' safety and security.

In that regard, there is a need to outline an
unambiguous and transparent description of robust
United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
development of concepts, policies and strategies
should be an intergovernmental process. We must be
mindful of the central role of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations to comprehensively review
the various aspects of United Nations peacekeeping
and to give its recommendations thereon. The
Secretariat should therefore refrain from developing
policies or guidelines on peacekeeping without their
intergovernmental discussion.

While the peacekeeping secretariat needs clear and
timely guidance from Member States, too, it should
enhance its very valuable work to improve the capacities,
planning, oversight and backstopping of missions. We
believe that the Secretariat can also play a greater role
in enabling more meaningful interaction among troop-
and police-contributing countries, host countries,
the Security Council and itself. That is especially
important in the early stages of formulating mission
mandates or when they are modified subsequently. We
call on the Security Council to engage more frequently
and substantively with all peacekeeping stakeholders
throughout all phases of a peacekeeping mission and
to reflect the different concerns and expectations
appropriately so that missions are more effective.

The use of modern technology as part of the
new trends also needs to be discussed openly and
transparently. While new technology can improve
situational awareness and help to enhance peacekeepers'
safety and security, we should be mindful that its
implementation, including the use of unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs), should be considered on a case-by-case
basis and should be in keeping with the basic principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, as well as United
Nations peacekeeping. Moreover, the legal, technical
and financial aspects of the use of and information
gathering by UAVs should be examined and approved
by all relevant actors.

Meanwhile, in the context of deploying the Force
Intervention Brigade within the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, we should also carefully guide
the discussion without creating a precedent, as it was
agreed as an exceptional consideration.

We would like to support the call for the increase
in the reimbursement rates for troop costs, daily
allowances, mission factors and contingent-owned
equipment on the basis of the actual expenses and
investment of troop- and police-contributing countries.

Finally, with its current participation in eight
United Nations peacekeeping missions, Indonesia
will continue to strongly support and to contribute
to United Nations efforts to lay the foundations for
stable international peace. We again underscore
the significance of a holistic, properly supported,
consultative and coordinated approach to fostering
peace and stability. For sustainable outcomes, the
interlinkage among peacekeeping, peacebuilding and
development should be seamless, nationally owned and
fully supported by all relevant actors.

