Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, my
delegation wishes to congratulate Malaysia on its
presidency of the Council this month and in particular for
scheduling this debate on children and armed conflict.
One of the saddest developments in the evolution of
armed conflict is that increasing numbers of victims
are civilians. In the early 1900s, approximately 5 per
cent of fatalities were civilians, whereas in the 19905
the percentage was over 90, including a large children.
While a disproportionate number of children are killed
and injured in conflicts, countless others grow up with
their material and emotional needs unmet. The entire
fabric of life and society is torn, as homes, schools,
health systems and religious institutions are no longer
safe from attacks and military operations. Indeed, those
institutions have become frequent targets in armed
conflicts.

The year 2014 has been proclaimed the worst ever
for children affected by armed conflict. An estimated
230 million children currently live in areas affected by
such conflicts, and new levels of violence have been
inflicted on them through their use as suicide bombers
and human shields. The Secretary-General's annual
report (S/2015/409) on children and armed conflict
provides a horror list of the forms of Violence to which
children were subjected in 2014: they were killed,
maimed, abducted, enslaved, recruited as soldiers,
displaced, trafficked and sexually abused. We can
safely affirm that never in recent memory have so many
children been subjected to such brutality.

It is very important to highlight the issue of the
abduction of children in armed conflict, because it
is often the gateway to more serious abuses against
children and graver violations of international
humanitarian law. The 24 April 2014 abduction of 276
schoolgirls by Boko Haram exemplifies the horrors of
that specific crime and highlights the added challenges
involved in bringing non-State armed and terrorist
groups to justice and into compliance with national
and international human-rights laws, especially as they
relate to child-protection obligations.

There has been progress in combating violence
against children in armed conflict. The "Children, Not
Soldiers" campaign has strengthened the commitment
of the Governments concerned. The Council has
focused its efforts and resources on that question
on numerous occasions. However, the gap between
legislation and implementation remains very wide and
the emergence ofnew challenges requires new tools. My
delegation therefore believes that we must strengthen
our response to the crime of abduction and its trail of
further crimes against children in armed conflict. We
believe the Council can and must do still more. My
delegation has prepared a five-point recommendation
for consideration, and we are pleased that several of its
points are already contained in resolution 2225 (2015),
which has just been adopted.

First, specific child-protection commitments
aimed at the rapid release of children from armed
forces and armed groups should be incorporated into
peacebuilding efforts. Accordingly, the Council should
consider expanding resolution 1612 (2005) to include
abduction as an additional issue to be specifically
monitored in peacekeeping operations.

Secondly, considering the increase in the number of
cases of abduction, the Holy See notes with satisfaction
that in accordance with the resolution adopted today,
the Security Council requests the Secretary-General to
include, in the annexes to his annual report on children
and armed conflict, those parties to conflicts that
engage in the abduction of children.

Thirdly, the care and rehabilitation of children
who have been rescued from armed groups must be
backed by adequate and long-term resources in order
to ensure as far as is possible the children's successful
reintegration into their families and into society and
that they do not remain hostages to the horrors they
have survived.

Fourthly, putting an end to impunity must be a key
part of the healing process, as well as a deterrent for
future potential perpetrators.

Fifthly, the prohibition against using schools,
hospitals and other institutions for children for
military purposes and armed attacks must be strictly
implemented and those practices condemned in the
strongest possible terms. The Holy See is therefore
pleased that that too is strongly stated in the resolution
adopted today.

I would like to assure the Council that the Holy
See and the Catholic Church, in general, have been
and continue to be actively engaged in providing
specialized support to child victims, including many
forms of trauma-healing services and reconciliation
with families. I wish to mention, in particular, the
Saint Monica's Centre in Gulu, Uganda, which has
dedicated itself for many years to the rehabilitation of
child Victims of the Lord's Resistance Army; there are
many similar institutions in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, as well. Numerous initiatives have been
launched to raise public awareness of this plague and
help child victims reunite with their families.

In areas of armed conflict, we have noted that
faith communities have demonstrated that they are
an essential element in the recovery and reintegration
of child victims into normal life. In addition, faith
communities are a key part of an early-warning system
for preventing abductions.

Horrendous as they are, the crimes committed
against children in armed conflict are but one
manifestation of a violent world. We must combat all
forms of violence, especially those that breed crimes
against children in armed conflict, and we must not
cease to foster an education that promotes peaceful and
harmonious co-existence among peoples.

The Holy See therefore exhorts the international
community and the Council, in particular, to engage in
more vigorous diplomacy in order to put an end to all
the situations of violence that rob so many children of
their present and future. The protection of children is a
serious moral and legal obligation. To protect children
in armed conflict from all forms of violence is to protect
our future.

