Mr. Nishimura: Mr. President, thank you very
much indeed for this occasion. I deeply appreciate this
great occasion to brief the Security Council on
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration (DDR).

Following 23 years of war and devastation and
one year after the cessation of the latest hostilities,
Afghanistan is still replete with weapons and
armaments. Despite some notable progress, there is a
high level of tension between the armed formations.
Nation-building cannot succeed under these conditions.
Nor is national reconciliation achievable. Most
crucially, the people who have suffered so much for so
long cannot enjoy genuine security. That lack of
security is a source of great concern to the Afghan
people as they toil so hard to reconstruct their country.
The restoration of peace and of the rule of law in their
country is their greatest aspiration. Indeed, soldiers and
officers also share that aspiration. They are tired of life
in the army. They yearn to go home and to resume their
normal lives.

The international community is also deeply
concerned with the lack of security as it mobilizes
resources, not just in Kabul but in the remote regions
of the country, in order to help all Afghans in their
reconstruction efforts. Lack of security prevents
donors' resources from reaching remote areas.

Lack of security is therefore the most serious
challenge confronting Afghanistan today. It is no
wonder, then, that there is unanimous agreement
among all parties concerned that the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) of soldiers and
officers is of the highest priority. Fewer soldiers mean
greater security. More ex-soldiers in workplaces mean
more peaceful development.

Nevertheless, DDR alone is not enough to
provide security. Security in Afghanistan can be
ensured only when the State exercises the sole
enforcement capacity. This, of course, means the
creation of a new national army and national police
force.

Counter-narcotics actions are also critical in
ensuring security. An independent judiciary is likewise
necessary. All these elements must be in place in order
for the nation to be able to exist under the rule of law
rather than the rule of the gun.

Mindful of these considerations, on 1 December
last President Karzai issued an important decree
broadly outlining principles and conditions with
respect to security, the military, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration.

The decree specifically states that a new
Afghanistan National Army (ANA) will be created of
not more than 70,000 soldiers. It will be an ethnically
balanced organization. More importantly, the decree
also stipulates that military formations, armed groups
and any other military or para-military units that are
not a part of the ANA shall be prohibited.

This will be a defining moment in the
Government's efforts to assert control nation-wide. A
new national army will be built, and all regional
military formations must disappear. It will be a
remarkable development indeed.

On 11 January of this year, President Karzai took
further steps to move ahead with DDR by issuing
decrees establishing four Government commissions.

As recently as last Saturday, on 22 February,
President Karzai announced in Tokyo his intention to
disarm his country within one year of the
commencement of the process. He said that he would
announce a detailed DDR programme on 21 March of
this year.

With all of these recent and remarkable
developments in place, today I can report to the
Council that in Afghanistan a solid foundation for DDR
is being laid; that DDR will soon commence,
promising to change the profile of Afghanistan from
that of a nation in conflict to one that is developing
peacefully; and that the entire international community
is committed to supporting the programme.

The DDR process in Afghanistan is not different
from DDR in other countries. Yet it is anticipated that
DDR in Afghanistan will be difficult in view of the
heavy legacy of factional rivalries. The fact that a new
national army must be built in parallel with DDR adds
to the complexity of the undertaking.

Here is the basic process: all soldiers to be
disarmed must first pass through the Disarmament
Commission and will have to decide to either join the
new national army or to demobilize. Those wishing to
join the new national army must then pass a number of
tough recruitment tests. Those who fail the tests, as
well as those who choose to get out of their armed
formations, will be registered. They will be offered a
variety of reintegration packages, including vocational
training, credit schemes, employment through public
works, land grants, cash compensation, community-
based development projects and so on.

Additionally, demobilized soldiers will be able to
take advantage of a wide referral network which will
allow them to seek job opportunities around the
country.

In terms of the administrative mechanism, the
Afghan New Beginnings Programme (ANBP) will be
created as the main executing body. With offices
established in nine cities across the country, the ANBP
will register individuals, assist them in choosing the
most appropriate job training options and
opportunities, and provide the necessary follow-up
over a period of three years.

Let me briefly explain what the Government of
Japan, as the lead nation, intends to contribute to this
programme.

First of all, Japan is totally committed to the
success of the DDR process. We will continue to play a
cooperative role throughout the entire process, in
cooperation with another lead agency, the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA).

On the financial side, the Government of Japan
has pledged a contribution of $35 million to jump-start
the Partnership for Peace Programme, which is the
basic component of the DDR process. In addition to its
financial contribution, Japan will consider extending
assistance for the establishment of a large database,
which will be indispensable for the implementation of
DDR.

Another major area in which Japan is cooperating
is vocational training. We will provide an extensive
training programme, again in addition to the financial
contributions mentioned earlier.

Moreover, we are looking at as many job-creation
aid projects as possible in order to meet the
requirements of DDR. It is our hope to employ as many
ex-combatants as possible in such public-works-type
projects.

The task ahead of us is truly daunting. We can
expect to be met with numerous challenges and
setbacks. But I am confident that the Afghan
Government, the Afghan people as a whole and the
international community will remain united and rise to
the challenges.

Nonetheless, today, realist that I am, I can
anticipate some of these challenges.

First, we will have to deal with the problem of
how to reach agreement on the number of soldiers and
officers to be released from the armed formations. The
number of soldiers under arms is difficult to estimate.
The definition of a combatant is itself problematic.

Developing a mechanism for the collection of
light and heavy weapons and maintaining transparency
in the process of weapons collection will also be a
difficult issue.

Very careful consideration will have to be paid, in
all phases of the programme, to ensuring a strong sense
of fairness and impartiality.

In the country, where there is a strong legacy of
strife and competition amongst various groups, any
attempt which benefits one to the detriment of another
is bound to fail. Confidence-building among all parties
concerned will be the key to the success of DDR.
Therefore, a sensitive approach is absolutely necessary,
but at the same time, a practical attitude is also
important. The task of disarmament must start where it
is most likely to succeed so that it can build momentum
for further successes.

The time line is another important factor.
President Karzai said in Tokyo last week that, once it
begins, the disarmament process would take one year.
The idea behind this timetable is to have DDR play a
role - of course, a positive one - in the context of
the upcoming general election scheduled for June next
year

There is another thorny technical problem - how
to treat commanders who still hold sway over large
numbers of people and communities - and, of course,
as always, there are problems of a financial nature. The
donor contributions that have been committed will not
be sufficient for the immense task ahead of us.

At the recent Tokyo Conference on DDR, as I
said earlier, Japan pledged $35 million. The United
States pledged $10 million; the United Kingdom,
$3.5 million; and Canada, $2.2 million. This total of
more than $50 million for the kick-off is a good record,
yet future prospects are not necessarily encouraging
and we must keep working on securing financing
throughout the process. Finally, the success of DDR
will ultimately depend upon the economic capacity of
the country itself. How the Afghan economy and the
international community will be able to generate
enough job opportunities to absorb everyone is a very
serious problem.

All these and other problems are sensitive ones
which will ultimately require political decisions.
Without broad political agreement, DDR will most
likely not succeed. The single most important factor for
the success of DDR is the steadfast commitment of all
political and regional leaders.

If the Government in Kabul and all regional
leaders are to achieve and maintain this commitment, it
is absolutely essential that the international community
as a whole remain committed to Afghanistan and
provide it with all possible support and encouragement.
In fact, the principal motivation which compelled the
Government of Japan to organize the Tokyo
International Conference on DDR in Afghanistan just
three days ago was to reinforce this solidarity and
support. As the Chair of the Conference, I urged all
participating countries and agencies to join hands and
embrace the Afghan people as they strive to rebuild
their nation by restoring the peace and achieving
genuine reconciliation.

In the view of Japan and UNAMA, DDR is
absolutely crucial to the rebuilding of the nation of
Afghanistan. The international community must stay
engaged and give every support to our Afghan friends
as they begin a courageous struggle, this time in order
to achieve genuine peace and reconciliation.

