Mr. Touray (Sierra Leone): I believe this is an
opportune moment to extend our sincere congratulations
to His Excellency the Foreign Minister of Nigeria on
his appointment and to warmly welcome him to New
York. I also want to place on record our appreciation to
the delegation of Nigeria for organizing this open
debate on this all-important subject of "Optimizing the
use of preventive diplomacy tools: Prospects and
challenges in Africa". And we are grateful too for the
concept note on the subject matter, circulated on
12 July (S/2010/371, annex), highlighting the need for
more use of preventive diplomacy and the Council's
role under Chapter VI of the Charter of the United
Nations.

Allow me also to welcome the Deputy Secretary-
General, Ms. Asha-Rose Migiro, and the representatives
of the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) and the World Bank and to thank them for
their participation in this debate. This meeting is more
than timely as we approach the stock-taking high-level
event on the tenth year of the implementation of the
Millennium Declaration.

It cannot be gainsaid that the present predicament
reflecting Africa's sluggish progress in meeting the
internationally agreed development goals, including
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), is
significantly related to the incessant spate of conflict
that the continent has had to grapple with over the last
half century. These conflicts have erupted, festered and
spread easily beyond national frontiers as a result of
sheer complacency, leading to the failure to adopt
timely preventive measures and early action.

Preventing violent conflicts involves, for the
most part, the institution at the international, regional
and local levels of structural mechanisms imbued with
effective capability to apply measures designed to
monitor early warning indicators and predict
potentially violent situations. That would be conducive
to the timeous adoption of effective measures and
initiatives in order to prevent impending conflicts as
well as to address the root causes of previous conflict
situations or disputes.

It is evident that many of the conflicts that have
erupted in Africa in recent decades were deeply rooted
in the failure of States to meet their obligations to their
citizens, particularly in providing much-needed
protection in order, inter alia, to safeguard human
rights, in the improvement of the quality of life of
citizens and in the taking of appropriate measures to
avoid political and economic exclusion and
marginalization. The key indispensable tools of
preventive diplomacy include development, education
and the wider recognition and promotion of human and
political rights. At least the lessons we in Sierra Leone
have learned and continue to learn from the results of
our Truth and Reconciliation Commission have put us
in a vantage position to appreciate this.

Preventing conflicts requires the application of
varying normative mechanisms, different sets of tools
and skills as well as the involvement of diverse
stakeholders at the local, national, regional and
international levels. And key among the players at the
heart of the maintenance of international peace and
security is, undoubtedly, the Security Council. Given,
however, the complexity of the task and the dynamics
involved, cooperation between the United Nations and
the regional and subregional organizations is imperative
if the Council is to carry out its mandate effectively
and efficiently.

Although we all seem to believe that the best way
to end wars is not to start them, the fact, however, is
that the international community has over decades been
more inclined to engage in what one could describe as
"firefighting diplomacy" than to use preventive
diplomacy in maintaining international peace and
security. Clearly, and in comparative terms, we all are
aware of the colossal nature of the human and material
costs involved in the former as opposed to the cost-
saving investment of resources in preventive measures.
Experience has shown that the use of preventive
measures or early action in addressing looming crisis
situations has often received little attention or at best
come as an afterthought. The need for a paradigm shift
cannot now be more overemphasized.

Developments that have taken place on the
African continent in the past decade with the adoption
of the Constitutive Act establishing the African Union
have significantly changed the conflict transformation
landscape on the continent. Thus, there appears to be a
fair quantum of normative mechanisms or measures to
prevent conflict, ranging from Boutros Boutros-Ghali's
1992 Agenda for Peace (S/24lll) to the 1998
recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the
promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development in Africa (S/1998/318), along with the
numerous initiatives undertaken thereafter, including
the recent establishment of the Peacebuilding
Commission.

It is safe to say that what the international
community needs to do is to muster the necessary
political will to fully implement these mechanisms by
providing the much-needed resources and human capital
for global peace and security. Until the establishment
of the Peacebuilding Commission, engagement with
societies emerging from conflict had often been fraught
with constraints ranging from weaknesses in
disarmament and demobilization programmes, justice
and security sector reform processes and resource
mobilization to human and institutional capacity-
building in order to create a more secure environment
for peace to take root and for the promotion of
economic growth and sustainable development.

Regional and subregional organizations like the
African Union, ECOWAS, the Southern Africa
Development Community and even the Mano River
Union have developed, within their respective
architectures, viable mechanisms for the prevention of
conflicts, yet are handicapped in their capacity to
implement these mandates in terms of matching
resources and capacity-building constraints.

In addition to the perennial problems of the illicit
transfer of small arms and light weapons and the lack
of surveillance and patrol mechanisms for long and
porous borders and territorial waters, the continent is
also experiencing new and/or emerging threats
involving narcotic drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime, piracy and terrorist activities, such as
the recent cowardly act of terrorism committed against
the innocent citizens of Kampala.

In conclusion, I deem it imperative to stress the
need for the Council to intensify cooperation with
regional and subregional actors in concrete ways in
order to promote preventive diplomacy by way of
measures to support and facilitate the coordination of
international assistance in resource mobilization, in
enhancing national capacities to monitor frontiers and
territorial waters, in the positive use of mediation
options and in putting in place robust security sector
reform.

At the national level, it also important to provide
support for and collaborate with civil society and
women's organizations to develop and implement
programmes aimed at preventing conflicts and to help
in fostering the requisite political will in doing so.

