Mr. Choi (spoke in French): The nineteenth
progress report of the Secretary-General on the United
Nations Operation in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
2
(S/2009/21), which members have before them, is an
update on important developments that have occurred
in Cote d'Ivoire since his previous report on that
subject (8/2008/645), issued on 13 October 2008.

With your permission, Mr. President, I should
like to focus my briefing today on the current pressing
issues for C6te d'Ivoire: identification of the
population, disarmament and the elections. Those three
issues will have a direct and decisive impact on C6te
d'Ivoire's future and even on a possible exit strategy
for UNOCI.

With regard to those three crucial issues, the
Secretary-General's report refers to two important
events that have taken place over the past three
months. The first concerns the decision taken by the
Permanent Consultative Framework, which met in
Ouagadougou on 10 November 2008, and the second
concerns the signing, on 22 December 2008, of the
fourth supplementary agreement to the Ouagadougou
Political Agreement, commonly called "Ouaga IV".

The Framework's major decision in November
was to postpone the presidential election initially
planned for 30 November 2008 and to announce that
the new date could be set according to the progress
made in identifying the population. The Framework's
decision is both understandable and intriguing. It is
understandable in the light of the historic importance
of identification for the Ivorian population. The issue
of "Ivoirite'" not only has been one of the major
sociopolitical problems over the past two decades, but
also lies at the heart of the current Ivorian crisis. A
definitive resolution of the issue of national identity,
which could be achieved within a few weeks' time,
would be a historic and strategic step forward.

The decision by the Permanent Consultative
Framework is intriguing because, for the first time
since the signing of the Ouagadougou Political
Agreement in March 2007, the Ivorian people and the
international community have neither a date nor a
period for the elections. Without objectives, all
momentum will be lost, including for the organization
of an electoral plan, its implementation, logistical
organization, a financial plan and even assistance
provided by the international community.

The Framework's decision mentions the
possibility of establishing the new electoral timetable
in January 2009. President Laurent Gbagbo has
publicly requested the Independent Electoral
09-21513
Commission to establish an electoral period. Henri
Konan Bedie and Alassane Dramane Ouattara also
believe that a new electoral timetable must be provided
to the Ivorian people and to the international
community. Given that unanimous position, I believe
that the Commission should provide an electoral
timetable with specific stages as soon as possible.

That was the first important event. What was the
other? It was the signing of the fourth supplementary
agreement on 22 December 2008. The agreement
contains two important points: the first concerns the
completion of disarmament two months before the
presidential election, and the second deals with the
restoration of State authority in the North by
2 February 2009, at the latest.

The provision concerning the completion of
disarmament before the presidential election is a
crucial change with regard to the third supplementary
agreement of November 2007, which provided only for
arms control - not for their elimination - before the
elections. The restoration of State authority in the
North, which also includes the judiciary, would then be
linked, inter alia, to the settlement of disputes
concerning the electoral list.

Thus, the impact of the fourth supplementary
agreement on the peace process in general and on the
electoral process in particular could be decisive. It is
too early to assess the scale of that impact, but it could
complicate managing the electoral timetable. I hope to
be able to provide a detailed report at the next Security
Council meeting on Cote d'Ivoire.

I cannot be silent about the frustration that we all
share because of the delays experienced in the holding
of the Ivorian elections. However, I should like to
suggest that we put things in perspective. For the
Ivorian people, the peace process will remain
incomplete unless the three issues of identification,
elections and disarmament are resolved. The United
Nations will be unable to design an exit strategy unless
credible elections are held and the effective
reunification of the country is achieved on the basis of
credible disarmament. In that regard, while there is a
danger that it could further complicate the electoral
process, the fourth supplementary agreement, by
placing disarmament before the elections - and
despite the possibility that it may be used as a pretext
to delay the elections - could be seen as a mechanism
to help resolve those issues.
09-21513

As to the identification process, I am pleased to
bring the Security Council encouraging news. More
than 3.5 million people have now been identified
throughout the national territory. That figure is
particularly noteworthy given the fact that most
Ivorians appear to agree that a realistic figure may be
much higher than the original ll million persons
originally foreseen. Moreover, the process is almost
complete in two of the most important political centres
of Cote d'Ivoire, Abidjan and Bouake.

Perhaps more significant is the fact that this
historic and strategic progress has been made with no
major incidents to date. Only a year ago, who could
have imagined such a development in the conduct of
the identification process? Millions of Ivorians will
very soon receive national identity cards for the very
first time in their lives, allowing them to participate
freely in economic activities and to circulate freely
within their own country and in neighbouring States. It
is moving to see people line up outside the
identification centres as early as 4 am. in order to be
identified.

In parallel with the peaceful conduct of the
identification process, peace and stability have been
largely restored in Cote d'Ivoire, allowing UNOCI to
propose reducing its military force by one battalion
beginning in March 2009. In principle, the
identification operation is to conclude by the coming
spring. At that point in time, I will be in a better
position to report on the progress made in the other two
critical issues of disarmament and elections.

