At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under- Secretary-General for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs, for her informative and important briefing. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Sameh Shokry Selim, Foreign Minister of the Arab Republic of Egypt, I also welcome the Permanent Representatives of the Sudan and Ethiopia to this video-teleconference. We take note of the positions of the relevant parties, including as elaborated in the letters addressed to the President of the Security Council recently on the matter under consideration today. We are concerned about the tendency that many international watercourses are being increasingly utilized in unsustainable ways that may not ensure the rights and legitimate interests of riparian countries, especially downstream countries, which are placed in a naturally more disadvantageous position. The adverse effects of this tendency, compounded by those of climate change, have posed challenges to security, stability and development in many regions, including in Africa where the lives of millions of people depend on shared rivers. As to the Blue Nile, we recognize and support the efforts of the parties directly concerned to promote a sustainable and equitable utilization of water resources, including through cooperation, consultations and negotiations with regard to the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam project. We call on all parties concerned to continue building upon the results achieved and fully implement the 2015 Agreement on Declaration of Principles on the project. Outstanding issues need to be resolved peacefully, in a friendly spirit and in good faith, in accordance with international law and the 2015 agreement. Towards that end, we welcome the important role of the African Union (AU) in promoting negotiations and mediating among the three parties, most recently at the Meeting of the Extraordinary AU Bureau of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government on 26 June, as well as results deriving from the meeting. We look forward to the continued earnest efforts of the parties concerned to resolve the remaining issues, including legal and technical questions, as soon as possible. It is important that the views of all parties concerned be taken into account. All parties must refrain from any unilateral measure that could escalate tensions, undermining the opportunity to achieve a negotiated solution to the issue. Such efforts will help not only to bring about a comprehensive solution that addresses the legitimate interests of all parties concerned but also to advance confidence, deepen friendly relations among the countries and promote peace, security and development in the region. In that regard, we would also like to emphasize the need to promote best practices on transboundary watercourses, including, among others, the exchange of data and information, notification, consultations and negotiations to address any concerns, and the full implementation of legal frameworks among the countries concerned. We are of the view that the utilization of international watercourses must be in line with international law and the commitments of the countries concerned, on the basis of harmonizing the interests of riparian States, especially downstream ones, to ensure the sustainable use and equitable share of water resources. It is also important to foster further codification and development of international law regarding the use of transboundary watercourses, including through the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Non-navigational Uses of International Watercourses.
