The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the members of the Council that I have received
a letter from the representative of Lebanon, in which
he requests to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council's agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council's
provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.

The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in accordance with
the understanding reached in its prior consultations.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council strongly condemns the
terrorist attack in Beirut on 19 September 2007 which
killed at least seven persons, including Member of
Parliament Antoine Ghanem. The Security Council
expresses its deepest sympathy and condolences to the
families of the victims and to the people and
Government of Lebanon.

"The Security Council commends the
determination and commitment of the Government of
2
Lebanon to bring to justice the perpetrators, organizers
and sponsors of this and other assassinations and
underlines its determination to support the Government
of Lebanon in its efforts to this end.

"The Security Council reiterates its condemnation
of all targeted assassinations of Lebanese leaders,
including since October 2004, and demands an
immediate end of the use of intimidation and violence
against the representatives of the Lebanese people and
institutions. On the eve of the crucial period of the
presidential election, it stresses that any attempt to
destabilize Lebanon, including through political
assassination or other terrorist acts, should not impede
or subvert the constitutional process in Lebanon.

"The Security Council reiterates, in this context,
its call for the holding of a free and fair presidential
election in conformity with Lebanese constitutional
norms and schedules and without any foreign
interference, fully respecting the sovereignty of
Lebanon.

"The Security Council emphasizes the importance
of the unity of all the Lebanese people and of the
pursuit of dialogue among all of the country's political
parties. It reiterates its full support to all ongoing
efforts in Lebanon to combat terrorism, solidify
democratic institutions through national dialogue, and
continue to extend the authority of the Lebanese
Government throughout its territory."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2007/34.

The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

The meeting rose at 2.15 p.m.
07-51194

