Mr. Blanchard (Canada): I am grateful for this
opportunity to address the Security Council. Canada
would like to thank the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Afghanistan for its ongoing crucial work
in Afghanistan, and welcomes the Secretary-General's
latest report on it to the Council (S/2016/768).

I would like to proudly state that Canada has had
an active development presence in Afghanistan for
decades, and we remain committed to helping it achieve
its development goals. As testimony to our commitment,
Prime Minister Trudeau recently announced Canada's
contribution to the next three years of Afghanistan's
transformation decade. Between 2017 and 2020, Canada
will provide $465 million, consisting of$195 million for
security and $270 million for development assistance.

I would first like to emphasize that no development
can be achieved without the active and substantive
participation of all members of society, including
women and girls. For that reason, Canada takes an
approach favouring women's and girls' rights first in all
of our health, education and human rights programming
in Afghanistan. The path to a prosperous and stable
Afghanistan is through empowering Afghan women
and ensuring that their voices are heard and their rights
protected. We are encouraged by the positive steps
that Afghanistan has made in recent years to promote
and protect women's rights, including strengthening
their legal protection from violence, creating greater
educational opportunities and increasing their inclusion
in public and political life. But more must be done, and
it must be done more rapidly. We believe that such
advances for Afghanistan's women and girls will help
to advance the rights, security, and empowerment of
all Afghans.

(spoke in French)

Secondly, Canada is concerned about the
deteriorating security levels in Afghanistan over
the past year. The Afghan security forces continue
to deal with considerable challenges from an armed
insurgency that is active across much of the country.
Canada remains committed to supporting the Afghan
National Defence and Security Forces and continues
to emphasize the importance of increasing the number
of women recruited into its ranks and ensuring the
protection of women and children.

Thirdly, Canada fully supports an Afghan-led peace
and reconciliation process and calls on the Taliban to
come to the table to negotiate. It is vital to ensure that
the peace process includes meaningful participation by
Afghan women. Canada's embassy in Kabul has been
working very closely with the Afghan Government to
make this happen through the appointment of strong,
capable Afghan women to the High Peace Council.
We thank the Government of Afghanistan for their
commitment to the issue and reaffirm our desire to see
a peace that can benefit the entire population.

(spoke in English)

Canada stands with the Afghan people as they strive
for a more secure and prosperous future. We support
the Afghan Government and its people in the face of
challenging circumstances, and welcome Afghanistan's
efforts to counter an escalating insurgency, broker
peace, tackle corruption and much-needed reforms
and pursue economic and social development. Those
are tough challenges. But Canada is committed to
supporting Afghanistan in its continued quest for
stability, accountability and self-reliance.

