Mr. Laher (South Africa): We extend our
appreciation to the delegation of Morocco for
convening this meeting. We also wish to commend you,
Mr. President, for conducting the work of the Security
Council's Working Group on Peacekeeping Operations
in an exemplary manner. We thank Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Herve'
Ladsous, as well as Under-Secretary-General for
Field Support, Ms. Ameerah Haq, for their respective
briefings on inter-mission cooperation in peacekeeping
operations. We appreciate the observations that they
have made.

As a troop-contributing country, South Africa
values open and frank exchanges of views on matters
that impact our troops, as well as on the efficacy of the
peacekeeping missions themselves. This discussion is
therefore most welcome. Allow us to briefly share our
views specifically on inter-mission cooperation.

Among the possible range of benefits that
inter-mission cooperation brings to peacekeeping
missions, it provides a useful tool for helping to restore
stability in those peacekeeping missions that encounter
unforeseen or unexpected challenges. Under such
circumstances, inter-mission cooperation becomes
a responsive tool but should not become an end in
itself. Consequently, in the planning and conception
phase, inter-mission cooperation must necessarily be
time-bound.

If a mission is deficient in any way other than for
the reason that the situation is deteriorating on the
ground, inter-mission cooperation will not serve as a
substitute for addressing mission capacities. Mandates
for peacekeeping missions must therefore be realistic
and achievable at inception. That would also ensure
that missions are adequately resourced in order to fully
implement their mandates. Inter-mission cooperation is
therefore a temporary or stop-gap measure to be drawn
on at critical or substantive phases of peacekeeping
missions.

Inter-mission cooperation can also serve as
appropriate support and enabler for predictable
situations, such as bolstering support to election
processes, sharing information across borders,
enhancing situational awareness and for the purpose of
training exercises. In such instances, it would be possible
to determine standard operating procedures in order to
effectively implement inter-mission cooperation.

It is also possible to have a similar standard operating
procedure for situations that involve unpredictable needs
to enhance mission capacities during crises. Triangular
cooperation among the Security Council, the Secretariat
and the troop-contributing countries would be but one
example of such a standard operating procedure when
implementing inter-mission cooperation. That ensures
that the relocation of strategic and other assets meets
the concerns of all, especially the troop-contributing
countries, and that all stakeholders contribute to a viable
operation in the field. Inter-mission cooperation must
always adhere to the key principles of peacekeeping,
that is, first, the consent of the host State; secondly,
impartiality; and thirdly, the non-use of force except
in defence of the mandate. Information sharing
regarding situational awareness in the coordination
ofjoint operations in missions that share borders is a
valued addition that support the work of peacekeeping
missions. Additionally, inter-mission cooperation
for missions in geographic proximity have the added
advantage of allowing for joint training programmes,
sharing emergency evacuation plans and assets, and
joint planning meetings, among other things.

Finally, while inter-mission cooperation has
traditionally involved United Nations peacekeeping
operations, we would also encourage a similar approach
in strengthening hybrid and African Union-led
peacekeeping missions.

