Mr. Kalomoh: This briefing follows my briefing
to members of the Security Council on 15 September
2003, one day after the coup d'etat led by General
Verissimo Correia Seabra was staged in Bissau. Today,
I would like to update the Council on the main
developments since that time.

Members of the Council are well aware of the
volatile political and socio-economic situation reigning
in the country before the coup d'e'tat. That situation
was characterized by, among other things, severe
financial problems; weak State structures that were
virtually incapable of providing minimal services to the
population; increasing rule by decree by former
President Kumba Yala after he had dissolved the
National Assembly; institutional instability caused by
frequent changes of prime ministers and ministers by
the President; a dire economic situation; and high
social tensions caused by, among other things, the huge
backlog of salary arrears. In a word, we had all the
indicators of a country in a pre-conflict situation.

Members will also recall that the military officers
who staged the coup d'etat on 14 September 2003
stated that their action was motivated by the need

"to re-establish the authority of the State, to rid
the public administration of partisanship, to
establish transitional Government to include all
national political orientations and to create the
foundations for the next general elections".

Immediately following the coup, the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
launched facilitation/mediation efforts and, with the
active support of the presidency of the Community of
Portuguese-Speaking Countries, helped reach, on 17
September 2003, an agreement between President Yala
and the military contingent that staged the coup. The
agreement provided for the return of the armed forces
to the barracks, the resignation of President Yala, the
establishment of a Transitional Government of
National Unity led by a civilian, and the holding of
general elections. On the day of the signing of that
agreement, President Yala resigned.

On 18 September 2003, President Kufuor of
Ghana, Chairman of ECOWAS, and his Nigerian and
Senegalese counterparts visited Bissau to facilitate a
consensus among the main stakeholders on the basic
transitional mechanisms. Subsequently, the military
agreed that the interim President would also be a
civilian. In the meantime, a l6-member Ad Hoc
Technical Commission, which included representatives
of all political parties and of civil society, as well as
religious and traditional leaders, was established to
elaborate a transitional charter.

On 23 September 2003, the Military Committee
nominated Mr. Henrique Rosa, an economist and the
former Chairman of the National Electoral Commission
during the 1994 elections, as transitional President.
Artur Sanha, the former Minister of the Interior and the
current Secretary-General of the ruling Partido da
Renovacao Social, was nominated as transitional Prime
Minister. While Mr. Rosa's nomination was received
favourably by all stakeholders, the appointment of Mr.
Sanha, opposed by most of the political parties, has
proved to be highly controversial.

After two weeks of almost continuous
negotiations, often accompanied by high tension, on 28
September 2003 the Political Transitional Charter was
formally agreed in Bissau by the Military Committee
for the Restoration of Constitutional and Democratic
Order, 23 out of the 24 recognized political parties, and
the organizations of civil society. It was formally
adopted and signed at a meeting attended by the entire
Military Committee and political party and civil
society representatives. The signing ceremony was also
attended by representatives of the diplomatic
community in Guinea-Bissau.

The Political Transition Charter defines itself as
the instrument whereby the process of return to
constitutional normality is to be guided. It lists the
organs of the political transition as the Transitional
President of the Republic, the Military Committee for
the Restoration of Constitutional and Democratic
Order, the National Transition Council and the
Transitional Government. The Military Committee,
whose mandate ends with the transition period, is
defined as the consultative organ for the Transitional
President. The National Transition Council is defined
as the political monitoring organ of the other organs
and therefore fulfils the role of a parliament during the
transition. The Council is to be chaired by the Chair of
the Military Committee. It includes all the members of
the National Transition Council, one representative of
each political party, and eight representatives of civil
society - 56 in all. The Prime Minister is to be the
head of the Transitional Government.

No dates have been fixed for the elections, but the
Charter states that legislative elections should be held
within six months of the signing of the Charter, that is,
by 28 March 2004. At that time, the National
Transition Council and the Transitional Government
will cease to exist and will be superseded by the
elected Peoples' National Assembly and a new
Government. The presidential elections are to take
place within one year of the swearing-in of the elected
deputies. In other words, the transitional presidency
shall last a maximum of 18 months.

Yesterday, 28 September, Mr. Henrique Pereira
Rosa was sworn in as Transitional President and Mr.
Antonio Artur Sanha as Transitional Prime Minister.
Members of the National Transition Council also took
their oaths of office.

In his acceptance speech, Mr. Rosa stated that he
saw his role as that of a compass providing a check on
the overall direction of the process. He also expressed
gratitude for the support and understanding of the
international community, including that of the United
Nations Peace-building Support Office in Guinea-
Bissau, and said that he wanted the international
community to accompany Guinea-Bissau so that urgent
help could be provided to its people.

In conclusion, let me say that the political class,
the military and the organizations of civil society in
Guinea-Bissau seem to have pulled back from the brink
and have reached a consensus solution for the
transition. We view that as a welcome move. There
now seems to be an atmosphere of give-and-take,
which augurs well for the immediate future. But
serious social and economic tensions persist, and they
will require careful management by the leaders of
Guinea-Bissau. The urgent task for the international
community is to help ensure a successful transition by
responding as generously as possible to economic and
budgetary needs of the Transitional Government.

