The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Brazil, Canada, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Japan,
Jordan, Liechtenstein, New Zealand, the Philippines,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, San Marino, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Sweden, Switzerland,
Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the Council's agenda. In conformity with
the usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate in
the discussion, without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the Council's provisional rules of procedure.

There being no objection, it is so decided.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Cappagli
(Argentina), Mr. Dauth (Australia), Mr.
Pfanzelter (Austria), Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan), Mr.
Almansoor (Bahrain), Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil),
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada), Mr. Ileka (Democratic Republic of the Congo), Ms. Laj (Denmark), Ms.
Rasi (Finland), Mr. Spatafora (Italy), Mr.
Haraguchi (Japan), Mr. Al-Hussein (Jordan), Mr.
Wenaweser (Liechtenstein), Mr. MacKay (New Zealand), Mr. Baja (Philippines), Mr. Kim
(Republic of Korea), Mr. Motoc (Romania), Mr.
Balestra (San Marino), Mr. Sahovic' (Serbia and Montenegro), Mr. Kanu (Sierra Leone), Ms. Fogh
(Sweden), Mr. Helg (Switzerland), Mr. Gift
(Trinidad and Tobago) and Mr. Palolillo
(Uruguay) took the places reserved for them at
the side ofthe Council Chamber.

The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council's prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno, Under-
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.

There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Guehenno to take a seat at the
Council table.

The Security Council will now continue its
consideration of the item on its agenda.

May I start by saying how welcome Jean-Marie
Guehenno is with us as the Under-Secretary-General
for Peacekeeping Operations. I understand that he and
his colleagues are ready to answer questions which
may arise during the discussion.

The Secretary-General spoke last week of the
heavy responsibility of the Council in the promotion of
justice and the rule of law. As he said, the rule of law is
not a luxury, and justice is not a side issue. It was that
conviction that led us, as the presidency, to bring this
issue before the Council. We are grateful for the
contributions that were made by Council members last
week, but we have never seen this as an issue
exclusively for the Council. Last week's meeting was
the start of a process. The second stage of that process
is the debate that we are about to engage in. Today the
wider United Nations membership and other parts of
the United Nations system with relevant expertise have
an opportunity to contribute to the process of reflection
and analysis that we began last week. We very much
hope that this will lead, under the guidance of the
Secretary-General's further contributions, to a more
effective and efficient handling of justice and rule of
law issues in the work of the Council and, perhaps
more importantly, in the wider United Nations system
and the international community generally, so that we
will be better prepared to confront problems when they
arise.

This discussion provides an ideal opportunity to
hear the views of the wider membership. I would like
simply to note that there are 25 speakers on the list,
which means that if each one speaks for five minutes,
the meeting will last for two hours and 10 minutes,
whereas if each one speaks for 10 minutes, the meeting
will last for four hours and 20 minutes. That is the
mathematics of it. I therefore appeal to speakers to be
as concise as possible. There is absolutely no
impediment to the subsequent circulation and
distribution of written texts, all of which will be
studied by the presidency and the Secretariat as part of
the follow-up.

In order to optimize the use of our time, I will not
individually invite speakers to take seats at the table.
When a speaker is taking the floor the Conference
Officer will seat the next speaker on the list at the
table.
I first give the floor to Mr. Jean-Marie Guehenno,
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations.


