Mr. Ka (Senegal), Chairman of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People (spoke in French): I wish at the outset to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
October. I am certain that under your wise guidance the
work of the Council will proceed in a constructive,
effective and successful fashion.

I wish also to congratulate your predecessor,
Ambassador Moctar Ouane, Permanent Representative
of Mali to the United Nations, on the exemplary way in
which he guided the work of the Council in
September-which is to say during the historic
millennium Summit.

I am grateful to you, Sir, and to the other
members of the Security Council for having given me
the opportunity to participate, in my capacity as
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, in this
important debate on the very recent events in the
occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem.

For several months we have been following very
closely the endeavours to bring about a final peace
settlement between the Israelis and the Palestinians,
and we had been increasingly hopeful about the
outcome of the peace process. Although the Camp
David peace summit sponsored by the United States in
July did not yield all the hoped-for results, the parties
nevertheless remained together and frankly addressed
all the issues. This gave us reason to hope that
agreement might be reached. Indeed, the Palestinian
side decided last month to postpone a declaration of
statehood, even though it was entirely entitled to make
such a declaration. With that courageous and
responsible act, Palestine gave peace another chance.

Unfortunately, the Israeli side failed to
reciprocate. Throughout the time when Israeli-
Palestinian final status negotiations were under way,
Israeli settlement continued without interruption, both
in the West Bank, including Jerusalem, and in the Gaza
Strip. Those unlawful measures, which seriously
undermined the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people in occupied East Jerusalem, are a blatant
violation of international law, of the fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, and of the great number of
resolutions and decisions adopted by the Security
Council and the General Assembly since 1947.

As members know, the latest outbreak of violence
followed in the wake of the provocative visit to the
forecourt of the holy site of Al-Haram Al-Sharif by the
Israeli opposition leader Mr. Ariel Sharon, and of the
brutal, disproportionate and indiscriminate way in
which the Israeli defence forces and police responded
to the protests the visit triggered among Palestinians.
As we all know, the results have been tragic: 63
Palestinian appear to have been killed, and more than
1,500 injured. The victims include civilians and even
innocent children, some as young as 12 years of age.
These inhuman acts run counter to humanitarian law
and to the letter and the spirit of the Declaration of
Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements
and of subsequent implementation agreements. These
actions could threaten the integrity of the peace
negotiations at a time when these should be entering
their most critical phase. They have struck a harsh
blow to the credibility of the entire peace process, and
thus threaten the peace and stability of the region.

These deplorable events have caused concern
throughout the international community, beginning
with the co-sponsors of the peace process, as well as
the European Union, the League of Arab States, the
Organization of African Unity and the Organization of
the Islamic Conference. The Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People wishes to join them in calling upon the two
parties to refrain from any further escalation of
violence, and to spare no effort to defuse the tension
once and for all. Moreover, the Committee joins with
all in the international community who have called
upon the Israeli Government and upon the Israeli
political parties and security forces to take no further
measures that could jeopardize the peace process. The
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Palestinian People calls for respect for the holy
places. The Committee calls for ensuring that the
Palestinian population will be protected. The
Committee calls for protection of the property of
Palestinians in the occupied Palestinian territories,
including Jerusalem, and for a halt to all activities that
could cause the peace efforts to miscarry. The
Committee appeals to the parties to proceed swiftly to
full, good-faith implementation of the agreements that
have already been concluded, with a View to achieving
a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement based on
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

The Committee remains convinced that only by
speedy, joint progress along the path of the peace
process, towards a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement, will it be possible to stop the situation in
the Middle East from deteriorating. Any exacerbation
of the present tension could have unforeseeable
consequences for peace and stability in the region -
something no one could wish to see.

As we are all aware, there is no possible
alternative to peace negotiations - the negotiations
upon which the two parties embarked so courageously.
Israeli leaders should recognize that peace and stability
cannot be imposed unilaterally and by military means,
but that peace and security must rest first and foremost
on mutual respect and on the development of a
partnership based on equity and mutual trust. There is
no need to recall that Israeli policies and practices that
deny the legitimate needs and aspirations of the
Palestinian people can never be compatible with the
peace process.

By convening this meeting, members of the
Security Council have clearly shown that they have
been deeply concerned at the deteriorating situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including Jerusalem,
and at the problems that threaten to derail the peace
process. The Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People fervently
hopes that this discussion will provide an opportunity
for the Council to show its determination to find ways
to prevent an escalation of the violence we have all
been witnessing, and also to get the peace process back
on track so that it can soon reach a successful
conclusion.

The international community, and in particular
the sponsors of the peace process, must assist the
parties to make rapid progress along the path of
negotiated peace, a path to which they committed
themselves together to guarantee lasting peace in the
region.

In conclusion, let me state once again that the
Committee I represent believes that the United Nations
should continue to exercise the primary, ongoing
responsibility incumbent on it with respect to all
aspects of the question of Palestine, including the
problem of Jerusalem, until the question is settled in a
satisfactory manner, in accordance with United Nations
resolutions and international law, until finally all the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people are fully
realized. The events that have brought us together
today once again prove that the United Nations must
continue to involve itself in the question of Palestine
and in all the questions relating to peace and security in
the Middle East.
