The President (interpretation from Chinese): The
Security Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. The Security Council is meeting in
accordance with the understanding reached in its prior
consultations.

Members of the Council have before them the report
of the Secretary-General concerning the situation in
Abkhazia, Georgia, document S/l995/181. I should also like
to draw the attention of members of the Council to
document S/ 1995/200, which contains the text of a letter
dated 13 March 1995 from the Permanent Representative of
Georgia to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council, and its enclosure.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council welcomes the interim
report of the Secretary-General concerning the
situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia
(S/ 1995/ 181). The Council also welcomes the recent
efforts of the Secretary-General's Special Envoy
which enjoy the Council's full support.

"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment
to the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Georgia and calls upon the parties to
achieve a comprehensive settlement of the conflict,
including on the political status of Abkhazia.

"The Security Council notes that there has been
little overall progress in achieving a comprehensive
political settlement and that a stalemate exists with
respect to the return of refugees and displaced
persons.

"The Security Council takes note of the
movement which has occurred in the political talks
which resumed in Geneva from 7 to 9 February 1995

and calls upon the parties to exert determined efforts
towards achieving substantive progress during the
next round of talks.

"The Security Council notes with concern that
despite the efforts of the United Nations Observer
Mission in Georgia (UNOMIG) and the CIS peace-
keeping force, the security situation, in the Gali
region in particular, has deteriorated, causing great
difficulty in the delivery of humanitarian supplies.
The Council also notes with concern that reports of
human rights abuses, largely against the Georgian
population, have become more frequent. The Council
calls upon the parties to provide a secure
environment, inter alia, to provide security for
returning refugees and displaced persons and to
ensure that international relief supplies can be
delivered safely.

"The Security Council is deeply concerned
about the lack of progress regarding the return of
refugees and displaced persons. The Council
deplores the continued obstruction on this issue
displayed by the Abkhaz authorities and, in
particular, the position taken by those authorities in
the recent meeting of the Quadripartite Commission
in Moscow. The Council expects the parties to
implement fully their obligations under the
Quadripartite Agreement on voluntary return of
refugees and displaced persons (S/ 1994/397, annex II). The Council urges the Abkhaz authorities to
agree to a timetable on the basis of that proposed by
UNHCR. The Council notes that cooperation
between UNOMIG and UNHCR is critical to the
safe and orderly return of refugees and displaced
persons.

"The Security Council, while welcoming the
pledge that has been announced to the voluntary
fund in support of the implementation of the
Agreement on a Cease-fire and Separation of Forces,
notes the lack of contributions to this fund and
reiterates its encouragement to Member States to
make contributions to the voluntary fund in support
of the implementation of the Agreement on a Cease-
fire and Separation of Forces and/or for
humanitarian aspects including demining, as
specified by the donors. The Council also welcomes
all other relevant humanitarian contributions of
Member States.
 

"The Security Council welcomes the steps taken
by UNOMIG and the CIS peace-keeping force aimed
at improving conditions for the safe and orderly return
of refugees and displaced persons. The Council notes
UNOMIG's increased patrolling and looks forward to
further information on intensification of its activities
within its mandate. The Council also welcomes the
strengthening of cooperation between UNOMIG and
the OSCE representatives in Georgia.

"The Security Council agrees with the
observation of the Secretary-General that, with
patience and perseverance, solutions can be found to
the situation in Abkhazia, Republic of Georgia. The
Council underlines that without progress in this
direction it will not be possible to maintain the
support of the international community.

"The Security Council will remain seized of the
matter."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/ l995/ 12.

The Security Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on its agenda.

The meeting rose at 11.50 61.111.
