Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): At the
outset I congratulate you, Sir, for completing your
month on an issue of particular interest to us and which
has allowed us to hear from our friend Sergio Vieira de
Mello and to have in the Chamber with us our friend
Jose Ramos-Horta.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the
European Union. The Central and Eastern European
countries associated with the European Union -
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary,
Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and
Slovenia - and the associated countries Cyprus, Malta
and Turkey align themselves with this statement.

On behalf of the European Union, I would like to
once again most warmly welcome Mr. Sergio Vieira de
Mello and to thank him for his briefing. We appreciate
the remarkable work that has already been done by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
his entire team, and their determination to fulfil as
effectively as possible the mandate of the United
Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET). The European Union reaffirms its
solidarity with the people of East Timor and its support
for UNTAET in its efforts to meet one of the United
Nations greatest challenges: to lead East Timor within
a limited timeframe, on the path to democracy and to
allow this country to establish secure relations with all
its neighbours.

The European Union commends in particular the
work done by UNTAET in four fields.

The first is the preservation of public order.
Notwithstanding the difficulties encountered at the
border with West Timor - about which I will have
more to say - UNTAET has done excellent work in
the effort to preserve public order in Timor. The
European Union encourages UNTAET to pursue the
dialogue with the local community and with the
political and religious leaders so as to better ensure the
promotion of the values of tolerance.

The second field is reconstruction. The European
Union is pleased by the efforts UNTAET and the World
Bank have made to accelerate the disbursement of
specially earmarked funds of the World Bank and thus
to remedy the problems encountered at the beginning
of the year. The establishment of a consolidated overall
budget for the budget year 2000-2001 - which budget
was approved at the Lisbon conference last June -
constitutes a significant step forward in this regard.
The identification and enhancement of the
reconstruction capacities of the East Timorese remain
essential objectives.

The third field is the establishment of the East
Timorese administration. The European Union takes
note with satisfaction of the training programme for
civil servants that has been implemented by UNTAET
and the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP). As a result, the number of East Timorese in
the administration has noticeably increased during the
last few months. The European Union encourages
UNTAET to accelerate the training programme for the
civil police so as to ensure a smooth transition when
the United Nations force departs.

The fourth and final field is the political
transition. The European Union fully supports the
process initiated by UNTAET to develop mechanisms
for good governance, get the East Timorese more
involved in decision-making and prepare them for
democracy, after the organization of the elections
planned for next year.

As for the transferring of competence that is now
under way, the European Union would like to know Mr.
Vieira de Mello's preliminary evaluation of the
functioning of his coalition Government. What
improvements might be possible? Do the donor
countries and agencies have a role to play in this field?

The European Union believes that, in order for
UNTAET's efforts to be successful, it is essential to
maintain a climate of peace and stability in East Timor.
In this context, the European Union recalls the request
made by the Security Council on 3 August and
considers it important that a special briefing on the
military situation be held. The European Union would
like in particular to have access to current information
regarding the military needs of UNTAET, the
consequences of the insecurity along the West Timor
border, the effective distribution of resources in the
territory in accordance with local security constraints,
the tasks that have been effectively passed on to the
military component of UNTAET, and the prospects for
the further evolution of the Mission.

As I already stressed last month, the European
Union believes that the conditions are now in place in
East Timor to allow the Timorese to undertake the
process for a solid and lasting national reconciliation.
In this context it is essential that the international
community show its commitment to support the
rehabilitation and development of East Timor. The
European Union will continue to assist the people of
East Timor at this critical moment in the establishment
of their nation.

The European Union is pleased by the excellent
cooperation in East Timor between UNTAET and
UNDP and the other specialized agencies and funds of
the United Nations. It believes that the quality of this
cooperation should, at the appropriate moment,
facilitate the exchange of authority between the
Transitional Administration and the Timorese
Government. A peacekeeping operation cannot take the
place of a long-term development programme.

UNTAET has benefited from significant
assistance from the international community. The
results achieved are considerable and deserve to be
enthusiastically commended. However, as with any
peacekeeping operation, it is useful to continuously
assess the costs and the adequacy of the means
available for success. The European Union will
naturally continue to pay attention to this aspect.

I would now like to mention on behalf of the
European Union two points of particular concern to us
and the entire Council. I refer to the activity of the
militias and to the situation of the refugees in West
Timor, which we are convinced could have very serious
repercussions on the evolution of the political situation
in East Timor and might place in jeopardy everything
that the international community has achieved through
UNTAET.

The European Union energetically condemns the
activity of the militias in West Timor. It deplores in
particular the cowardly murder on 6 September in
Atambua of three UNHCR staff. The European Union
urges the Indonesian authorities to arrest and prosecute
the perpetrators of that aggression and to put an end to
the destabilizing activity of the militias. The Union
also calls upon them to guarantee the security of the
refugees and of the humanitarian personnel in West
Timor so that they may soon resume their work. In
short, the European Union calls upon Indonesia to fully
implement resolution 1319 (2000), adopted on 8
September.

The Union takes note of the initial steps taken by
the Indonesian Government with a view to disarming
and disbanding the militias. The European Union hopes
that this action will continue and that steps will be
taken to make sure that the disarmed militia members
do not find any way of rearming.

The European Union recalls the urgent need to
settle at the earliest possible opportunity the question
of refugees in West Timor. Resuming humanitarian
assistance in West Timor and resettling the refugees are
essential prerequisites for lasting peace and stability.
The Union is prepared, along with the international
humanitarian organizations concerned to help the
Indonesian Government resolve the problem of
refugees in West Timor.

The Union would like to know what measures are
planned by Indonesia, UNTAET and the UNHCR to
bring about the return of refugees to East Timor or
their resettlement in Indonesia. In this context, the
European Union invites the Indonesian Government to
confirm that it agrees to the forthcoming visit of a
Security Council mission to accompany efforts at the
national level to implement resolution 1319 (2000).

The transitional period in East Timor is at a
crucial juncture. The United Nations mission must,
with the East Timorese, pursue the construction of a
new democratic, independent State, fully integrated
within the region and living in peace with all its
neighbours.

