Ms. Kamara (Liberia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to participate in this second
briefing of the Council on the Ebola crisis. I also
extend my appreciation to the members of the Council
for maintaining the focus on this deadly disease and
on the global effort to contain it in the countries most
seriously affected in the West Africa region. I thank
Mr. Nabarro and Mr. Banbury for their briefings and the
deep insights we have become accustomed to receiving
from them. We pay tribute to them for their engagement
and commitment. I also thank the representative of the
International Committee of the Red Cross for sharing
the perspective from Guinea. Liberia is also benefitting
immensely from the valuable support of the Red Cross,
especially for safe burials.

The first meeting and discussion in the Council
on the Ebola virus disease, held on 18 September (see S/PV.7268), was a turning point in the fight to contain
the Ebola epidemic in West Africa. The initiative of
the Council effectively globalized the response to the
disease and gave great impetus to the international
community to begin a robust scaling-up of efforts. It
gave a welcome boost to national efforts to confront
the disease. It was in this Chamber also that we heard
the announcement of the creation of the United Nations
Mission for Ebola Emergency Response, which is
making its presence felt positively on the ground.
That first Council meeting, held under the presidency
of the United States, owes much to the credit and
determination of Ambassador Power. We appreciate
her visit to the region and commend her passion and
commitment. After two months, we can now assert
that modest positive results are being achieved, but the
battle is far from won and the war against Ebola must
be intensified.

In their briefings Mr. Nabarro and Mr. Banbury
confirmed that the rates of infection and death due to
Ebola had declined considerably in Liberia. It is clear,
however, that the Ebola virus disease is not yet under
control. The Government continues to warn Liberians
to remain vigilant and avoid complacency. President
Johnson- Sirleafrecently indicated in a recent statement:

"With the determination of the Liberian people and
support from partners worldwide, we have made
good progress in containing the virus. We intend
to continue with stronger support for community
care centres, which support community members
in taking responsibility and ownership in working
with health teams in contact tracing, support to
those quarantined and help to those who face
stigmatization after discharge, free of the virus.
Our next step in this integrative process is to
upgrade regular health-care facilities throughout
the country through training, equipment and
supplies. This will minimize the chances of the
virus recurring and ensure that those suffering from
other diseases will be properly treated. A final step
in the process is obviously to obtain the support of
partners for our economic recovery to reverse the
decline in growth, in delayed infrastructure and in
job creation".
Recent developments are a source of great
encouragement for us. They have renewed our hope
and lifted the level of optimism within the Liberian
Government and among the Liberian people that
the disease will eventually be overcome. Although
infections are continuing, we believe that the prospects
of the outbreak reaching the 1 million mark by January
2015 are less likely. The worst-case scenario at this
present stage may well have been averted.

I wish to recognize the critical role of the Council,
which garnered support for the international efforts
now under way in our region. We offer our thanks to
all Member States, non-governmental organizations,
regional organizations, international financial
institutions, the private sector and all partners for their
valuable support, and we encourage them to fulfil
their commitments and to remain engaged until we can
together claim victory over Ebola.

We have said consistently that the effects of
this disease upon our society and our people are
multidimensional. As we progress in containing the
disease, we should explore any opportunities that may
arise to address, however preliminarily, some of the
social and economic effects that create tension and
instability and threaten the hard-won peace dividends.
We need to reflect on measures that enable the
Government to fulfil its basic obligations to its people
so as to restore the confidence between the Government
and the people. In that regard, we commend the Chairs
of the three Configurations of the Peacebuilding
Commission for the attention that they have given to
these issues. We also see that United Nations agencies
are beginning to frame project proposals around
some of the social issues that are indeed the direct
consequences of the Ebola virus.

Together and individually, the Governments of
the three countries most affected have mentioned
that assistance through budget support is important. I
am pleased to acknowledge and express appreciation
to the World Bank and the European Union for the
significant contributions made in this regard. We also
thank Governments that have made similar gestures at
a bilateral level.

Support for livelihoods remains important. The
people are experiencing hardships in accessing food
due to high prices and the limitations of local supplies.
Farmers have not been able to cultivate, and there are
reports that, as the food-security situation worsens,
farmers are resorting to consuming the seed rice
intended for the planting and local production of rice.
The Ambassador of Argentina has already spoken about
this eloquently, and I thank her. Succinctly, I would say
that we need to avert a food crisis in the New Year.

On the political front, as I indicated at an earlier
meeting of the Council, the Liberian Legislature has
approved December 16 as the date for holding the
suspended senatorial elections. Mindful of the rapid
spread of the disease through contact, the Government,
through the powers granted to the Minister of Health,
has issued a regulation restricting mass rallies during
the campaign period. Acknowledging the difficult
circumstances under which the elections are being held,
our President has appealed to all Liberians to comply
with the regulations, admonishing them that "we can
enjoy democracy only if we are healthy and alive".

Cognizant of the need for the transparency and
credibility of the polls, President Sirleaf also requested
an Economic Community of West African States
delegation that visited Liberia last Tuesday to provide
observers to monitor the senatorial elections.

I would like to assure you, Mr. President, and
members of the Council that, at this critical time in our
nation's history, everything is being done to maintain
tranquillity and ensure social cohesion in the country
as we move forward in the response to the Ebola virus.

Finally, as I may not appear before the Council before
2015, I would like to express special appreciation to all
of the members that will be vacating the Council at the
end of this year for their support to Liberia with regard
to the Ebola crisis and the peacekeeping operation in
Liberia, the United Nations Mission in Liberia. We
expect to continue our normal collaboration outside
this Chamber as a Member State of the United Nations.

