Mr. Ragaglini (Italy): Italy endorses the
statement that will be made later by the representative
of the European Union. I should like to add a few
remarks in my national capacity.

We appreciate the long-term commitment of the
United Nations to work with the Government and the
people of Afghanistan. We reiterate our full support for
the work of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA) and the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Staffan de Mistura. Italy
will work closely with UNAMA to reinvigorate the
delivery of basic services to civilians. We commend the
Organization on enhancing the coherence of
international efforts in Afghanistan.

In a few days, President Karzai will formally
announce the beginning of the transition process - a
process that Italy strongly supports - in accordance
with the framework established at the Kabul
Conference last summer and confirmed at the Lisbon
NATO Summit in November 2010. We see transition
not as an exit strategy but as a condition-based joint
process aimed at achieving Afghan ownership in
security, governance and development. It entails both
long-term international civilian commitment to support
Afghanistan beyond 2014 and a strong Afghan
commitment to translate the Kabul commitments into
concrete actions.

Italy is exerting its utmost efforts to ensure that
transition will be irreversible, including increased
security trainers to 700 units of the 4,200 troops on the
ground; a civilian-oriented presence in Herat; new
initiatives to support governance at local and central
levels; a wide range of development cooperation
programmes and support to develop the private sector.
We have also joined in the European Union's
comprehensive effort in priority sectors of Afghanistan.

One key to stabilization is an effective,
accountable and transparent Afghan Government that
delivers basic services to its people. The Kabul
process - whereby the Government of Afghanistan is
assisted by the international community and commits
to undertake reforms, improve governance and the rule
of law, promote social and economic development and
strengthen Afghan security capacities - remains
pivotal. Roughly 70 per cent of Italy's aid to
Afghanistan is already aligned with the priorities
indicated by the Afghan Government. While we
commend the Government on the establishment of an
Afghan-led monitoring system, we now expect that the
obstacles that still impede the channelling of additional
resources through the Afghan budget will be removed
and that the management of public funds will be
improved. Transparent allocation of international
resources is vital to our continued cooperation.

Italy also expects the Afghan Government to
make full use of the valuable assistance and expertise
of UNAMA and to work with the newly elected Wolesi
Jirga, all the relevant Afghan institutions and Afghan
civil society on initiating long-term electoral reform.

Another key to stabilization is the inter-Afghan
political process. We support the intertwined processes
of reintegration and reconciliation. Yet, that endeavour
will not bring about lasting peace unless it is based on
national consensus and is conducted in a spirit of true
openness to all sectors of Afghan society. The red lines
agreed upon at the Kabul Conference must be
respected. In other words, consideration has to be
given to local traditions and sensibilities, as well as to
the promotion of fundamental human rights. Italy
commends the efforts of the High Peace Council to
reach out to local authorities and representatives of
ethnic minorities and civil society and encourages
installation of the local bodies needed for
reconciliation and reintegration.

That Afghan-led process requires the support of
Afghanistan's regional partners. We therefore
commend Afghanistan and Pakistan for deepening their
strategic dialogue following the signing of the
Afghanistan-Pakistan Transit Trade Agreement. But
more can be done. Trade, water, energy, agriculture,
capacity-building, vocational training, education,
refugee return and reintegration and infrastructure are
matters of common concern for Afghanistan and its
neighbours. Joint actions on those issues will spur
regional connectivity and help to address economic
challenges and transnational threats.

Existing organizations and forums, in various
forms, have a remarkable contribution to make to this
process and deserve greater international support. We
value the active role played by the Organization of the
Islamic Conference and look forward to working with a
growing number of Muslim countries to counter
extremism and foster peace and reconciliation to the
benefit of the Afghan people.

