Ms. Bolafios Perez (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish): We would like to thank Ms. Sandra Honore
for her introduction of the Secretary-General's report
(S/2014/617) and the Permanent Representative of Haiti
for his valuable comments.

Some months ago, Guatemala was pleased to hear
the announcement of the consensus forged in Haiti with
the signing of the El Rancho Accord, which we believe
showed how the country's political culture had evolved.
We therefore regret the fact that the Accord has yet to be
implemented, as well as the existence of an atmosphere
of mistrust that has not only hindered the holding of
parliamentary elections for 2015 but is also delaying the
reconstruction process. We urge the country's political
leaders to resume their dialogue and overcome this new
impasse. Holding inclusive elections in 2014, as the
Constitution requires, is crucial to the consolidation of
democracy and the rule of law and to promoting the
socioeconomic development needed to improve the
people's living conditions and achieve lasting stability.
In that regard, Guatemala fully shares the Secretary-
General's concerns, outlined in paragraph 62 of his
report, about the consequences of further delays in
holding elections.

If the hoped-for electoral process is to succeed,
security and confidence must rule, something that
can be achieved only with a significant and deterrent
military and police presence. Experience has shown that
the United Nations must maintain an adequate presence
in the country, which is why we are carefully mulling
over the Secretary-General's recent proposal to reduce
the Mission's military component by half. For now, we
are viewing the proposal with some scepticism, since
we continue to believe that for the time being we should
avoid actions that could jeopardize the proper conduct
of elections.

The report of the Secretary-General and the
recent meeting with troop-contributing countries
(see S/PV.7261) show that operational support for
the MINUSTAH forces is still needed. It should be
remembered that we are in the Mission's consolidation
phase. The process of reconfiguration and restructuring
should start only once that phase is complete. We must
act carefully on the basis ofthe conditions on the ground
and in close consultation with the Government of Haiti,
as well as with the troop-contributing countries.

With regard to strengthening security across the
country, we note the progress in the professionalization
of the Haitian National Police. In fact, the understanding
has always been that any significant reduction of the
military component of MINUSTAH should not only
be undertaken steadily, gradually and responsibly,
but must also be linked with the necessary capacity-
building and increased strength of the Haitian National
Police. That is not a matter of quantity but due to the
fact that the professionalism of the police is linked to
progress in the judicial and correctional fields required
for strengthening the rule of law in order to achieve a
police force that is also of quality.

In short, we clearly understand that without the
strong political will of the leaders and all the people
of Haiti to achieve a democratic security, no military
presence or international pressure can overcome the
impasse facing the country. At the same time, it is
also true that without the support of the international
community, the people of Haiti may not by themselves
achieve the stability for which the Mission was
established.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge
Ms. Sandra Honore for her work as the head of the
MINUSTAH at a time marked by challenges and
difficulties. She has carried out outstanding work, as she
has showed us once again today with the presentation
of the report of the Secretary-General. Guatemala will
continue to support her leadership.

