Mr. Rishchyski (Canada): Canada would like to
thank the Nigerian presidency of the Security Council
for providing this opportunity to discuss security sector
reform (SSR) in the context of the African continent.
For Canada, SSR is a process through which a country
seeks to establish effective, accountable and
representative security institutions that carry out their
legitimate functions in a manner consistent with
democratic norms and sound governance principles. A
number of countries on the African continent continue
to face forms of insecurity that damage the lives of
their people. SSR is an important lens through which
African States can develop strategies to transform their
security sectors. On this note, allow me to make a few
brief comments.
Canada actively contributes to initiatives within
the United Nations and has extensive experience in
assisting States in their efforts to reform their security
systems. Our assistance is a multifaceted, whole-of-
government effort. We have engaged in activities
through project financing, policy development and the
deployment of personnel, including experts and
advisers, working in such areas as governance, justice,
policing, border management, corrections and the
military. We currently contribute to related fields in
several of the United Nations African missions,
including the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan.

Additionally, Canada supports strengthening the
ability of the United Nations to coherently implement
SSR activities across different programmes and funds.
We support an in-house capacity-building initiative
through the United Nations SSR Inter-Agency Task
Force. That initiative is meant to assist members of the
Task Force in such areas as training and technical
support in the field and through the development of
technical guidance notes. As a donor, Canada supports
better whole-of-system coherence, in particular by
working through and coordinating with the United
Nations SSR Task Force.

(spoke in French)

Canada concurs that the Security Council should
emphasize ongoing inclusion, wherever appropriate, of
security sector reform in the future planning of United
Nations operations in Africa. For example, as a
member and Chair of a Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) configuration, Canada notes that security and
related justice reform is a priority in all six of the
countries on the Commission's agenda. The PBC is
developing valuable experience on the ground that can
be drawn upon to help inform Security Council
mandate development and United Nations system
transition planning.

Canada therefore concurs that assistance from
international donors must be anchored by national
ownership and the commitment of all involved parties.
In particular, it is imperative that the political will of
the reforming State buttress those initiatives. A State's
political environment must be considered when
planning SSR initiatives to ensure that the milieu is
conducive to reform and that efforts to support the
Government and civil society will have an opportunity
to succeed.

(spoke in English)

Finally, Canada welcomes the call for an
assessment of United Nations SSR support, including
the efforts being made in Africa. The assessment
should specifically examine opportunities to strengthen
United Nations inter-agency coordination, including
the donor coordination role of the various agencies. In
addition, we believe that it should examine ways to
increase United Nations SSR capacity, both at
Headquarters and in regional offices.
In conclusion, we strongly encourage ongoing
Security Council discussions concerning security
sector reform capabilities. Ultimately, we are
convinced that sounds SSR policies and practices will
assist in promoting regional and continental peace and
security for all Africa.

