Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to join those who spoke before me
in congratulating you, Mr. President, on behalf of my
delegation, for your assumption of the presidency of
the Security Council for the month of January 2013.
Allow me to also extend to the members of the Council,
on behalf of the Government of Burundi and on my
own behalf, the warmest greetings of His Excellency
the President of the Republic of Burundi, Mr. Pierre
Nkurunziza.

The peace dividend that the people of Burundi are
now enjoying is the outcome of the joint efforts of its
people and the international community, in particular
the United Nations. The gradual withdrawal of the
forces of the United Nations Operation in Burundi was
the result of a compromise between the United Nations
and Burundi because the political, social and security
situation was increasingly improving. Consequently, it
was necessary to transform that mission into the United
Nations Integrated Office in Burundi, with a mandate
to consolidate peace and strengthen national capacity.

During those events, in 2007 the Government
of Burundi, with the support of the United Nations,
drafted a strategic peacebuilding framework, which
underscored four priorities: governance, justice and
human rights, security sector reform, and, finally, land
issues and community revival.

The financing of 18 quick-impact projects that
were developed within the framework of implementing
the strategic peacebuilding framework allowed the
people of Burundi to overcome many challenges that
were linked with the integration of former combatants,
national capacity-building in terms of promoting human
rights, combating poverty, and community revival, as
well as the reintegration of thousands of returnees,
most of whom were coming back from neighbouring
countries.

The transformation of the United Nations
Integrated Office in Burundi to the United Nations
Office in Burundi (BNUB), with a light footprint for an
for an initial period of one year beginning on January
2011, was brought about, as representatives all know,
by a political, social and security situation that was
becoming increasingly manageable. Therefore, it was
necessary to continue to consolidate peace and tackle
the fight against poverty, which is the main enemy of
the people of Burundi.

The Office's mission also included working with
the Government "to develop a set of benchmarks for
the future evolution of the United Nations Office in
Burundi to a United Nations country team" and to
report regularly to the Security Council on progress on
that task. That work was completed, and the Secretary-
General presented the Council with the report on
10 May 2012 (S/2012/310, annex).

We take this opportunity to report to the Council
Burundi's significant progress on many fronts, and we
will make more progress in the future. Burundi already
serves as an example for several struggling countries
around the world. Without outlining all the tangible
results achieved in recent years, I would like to share
some of them with the Council, issue by issue.

In the area of democratic processes, Burundi has
made important progress in strengthening democracy
and resolving political differences through inclusive
dialogue. I will enumerate a few notable achievements
in that sphere. First, in 2010, was the holding of
fair, open, democratic elections in keeping with
international electoral standards. Secondly, we drafted
the law concerning opposition parties, which will
allow all political players to participate in constructive,
organized political dialogue. Thirdly, on a consensus
basis and with the Parliament's approval, we appointed
members of the National Independent Electoral
Commission with a view to preparing in a timely way
for the 2015 elections.

The whole of the Burundian population has
benefited from those achievements. According to a
poll conducted by Gallup World Path, the percentage of
Burundians who have confidence in Burundi's electoral
process rose from 66 per cent in 2009 to 83 per cent in
2011 - an increase of 17 per cent in less than two years.

In the sphere of security and stability, the
Government of Burundi has continued to improve
its security and defence forces and make them more
professional, with a view to responding effectively to
both national and international security problems while
respecting norms and rights. We can point to a number
of significant achievements in that area.

First, in the framework of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, the
relevant services were able to collect and destroy more
than 12,000 grenades, over 2,000 rifles and around
4,000 hand guns in 2009. The successful integration
of former rebels into our defence and security corps,
in strict accordance with the Arusha Peace Agreement,
has greatly contributed to stabilizing the country by
providing security and protection for all. Secondly,
at the end of 2012 more than 60 per cent of weapons
belonging to the Police nationale du Burundi were
registered and marked. During the same period, 100 per
cent of the weapons of the Forces de defense nationale
were registered and marked. Those percentages are
compared to 50 per cent and 40 per cent in 2011,
respectively.

A third significant development was the drafting
of the National Security Strategy. Fourthly, again
according to Gallup World Path, the people's confidence
in the Force national de defence has also increased, from
89 per cent in 2009 to 91 per cent in 2011. The Police
nationale du Burundi have also enjoyed an increase in
popular confidence, from 82 per cent in 2009 to 83 per
cent in 2011.

In the area of strengthening good governance and
national institutions, a number of institutions called
for in Burundi's Constitution have been established.
Among them are the Anti-corruption Brigade and the
Anti-corruption Court, created in 2006, the National
Communications Council, in 2007, the National
Security Council, in 2008, and the Permanent Forum
of Political Parties, in 2010. In 2011 the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, the Office of
the Ombudsman and the Burundi Revenue Authority
were established. There are others as well.

In the fight against corruption, according to
Transparency International's 2012 East African
Bribery Index, Burundi has moved from last place in
East Africa to second place on the list of countries least
affected by corruption in the East African Community.
The recent adoption of our National Strategy on Good
Governance and the Fight against Corruption, together
with the integration of the fight against corruption in
our Constitution and criminal code, leaves no doubt that
our anti-corruption initiative will continue. The call by
the President of the Republic of Burundi for objective
application of a zero-tolerance to anyone found guilty
of financial malfeasance remains our watchword.

With regard to the rule of law, since the 2005
transition period Burundi's Government has
unflaggingly focused its efforts on fostering the
independence of the judicial sector. For example, the
year 2011 was devoted to developing departmental
policies for the Ministry of Justice for 2011-2015,
an initiative confirming the Government's firm
commitment to strengthening the independence of the
judicial sector. The year 2011 also saw an increase in
the percentage of the population voicing confidence in
Burundi's justice system. According, again, to a Gallup
World Path poll, it increased by around 10 per cent
between 2009 and 2011.

As for respect for human rights, the Government
of Burundi has continued to nurture a culture of
protection and promotion. The National Independent
Human Rights Commission continues to conduct
investigations of cases on its docket. In the interest of
greater contact with the public, the Commission has
set up three regional offices in the country's interior.
Along the same lines, the Government of Burundi
is pleased to continue the ongoing dialogue with the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
especially because a number of meetings were held
with that Office on the vital question of human rights.

In the same vein, the Government of Burundi
cannot leave unmentioned the violence routinely done to
women and girls. To address it, a care centre for victims
of sexual abuse - le Centre Humura - has been set up
in the middle of the country, in Gitega. Other measures
have also been taken, notably the creation of a criminal
office that is always open so that serious cases can be

judged while the facts are fresh.

As for regional integration, Burundi continues to
focus much effort on being integrated into important
regional entities. It takes part in all meetings ofthe East
African Community and chaired its 2011 summit with
striking success. To demonstrate its deep commitment
to regional integration, Burundi included that sector
among the eight pillars of its Vision 2025 and gave it
a place of prominence in its second Poverty Reduction
Strategy Paper. The economic benefits of this
integration are many. Internal trade between Burundi
and the EAC has grown by 15 per cent since we joined
the Community, in 2007, and that trend is continuing.

In the area of socioeconomic development, I should
point out that despite the considerable efforts of the
Government of Burundi and its people to improve the
country's socioeconomic situation and the quality of life
of its citizens, poverty, the lack of land, food insecurity
and high unemployment are still major challenges
that Burundi will have to tackle in the years to come.
In order to achieve that, budgetary support from our
partners, beyond project financing, will continue to be
more essential than ever.

Aware of the extreme poverty that Burundi is
dealing with, the people of Burundi themselves, with
the support of their development partners, have decided
to formulate their strategic framework for growth and
poverty reduction, which integrates some peacebuilding
elements into its first pillar. This is the right moment,
through you, Mr. President, to thank the international
community and the development partners who put
their efforts into ensuring that we received better-
than-expected pledges at the Development Partners
Conference on Burundi held on 29 and 30 October in
Geneva. It was an undisputed success.

It is true that Burundi has made significant
progress in several areas in recent years, but there are
still challenges to be met that require the support of
the international community in general, and of the
United Nations in particular. Regarding the challenges
that remain, Burundi, like the other countries in the
subregion, cannot fully enjoy the peace it has regained
or speak of peacebuilding when the security situation in
the subregion as a whole is not good. The negative forces
that are active in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo portend a troubling security
situation and have led us to remain vigilant and to
adopt a policy of neither interference not indifference.
The situation in the eastern Congo deserves greater
attention from the Security Council, since it runs the
risk of inflaming the entire region, thereby threatening
international peace and security.

Aware of the part that the international community
has played in restoring peace to our country, the
Government of Burundi will continue to send troops to
other countries in difficulties in order to help them regain
and consolidate peace. That reflects our reciprocity for,
and recognition of, what the international community
has done for Burundi during the difficult periods in our
own history.

Ibelieve the Council will agree that no country in the
world can ever get everything done at once. That is why
the Government of Burundi appeals to the international
community to recognize that our country has made
significant progress in the areas I have mentioned. In
order to accomplish that, my Government's hope is,
in the best-case scenario, to achieve a new framework
of cooperation with the United Nations through the
progressive transformation ofthe United Nations Office
in Burundi into a new United Nations country team in
Burundi. The Government believes that a period of
12 months will be more than enough to achieve such
a reconfiguration. The country team could continue
to cooperate with the Government of Burundi in key
areas, including democratic governance, combating
corruption, security sector and justice reform and the
promotion and protection of human rights.

The same applies to the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission. While recognizing and
paying tribute the efforts of Ambassador Paul Seger
and his predecessors, Burundi would like to see a more
flexible commitment in terms of the timetable, agreed
on with the Commission, and taking into account the
context of the strategic framework for growth and
poverty reduction and its first pillar, as well as of the
evolving situation in our country.

Concerning the current report of the Secretary-
General (S/2013/36), the Government of Burundi takes
note of it and reiterates its intention to cooperate fully
with the United Nations in order to meet its remaining
challenges within a framework of good governance,
the rule of law and community restoration. We would
like to take this opportunity to offer our sincere thanks
through you, Mr. President, to the Secretary-General
for producing a balanced report in which he explicitly
acknowledges that the human rights situation in Burundi
improved significantly in 2012 by comparison with the
previous two years. The Government of Burundi, for its
part, is committed to maintaining that trend.

