Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
warmly welcome the initiative of Ghana to hold this
debate. It is a particular pleasure, Sir, to welcome you
back to the Council and to see you presiding over our
work this morning. I should also like to thank our
visitors who have already contributed to the debate and
to associate the United Kingdom with the statement to
be made by the representative of Finland on behalf of
the presidency of the European Union.

The United Kingdom has always had a
particularly close interest in West Africa, an area which
is central to the work of the Security Council. So, I
should like to thank His Excellency President John
Agyekum Kufuor and the Government of Ghana for
their particularly strong and continued commitment to
promoting regional peace and stability in West Africa,
particularly in Liberia and Cote d'Ivoire. If I may say
so, Mr. President, your country's record of stability and
good governance sets an example to the subregion and
more widely, and the United Kingdom stands fully
behind Ghana in its efforts.

We very much appreciate the efforts of the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) to bring peace to the region, and we are
committed to working with the African Union and
ECOWAS to deliver regional solutions to West African
problems. Without that regional approach, there can be
no lasting peace and stability. As we have seen only too
clearly, adverse events in one State can quickly spill
over into neighbouring States.

But compared to the dark days of a few years
ago, it is good now to see that peace is embedding
itself within West Africa. Of course there are setbacks,
as recent events in C6te d'Ivoire have shown, but the
region now has a real opportunity to consolidate its
fragile but increasingly stable peace. Through this
Council, we need to work with the Peacebuilding
Commission and, through the efforts of the entire
United Nations family, make sure that the United
Nations as a whole reinforces its support to West
Africa so that it can build upon the gains that are being
made.
There is, of course, still a long way to go, but the
United Kingdom is committed to the region, through
its military and long-term development support. Both

06-4607]
Sierra Leone and Liberia stand on the threshold of
becoming regional and African success stories. Both
have the opportunity to draw away from conflict once
and for all, using instead their many resources to grow
and develop. The United Kingdom will support both
countries through bilateral aid programmes, through
our contribution in the European Union and through
the training we are providing to each country.

The arrest of Charles Taylor and his transfer to
the Special Court for Sierra Leone in The Hague was a
particular triumph, not only for West Africa but for
Africa as a whole, and for the system of international
justice, because it demonstrates an ending of impunity.
Liberia, like Sierra Leone, therefore also has the
chance to build on its peace now. Both countries should
focus on nation-building, good governance, the fight
against corruption, entrenching democracy through free
and fair elections, tackling the root causes of conflict,
such as youth unemployment and access to justice,
encouraging economic growth and building efficient
and effective institutions to deliver national services.
The holding of presidential elections in Sierra Leone
next year will be a particular test.

We all need to continue to be vigilant, to watch
developments in the region carefully. Worries remain
over Guinea, which has the potential to destabilize the
entire Mano River basin. We must all do what we can
to work with regional actors to help bring about a
peaceful and democratic transition there. In C6te
d'Ivoire, the international working group must ensure
that the roadmap to a durable peace, including free and
fair elections and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, is fully implemented. In Gambia, the
ongoing investigations into the failed coup in March
are a continuing concern.

But West Africa has reason to be hopeful. What is
clear to me is that we must work to ensure that the
countries of the region can succeed together. Any
individual failures will only jeopardize the prospect of
gains for the others. That is why this thematic debate is
so timely. That is why, as the presidential statement we
will adopt today calls for, the United Nations in
general and this Council in particular must continue to
take a regional perspective. The region continues to
have the Council's support and engagement as well as
that of the rest of the United Nations, financial
institutions and the international community at large. It
deserves it.

What that means is international support by all
who can contribute, so that in any individual country
and across the region, we tackle the three essential
elements of peacebuilding: the ending and the
prevention of conflict, delivering political progress
based on institutions and the rule of law, and providing
sustained economic development and implementing the
Millennium Development Goals. West Africa demands
and deserves our support for those goals.

