Ms. Tan (Singapore): Singapore aligns itself with
the statement delivered by the Islamic Republic of Iran
on behalf of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

No country can defeat the scourge of terrorism
alone. Terrorism does not respect national or
geographical boundaries. Today, social media are being
used by terrorists to spread radical ideas and promote
violent extremism across borders. Southeast Asia is
not immune. In addition to the January 2016 attacks
in Jakarta, there are now over 1,000 South-East Asians
who have joined the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham
(ISIS), including a handful of Singaporeans. They are
battle hardened and have combat skills and violent
tendencies and embrace an extremist ideology. When
they return, they pose a significant risk. They hope
to overturn Governments and establish a caliphate in
Southeast Asia.

As an international hub and a multi-faith society,
Singapore takes the threat posed by ISIS and other
extremist ideologies seriously. They are threats not
only to physical safety, but also to social harmony. In
our view, there are three key elements in an effective
approach to addressing violent extremism and
terrorism. First, it is crucial to build national resilience.
Inclusive economic development, good governance, and
political and social stability are a critical starting point
in our approach. On top of that foundation, we also
need to promote tolerance and mutual understanding.
Singapore works closely with religious and community
leaders to encourage dialogue and counter the spread

of extremist exclusionist ideologies. We have put in
place initiatives such as the Interracial and Religious
Confidence Circles, and other community engagement
programmes to build social trust. Our goal is to build
a strong web of trust among our various racial and
religious groups, so that there is greater community
resilience to deal with "the day after" a major incident.

For those led astray, Singapore has emphasized
rehabilitation and reintegration. In 2003, a religious
rehabilitation group was formed by respected religious
teachers and scholars to counsel detained extremists
and correct erroneous religious teaching. Further,
we continue to educate Singaporeans on the dangers
of online threats to security and social harmony.
Increasingly, the social media enable us to live in
fragmented echo chambers, filled only with people
who agree with us. It is vital to continually remind
our people of the need for diversity and tolerance,
both online and offline. Only then can we keep our
community bonds strong.

Secondly, itis important to cut offfinancial resources
for terrorism. Singapore takes a serious approach
to protecting the integrity of our financial system
against money-laundering and terrorism-financing.
We are an active member of the Financial Action Task
Force and a founding member of the Asia/Pacific
Group on Money Laundering. Singapore has a strict
legal and regulatory framework to safeguard against
terrorism-financing through our financial system.
We have required financial institutions and relevant
non-financial sectors to implement comprehensive
monitoring and due diligence procedures in line with
international standards. Those controls are overseen by
sectoral supervisors for compliance. The threat posed
by ISIS requires that we remain vigilant, and continue
to work closely with industry to detect and deter such
illicit flows.

Thirdly, effective international cooperation and the
sharing of best practices will strengthen the first two
pillars of our fight against terrorism. Bilaterally, our
security agencies have established close cooperation
with their counterparts. Regionally, Singapore
participates actively in counterterrorism initiatives
undertaken by the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, the Asia-Europe Meeting, and the Asia-
Pacific Economic Cooperation Forum. We believe that
the international community needs such platforms to
discuss and share our experiences. Working together
will amplify our individual efforts. That was why
Singapore convened the East Asia Summit Symposium
on Religious Rehabilitation and Social Reintegration
in 2015. This year, we organized the tenth Asia-Pacific
Programme for Senior National Security Officers,
and will host another workshop later in the year to
develop a cross-regional perspective on best practices
and policies for promoting religious tolerance and
strengthening resilience.

Multilaterally, Singapore supports the efforts of the
United Nations to develop a framework for collective
action to counter violent extremism. We co-sponsored
resolution 2178 (2014) on arresting the international
flow of terrorist fighters, and we therefore welcome
this timely open debate convened by China.

Given the continuing threat posed by terrorist
groups, we believe that a successful framework for
collective action must take a holistic approach. It
must address the key drivers of terrorism, including
the propagation of extremist ideologies, which distort
religious concepts, and the role played by the social
media in spreading and amplifying such ideologies. To
be truly effective, the framework must take into account
domestic and contextual factors, and put national action
plans at the heart of our collective endeavour to address
the terrorism challenge.

Terrorism continues to be a serious threat to
international peace and security. But if we work together,
we can translate national resilience into global unity and
strength. Singapore will remain committed to playing
its part in the fight against international terrorism.

