Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I welcome Mr. Joachim Rficker, the new Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo. I
wish him every success in the discharge of his
responsibilities. I thank him for his preparation of the
technical assessment of progress in implementation of
the standards for Kosovo, annexed to the Secretary-
General's report on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).

We also pay tribute to the remarkable job done by
his predecessor, Mr. Jessen-Petersen, during his term of
office over the past two years.

We must also recognize the important role played
by UNMIK, the European Union and the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe in support of
the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government in the
fight against crime and the transfer of powers to those
Institutions in preparation for the implementation of a
political settlement under resolution 1244 (1999).

Recent months have witnessed an acceleration in
the implementation of the standards for Kosovo and in
the talks between Pristina and Belgrade. The Special
Representative's technical assessment of progress in
implementation of the standards refers to the
declaration by the Government of Kosovo that most of
the 13 priorities determined by the Contact Group have
been implemented. That bears witness to the
importance of the standards being implemented,
whatever the future status of Kosovo may be. It is our
hope that the Government of Prime Minister Ceku will
continue to honour its declared commitment to placing
the standards on its list of priorities.

Recent months have also witnessed the first high-
level meeting between the two parties, held in Vienna
between the President and the Prime Minister of Serbia
and the President and the Prime Minister of Kosovo.
The meeting was followed by three additional rounds
of direct talks between the two parties. Those
meetings - in which Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, the
Secretary-General's Special Envoy for the future status
process for Kosovo, played an important role - have
highlighted the ongoing divisions between the two
parties on the future status of Kosovo. They
nevertheless represent an important step forward in the
process of reaching a lasting and sustainable
settlement.

One prerequisite for finding a sustainable
solution, for the future of Kosovo is the effective
participation of Kosovo's Serbs and Albanians in the
Government institutions and in all the activities of the
State and society. They must also participate in the
dialogue if it is to enjoy credibility and continuity.
Both parties must encourage such participation and
refrain from taking any measure to discourage or
impede it. The future of Kosovo will be neither stable
nor prosperous if it is not built on multi-ethnicity. That
is why national consensus and reconciliation are
critical to the future of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.

The people and Government of Kosovo have
borne the responsibility for all communities to feel
secure in their life, work and movement within
Kosovo. The number of returnees to Kosovo reached
around 770 persons in the first half of this year. That is
not sufficient. Encouraging the return of refugees
requires both financial support and tangible progress in
the political process. One of the conditions for
reaching a sustainable solution is for all parties to
make all possible efforts to preserve the stability of the
security situation in order to prevent any form of ethnic
Violence that targets people or religious sites, and to
bring to justice those who are responsible for
perpetrating such acts.

