Mr. Sharma (Nepal): Thank you, Mr. Minister,
for convening this open Security Council meeting on
the work of the ad hoc Working Group on Conflict
Prevention and Resolution in Africa and for presiding
over the debate. Singapore deserves our appreciation
for this innovative debate, in which Africa's peace and
security problems are put in perspective, in which
Council members speak only occasionally and in which
most of the speaking is done by non-members of the
Council.

The Secretary-General's report on the causes of
conflict and the promotion of durable peace and
sustainable development in Africa, contained in
document 8/1998/318, puts the issue before us in
context. Today, Africa is in deep crisis. While its
natural bounty has attracted colonizers and prospectors
from far and wide and has made some of them
fabulously rich, most of its people are caught in a
vicious circle of poverty, illiteracy, disease and
conflict. That, together with the colonial legacy, bad
governance, injustice and greed, offers a potent recipe
for instability and underdevelopment in Africa. It is
untenable, and we must collectively change it.

First and foremost, African leaders will have to
show leadership in transforming Africa from a land of
conflict into a land of construction. It is a happy
development that they have already taken two major
steps that are vital for Africa's lasting peace and
progress: they have pledged themselves to promoting
peace, democracy and freedom, and they have launched
the New Partnership for Africa's Development
(NEPAD) to reduce poverty and to bring renewal and
growth to Africa.

Never before have African nations had so much
faith in freedom and democracy and so much
awareness and resolve to invest in their people and in
their development. As the African countries spearhead
their respective specific efforts to resolve conflicts, to
improve governance, to mobilize resources and to
strengthen service delivery systems, they have also
formed regional and subregional mechanisms to pool
their resources for collective peace and progress. But
their problems are too complex and their poverty too
deep for them to be able to address those problems
individually and regionally. Therefore, the United
Nations, along with other stakeholders in the
international community, ought to continue to
encourage African countries to initiate regional and
subregional cooperation where there is none and to
reinforce it where it exists, so that they can
increasingly shape their own destiny.

The United Nations has already been extensively
engaged in Africa through its peacemaking and
peacekeeping missions, its humanitarian assistance and
its New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the
19905. Its peace missions, barring a few, have helped to
manage conflict and to bring peace in many lands, and
its humanitarian assistance has benefited millions of
refugees and other needy Africans. Likewise, the New
Agenda and the United Nations System-wide Special
Initiative on Africa have placed Africa firmly at the top
ofthe global development agenda.

However, Africa, like other needy areas
elsewhere, requires more United Nations involvement.
Nepal therefore urges the world body to mobilize more
of its own resources and to play a stronger advocacy
role to help African States to achieve durable peace, to
protect their people and to invest in tackling poverty,
illiteracy and disease, including HIV/AIDS and
malaria, which are now devastating the whole
continent. To come to grips with those problems,
African countries - particularly the least developed
among them - need more aid, deeper debt relief and
more investment. They also require improved access to
global markets so that they can join the process of
globalization.

The Security Council deserves full appreciation
for establishing the ad hoc Working Group, chaired by
the very competent Mauritian Ambassador Koonjul, to
respond to some of the pressing imperatives of Africa.
The Group has shown its commitment and competence
by convening a brainstorming session and by drawing
up its broad programme of work. This is certainly an
encouraging beginning and I congratulate Ambassador
Koonjul on it.

Yet, formidable challenges remain for the
Working Group. The issues identified by the
Ambassadors of Singapore and Mauritius in their letter
of 13 May 2002 are useful and relevant, but on the one
hand, they entail close cooperation and partnership
between the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council, which are
largely lacking at the moment, as well as between the
United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations; and on the other hand, they do not cover
the entire gamut of issues, which include the
humanitarian assistance and sustainable development
necessary to ensure effective conflict prevention and
resolution in Africa.

Indeed, durable peace and security for Africa, as
we have reiterated umpteen times in the hallowed
chambers of the United Nations, call for a
comprehensive approach that includes all these
elements. Hence, there is no doubt that United Nations
organs and other relevant bodies must seamlessly
cooperate to fulfil the overall goals of the United
Nations.

If the United Nations is to be able to grapple with
the problems of peace and security, we will have to
look at these issues in a more holistic manner. We must
ask how we can revitalize each United Nations organ
so that it can fulfil its own specific mandate better and,
at the same time, work together with other organs on
the cross-cutting issues, as the founding fathers of the
United Nations envisaged. This basically entails
agreement, first, among the United Nations organs on
the modality of cooperation, coordination and
coherence that will ensure full understanding of each
other's sensitivities and respect for each other's
mandate in a collective effort. Critical to the success
of such an arrangement will be the involvement of all
key stakeholders in all phases of the planning and
execution of a comprehensive plan of work of which
conflict resolution would be only one element, albeit a
very important one.

We encourage the Security Council to pay careful
attention to these rather sensitive aspects and to work
in such a way that other organs do not feel excluded or
marginalized. To address this issue, the Presidents of
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council, supported by regional
group chairmen and the Secretariat, could agree on a
modus operandi that, if necessary, could be firmed up
by the adoption by those organs of identical
resolutions. Perhaps similar arrangements might be in
order later between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations.

The conclusion of the brainstorming session and
the programme of work presented by the Working
Group provide a sound basis for developing such a
framework within the United Nations, as well as across
the regional and subregional bodies. While too much
detail is likely to entangle us in procedure, adequate
conceptual and procedural clarity will be essential to
erecting a stable edifice of inter-organ cooperation on
complex issues of a multidisciplinary nature, such as
conflict prevention and resolution.

Nepal is committed to working for such greater
cooperation and coordination between the General
Assembly, the Security Council and the Economic and
Social Council, as well as between the United Nations
and regional and subregional organizations. We are
also in favour of clearly, though not cumbersomely
defined rules of the game so that the stakeholders can
all engage in seamless cooperation to help Africa and
to achieve the United Nations goals without our being
drawn into turf battles.

