Mr. Valdivieso (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
would like to welcome you here, Mr. Minister, and
thank you for participating in this meeting. Through
you, I would also like to commend the Irish Mission,
particularly Ambassador Ryan, for their dedication and
the very efficient way in which they have organized
our meetings during the month of October. I would also
like to welcome the participation in this meeting of Mr.
Alkatiri, Chief Minister of the Second Transitional
Government, and the representatives of the World Bank
and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
I would like once more to welcome Sergio Vieira de
Mello, and reiterate our appreciation for his successful
leadership.

Without a doubt, the work of the United Nations
Transitional Administration in East Timor (UNTAET)
allows us to speak of a success story of the United
Nations, which contributed to the awarding of the
Nobel Peace Prize. This success should be confirmed
by our commitment to the culmination of the United
Nations presence in East Timor.

I would like to thank you, Mr. Vieira de Mello,
for your statement, and I would like to highlight a few
points. First, the elections marked the crucial moment
in the process of the East Timorese really taking charge
of their own future. This fills us with genuine
democratic pride, if I may put it that way.

Secondly, we are now entering a very important
stage - the next 200 days before the date set for
independence. This period will make many demands on
the United Nations and will call for painstaking work
by the multilateral bodies. But, above all, it will place
greater obligations on the East Timorese before they
take full responsibility for their governing institutions.
It is therefore essential to ensure that all these efforts
are coordinated, which UNTAET will continue to do.
Another point that Mr. Vieira de Mello made
relates to the need for proper justice for crimes
committed, particularly the most serious offences. We
have all recently heard many calls for ad hoc courts or
mechanisms to ensure that perpetrators of such crimes
are held responsible. This campaign and this activism
confirm how important it is to do away with impunity.
However, in our opinion, we must focus our efforts on
the functioning and strengthening of existing
institutions and those that are to be created. In our
view, justice and reconciliation should be fully
compatible. Without proper justice being done, we
cannot set out on the road to true coexistence. The
Commission for Reception, Truth and Reconciliation
commissions is very useful.

We also agree on having systems that work well
and speedily - for example, plea-bargaining systems
for certain offences. This is an exceptional situation in
which investigations should be carried out and
sentences handed down as quickly as possible. But for
the most serious crimes, the work of the Transitional
Administration and the future Government is extremely
important, as the Secretary-General's report states.

Progress has been made in this area, including the
remarkable action on the crime of extermination, which
is truly novel. Much more needs to be done. We need a
high level of international cooperation, with emphasis
on what the authorities of Indonesia have done and
should continue to do.

My delegation endorses the recommendations in
the report now before us, in particular those on the
establishment of the successor peacekeeping mission,
headed by a special representative of the Secretary-
General and consisting of a military component, a
civilian police component and a civilian component.
We agree that the civilian component will be essential
to ensure the proper functioning of the Government in
the period immediately after independence. It is clear
to my delegation that the financing of the civilian
component should not be based on voluntary
contributions, which, as the report indicates, are fewer
and fewer. We have noted that UNTAET will do
whatever is necessary to adapt its size and shape to
existing needs and to be able to carry out a smooth,
harmonious transition to a post-independence United
Nations presence. It is clear that the mandate of
UNTAET will have to be extended until East Timor's
independence is declared.

Finally, we are convinced that a hasty, premature
winding down of the international presence could have
destabilizing effects on the future of this new country.
We do not want to have a bad beginning. East Timor
must receive the support it needs in order to come
together as a new State fully capable of participating in
the community of nations.

