Mr. Cabral (Portugal): Let me start by thanking
the Moroccan presidency for taking the initiative
to promote this discussion on peacebuilding, the
importance of which is well reflected in the list
of speakers that we have before us. I also thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his insightful
presentation and for his report (S/2012/746), and I
thank Ambassador Abulkalam Abdul Momen for his
important contribution. Portugal, naturally, also shares
the positions that will be presented later on by the
observer of the European Union.

The debate we are having today and the various
other debates on peacebuilding in which we have
actively participated over the past two years constitute
solid evidence of the importance of post-conflict peace
consolidation in the various areas of United Nations
action. There is certainly much that we can improve,
but there is also a wide consensus across the United
Nations on the need to support the crucial transition
phase of peacebuilding between immediate post-
conflict peacekeeping and long-term development
assistance.

When we speak of support to peacebuilding
processes, it seems obvious that there is no one-size-fits-
all formula that can be applied, regardless ofthe context.
The basic choices and the definition of priorities must
be made by the countries themselves, while the role
of the international community is essentially one of
support, not of replacing the State in the fulfilment of
its functions. In the end, a successful transition from
conflict into peace is the work and the accomplishment
of each State and its society.

Having said that, our experience of support to
various peacebuilding processes allows us to draw
some lessons and identify certain areas that are
particularly important in order to ensure that peace
gains are sustainable and that societies do not relapse
into conflict. In that respect, we very much share the
emphasis on institution-building and inclusivity in the
Secretary-General's report. Without strong institutions
that can deliver basic services and ensure respect
for the rule of law, it will always be very difficult to
create a sustainable environment of confidence and
accountability, for both national and international
actors. It is also a crucial element for promoting
investment and the creation ofjob opportunities.

International coordinated support is therefore
required, bearing in mind that institution-building is a
long-term commitment. The United Nations certainly
plays a central role in ensuring sustained international
support in that area, working closely with other
peacebuilding actors and national stakeholders, while
taking into account the specific social and political
dynamics.

Equally important is the promotion of inclusivity
in the peacebuilding processes, that is, making sure
that the various sectors of society are represented, not
only in political institutions, but also in the definition
of the country's core objectives, which is an essential
confidence-building measure, one that increases the
legitimacy of political transition. I would highlight
in particular the role of women and of youth in
peacebuilding strategies from the early stages of those
processes. Indeed, there is certainly much that can still be
done to raise awareness and empower women as agents
in the prevention and resolution of conflicts, as well as
in the fulfilment of development goals. That objective is
attained through the active encouragement of women's
participation in decision-making, management and
education and their access to economic resources.

With regard to youth, it is necessary to promote
concrete policies for encouraging youth employment,
adopting measures and programmes that aim to
facilitate access of youth to the labour market,
particularly in post-conflict settings, as a way to bridge
the consolidation of peace and security with investment
in sustainable development.

Still on the issue of priority areas, we believe that
recent Security Council debates on cross-national
issues, such as those on transnational organized crime
in West Africa (S/PV.6717) or on the Sahel (S/PV.6882),
are very promising and represent an attempt to provide
a regional dimension to our work. It is important that
peacebuilding actors, including the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), also adopt such a regional approach
in their work and make good use of existing regional
instruments. Regional offices of the United Nations,
such as the United Nations Office for West Africa and
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
can play a relevant role in that process.

Today's debate takes place in the wider context of
the process ofreflection on the relation between the PBC
and other organs of the United Nations, in particular,
the Security Council. Our discussions on the latest
PBC report and the interactive dialogue between the
Security Council and the chairs of the country-specific
configurations last July were valuable contributions
to such a reflection. Recent reports on peacebuilding
acknowledge some progress in the interaction between
the two organs and provide recommendations on how
their relations can be strengthened. We should work
collectively to improve our working methods in order
to allow us to draw regularly on the advice of the chairs
of country-specific configurations. There is certainly
room for the Council to seek and make better use of
the PBC's advice, especially when discussing mandate
renewal, but also as an early warning for potential
setbacks in peace consolidation in specific countries.

As always, Portugal stands ready to engage in an
open and creative discussion on ways to advance the
peacebuilding agenda as part of more efficient and
integrated action by the international community
throughout the various post-conflict stages and the
stages of peace consolidation in the countries involved.
Indeed, the success of peacebuilding efforts represents
our collective success with regard to achieving
sustainable security, stability and development.

With that, I conclude my remarks on the issue
at hand. But since this is probably Portugal's last
intervention in an open meeting of this Council as one
of its elected members, allow me a few but very sincere
final words.

First, I express, on behalf of my delegation and on
my own behalf, how privileged and honoured we felt to
have had the unique opportunity throughout the last two
years of participating in and contributing to the activity
and deliberations of the Security Council and all of its
subsidiary organs and working groups. I also offer a word
of thanks to all colleagues - permanent representatives,
fellow deputy permanent representatives, political
coordinators and experts of all delegations that shared
this table with us - for their cooperation, understanding,
professionalism and friendship. Here I also include the
delegations of Brazil, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Gabon,
Lebanon and Nigeria, whose mandates ended last year.

I also wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
leadership, commitment and availability and advice.
I thank all the members of the Secretariat, especially
Mr. Movses Abelian and his able team, and the entire
hidden army that is essential for the functioning of the
Council - the interpreters, the translators, conference
officers, security agents, technicians. media people and
all staff without whom the functioning of the Council
would be impossible.

Finally, I offer a word of welcome and encouragement
to the new members of the Council that will embark
on this daunting endeavour f Argentina, Australia,
Luxembourg, the Republic of Korea and Rwanda. I
wish them every success in their work for the benefit of
international peace and security.

