Mr. Alhakim (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to begin by congratulating Lithuania on its accession to
the presidency of the Security Council this month and
on its sterling work in that role so far. We pay tribute
to the Jordanian delegation for its skilful efforts in
leading the Council last month. We welcome Mr. Jim
Kubis, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq, and thank him for his first briefing. We would also
like to thank Ms. Amos for her very touching briefing.

Iraq is facing unprecedented challenges, be they
in relation to terrorism or other crimes. Addressing
those challenges requires collective efforts by the
international community. We have to step up and
strengthen coordination. As the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. Ibrahim AI-Jaafari said during his most
recent visit in New York:

"We are faced with a problem ofterrorism, which is
a multinational problem. We are not facing an Iraqi-
Iraqi problem, or even an Iraqi-Arab problem - we
are facing a globalized problem. All States of the
world, regardless of the continent where they find
themselves, have had citizens come to Iraq. Indeed,
there are terrorists from 62 different other countries
present in Iraq right now."

We welcome the international support given to
Iraq through resolutions on the fight against terrorism,
especially from the Security Council, including
resolutions 2170 (2014) and 2199 (2015). However, these
resolutions have not been fully implemented by all
Member States and, despite the efforts undertaken by
Iraq and its partners at the international level to fight
against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL),
and despite the rout of thousands of its soldiers, the
flow of terrorist fighters continues. I ask the Security
Council to reiterate the need for all Member States
to respect the implementation of Security Council
resolutions, especially resolution 2178 (2014), which
calls upon all States to take the necessary measures at
the national level to put an end to this flow of foreign
fighters, including those attempting to join ISIL in
Iraq and Syria, as well as other groups and entities
associated with it.

We would like to reiterate the fact that the fight
against terrorism can take place only through a
comprehensive, regular and serious approach aimed at
facing up to the terrorist threat, isolating it, neutralizing
it, choking it off- in which all Member States would
participate, especially our neighbours. Whether it is
in Iraq or Syria, we have to prevent the proliferation
and spread of terrorism to other States. It is simply
unrealistic to hope to destroy ISIL in Iraq alone.

ISIL today still possesses freedom of movement
in Syria, which is clear from what has happened over
the last couple of years. The Iraq position remains
unchanged when it comes to the need to find a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Syria and to fight ISIL and
affiliated groups, including those associated with
Al-Qaida, if we are to see a return to peace, security
and stability in both States.

While Iraq has been facing ISIL's terrorism,
savagery and violence within its borders, it has also
been confronted with a humanitarian catastrophe as a
result of the capture of Iraqi cities by terrorists. This
situation has led to major flows of civilian exiles from
their homes to safer regions. Close to 2 million Iraqis
have been displaced and are suffering immensely. In
that regard, I would like to recall that, last August,
the United Nations declared the situation in Iraq a
level-3 emergency, the highest level when it comes to
emergencies. The situation since then has continued
to deteriorate and it is now an extremely heavy burden
for the Iraqi Government and the United Nations active
in Iraq to bear, working as they are to contain the
constantly worsening humanitarian crisis.

This situation will only increase the threats and
dangers throughout the different regions in Iraq. The
Iraqi Government is working to come up with a plan
that would tackle the humanitarian dimensions of the
problem and set up aid, sanitation, water provision,
medical and psychological care for the benefit of local
communities. Yet despite the significant response
from the international community, both financially
and logistically - assistance we have enjoyed from an
number of countries - the level of the emergency and
our inability to forecast what the situation in Iraq will be,
compounded by the problem of access to humanitarian
assistance to regions under ISIL's control, leaves us
with very few choices in dealing with the crisis.

The cities and regions that are welcoming the
displaced in Iraq are now suffering from a great deal
of tension - tension that transcends their ability
to tackle the problems. All this does is increase the
pressure on the Iraq Government, which finds itself
unable to adequately respond to cover all the needs.
The only solution to the human tragedy of the millions
of displaced people is to liberate the cities from ISIL
control as rapidly as possible. One also has to guarantee
a safe return for displaced persons to their homes and
ensure that they are rebuilt. We ask the international
community and our partners in the fight against
terrorism to mobilize resources and step up efforts
to increase international assistance with a View to
stopping international terrorism today.

ISIL's crimes against Iraqi civilians were referred
to in the report of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights published on 28 March 2015 as crimes against
humanity, war crimes and even crimes of genocide.
Those crimes have been directed against all sectors
of Iraqi society: Kurds, Arabs, Sunnis, Shiites and all
others. That savage organization has destroyed and
pillaged the Iraqi cultural heritage, an integral part ofthe
global cultural heritage, in a very organized, deliberate
way. It has targeted cultural and religious sites, libraries
and museums to simply cleanse the country of its
cultural diversity and to finance its activities. It intends
to destroy cultural diversity and the collective memory
of Iraq and to destabilize social harmony by threatening
the diversity of the country's cultural identity, thereby
hindering the Iraqi Government's efforts to restore
stability, national reconciliation and understanding.

To confront that challenge, we are working in
partnership with the German federal Government
and UNESCO to draft and adopt a new General
Assembly resolution that would complement Security
Council resolution 2199 (2015) and reiterate the need
for Member States to preserve Iraqi historical assets
and civilizational heritage as part of the civilizational
heritage of humankind. The destruction of cultural
heritage is a crime that cannot go unpunished. We call
on all Member States to support the draft resolution
when it comes before the General Assembly.

Destroying Daesh is a primary and essential
objective. We must succeed, and not only for reasons
of security and stability along our borders or indeed
for the preservation of the territorial integrity of the
State or a number of States faced with the danger that
entity represents. This is not solely about confronting
the savage acts and crimes of a terrorist organization
that seeks to foment chaos and destruction in the States
where it is active. Our struggle also about achieving
what is in essence a humanitarian objective and
addressing the problem of millions of impoverished
civilians. We are facing a humanitarian disaster; we
must protect civilians, end the cycle of destruction, and
meet the fundamental basic needs of displaced persons,
especially children and women. We must also protect
religious sites and preserve our millennial intellectual
diversity.

Faced with those challenges, my Government is
working at the local level, in particular to safeguard
the democratic achievements enshrined in our
Constitution. We hope to accelerate the adoption of
laws on generalized amnesty, the establishment of
a national guard, and the federal high court, and to
forge an agreement with the federal Government of the
Kurdistan Region to foster national reconciliation and
maintain national interests.

In the same framework, my Government is working
to promote relations with neighbouring States. There
has been progress and positive developments in our
relations with the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, which
has announced that it will soon send an Ambassador
to Baghdad. In addition, we thank the State of Kuwait
for its announced cancellation or delay of our debt
repayment. Those actions clearly highlight the success
of Iraq's efforts to restore friendly relations with our
neighbours. The Iraqi Government also has a legal and
humanitarian commitment to working to resolve issues
related to the disappeared and to the archives. We are
exploiting modern technology to accelerate the process
related to the Kuwaiti disappeared.

Finally, Iraq is facing immense security challenges
and economic conditions that it will not be able to
tackle alone. We welcome and thank our international
and regional partners for their role and the United
Nations for its efforts, particularly through its Mission
in Iraq, in providing assistance and advice to the
Iraqi Government. We pay tribute to the courage they
have shown in their ongoing work and the provision
of humanitarian assistance in extremely difficult
conditions in our country. We wish Mr. Jan Kubis,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Iraq, every possible success in his endeavours. We
reiterate the Iraqi Government's readiness to lend its
assistance to all his efforts and to the country team to
ensure success.

