Ms. Pillay: Madam President, allow me to
express my appreciation to you and to members of the
Security Council for giving me the opportunity to
address the Council during this high-level debate on
the vital issue of the protection of civilians in armed
conflict. Since the Council was last briefed by the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights on this topic in November 2009 (see S/PV.6216), important developments pertaining to
protection and accountability have taken place, which I
will discuss today.

The Council's initiative in developing a solid
framework to protect civilians in many countries is
most welcome. However, protection remains a dream
for victims, and the gulf between policy and practice is
still vast. If we want to make a greater difference on
the ground, human rights and humanitarian actors need
to work together in order to give effect to the United
Nations policy framework. I am sure that my colleague
John Holmes would agree with me, and I would like to
take this opportunity to salute him for championing
humanitarian action within the United Nations system.
His leadership has enabled the development of
meaningful partnerships to advance protection.

The Council has long recognized that the
maintenance of peace and security will not be achieved
or sustained without due attention being paid to
redressing grievances, ending impunity and protecting
the human rights of civilians. Monitoring human rights
conditions can serve to sound an alarm when situations
are at risk of degenerating into violence. Information
gathered by my Office as well as the United Nations
human rights mechanisms, including the special
rapporteurs, can be very helpful to the Council in this
regard. When the security environment requires the
dispatch of peacekeeping missions, a clear mandate
with robust and well-resourced human rights
components becomes essential for the effective
implementation of protection measures.

Holding perpetrators accountable is key for the
protection of civilians. Amongst the most significant
actions taken by the Council for the protection of
civilians is the establishment of commissions of
inquiry. I am pleased that, on several occasions, the
10-43853
Council and the Secretary-General have requested my
Office to assist with these commissions. More use can
be made of such mechanisms.

It is worth recalling that States bear the primary
responsibility for carrying out investigations and
prosecutions regarding genocide, war crimes, crimes
against humanity and gross human rights violations.
Several countries have established national
commissions of inquiry. These are welcome
demonstrations of a State's willingness to seek justice.
True accountability can be achieved only if national
inquiry mechanisms are credible, independent and
impartial. Such national commissions should have the
power of access to all relevant authorities, persons and
information, as well as adequate financial and human
resources. It is these conditions that will instil
confidence and trust in these national initiatives.

The Council has acted to promote accountability.
It has explicitly made its support for military
operations of national armed forces conditional on their
observance of human rights law, humanitarian law and
refugee law. We need to ensure that United Nations and
bilateral support to military operations and security
sector reform are tied to promoting respect for human
rights.

Let me now update the Council on situations
where the protection of civilians has been, and
remains, of great concern.

In Afghanistan, the intensifying conflict has had
an intolerable impact on civilians. Many lives are being
lost, homes destroyed and livelihoods and access to
basic services threatened. Clearly, anti-Government
insurgents, with their widespread use of indiscriminate
suicide bombing and targeted assassinations, present a
fundamental challenge. I am also concerned about
civilian casualties caused by aerial attacks and ground
operations, including from search and seizure
operations, carried out by Afghan national security
forces and international military forces. Moreover,
women and girls continue to face widespread human
rights abuses including abduction, trafficking, sexual
violence, forced and underage marriage and harmful
practices justified on the basis of tradition. I am
particularly concerned about the legal framework,
which in many instances institutionalizes violence and
discrimination against women. Although the
Government has taken steps to enact laws aimed at
protecting women's rights, those laws remain largely
unimplemented.

The corrosive effect of impunity on both human
rights and peace is evident in the case of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Few perpetrators
of serious Violations of human rights and humanitarian
law have been brought to justice. Some research even
indicates that rape and violence against women have
increased despite all the attention they have received in
recent years. In that context, I wish to recall that, in
cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, my Office undertook an
exercise to map out the most serious Violations of
international human rights and humanitarian law in that
country between 1993 and 2003. That exercise is a
contribution to combating impunity and supporting
transitional justice. The report will be published soon.

Following the recommendations of the
international Commission of Inquiry into the
September 2009 events in Guinea, a start-up presence
from my Office has been deployed to the country. We
expect the presence to gradually evolve into a fully-
fledged office that can more effectively help the
Government to address the human rights challenges
that the country faces. In addition, my Office has
dispatched a small team to assist the authorities, in
cooperation with other United Nations bodies, in
ensuring respect for human rights throughout the
electoral process.

The serious protection concerns in the aftermath
of the earthquake in Haiti are of a magnitude that
warrants the utmost attention. Death and destruction
are compounded by displacement, and women and
children continue to be vulnerable to widespread
sexual and gender-based violence and trafficking.
Alleviating those conditions remains the priority of the
Human Rights Section of the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, acting in concert with
the protection cluster led by my Office and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees. With regard to accountability for continued
human rights violations, I note the establishment of the
joint investigative commission which, starting next
week, will seek to determine the facts around the
events that led to an as of yet undetermined number of
violent deaths in the Les Cayes prison on 19 January
2010.
Turning now to Kyrgyzstan, where a deadly wave
of violence engulfed the south of the country in June, I
am particularly concerned about the targeting and
indiscriminate killing of civilians - including
children - looting and destruction of public and
private property, displacement and sexual violence. My
Office leads the human rights sub-cluster within the
protection cluster and works closely with all
humanitarian agencies to address the most critical
protection challenges and contribute to strengthening
the rule of law. On the accountability front, I continue
to be convinced of the need for an independent
international inquiry. Meanwhile, we stand ready to
engage, should there be credible national investigations
aimed at establishing the facts and the responsibility
for the attacks.

Both Palestinian and Israeli civilians have the
right to live in peace and security. I welcome the
decision of the Government of Israel to moderate its
blockade of Gaza. Yet I stress the urgent need to ensure
the open flow of imports and exports to and from Gaza.
I urge the Council to take appropriate action to ensure
the lifting in full of the blockade. In the West Bank,
including East Jerusalem, settler violence, forced
evictions, home demolitions, revocation of residency
permits, arbitrary detention and torture are taking place
with impunity. I urge the Security Council to support
the recommendations of the United Nations Fact-
Finding Mission on the Gaza Conflict (see A/HRC/12/48), especially those that call for
accountability for all perpetrators of violations. In
accordance with relevant resolutions of the Human
Rights Council, a follow-up mechanism is currently
monitoring and assessing domestic, legal and other
proceedings undertaken by both the Government of
Israel and the Palestinian side. The Council has also
mandated an independent fact-finding mission, which
will soon start investigating violations resulting from
the Israeli military action against the flotilla carrying
humanitarian assistance to Gaza.

Turning now to Sri Lanka, let me recall the
unacceptably high level of loss of civilian lives caused
by both sides of the conflict in that country. Since the
end of the conflict, some progress has been made in the
return and resettlement of internally displaced persons.
Concrete initiatives must now follow to provide justice
and redress to victims and to promote accountability
and longer-term reconciliation. The leadership of the
Secretary-General in establishing an expert panel to
advise him on those issues is a welcome step in that
direction.

With regard to the Sudan, sporadic fighting in
Darfur between armed movements and Government
forces continues to result in civilian casualties, the
destruction of civilian property and large-scale
displacement. Civilian lives are also being lost in inter-
communal violence stemming from resource-related
disputes. Across southern Sudan, also, lawlessness and
inter-communal violence, compounded by the
widespread proliferation of arms and ammunition,
continue to put civilians at risk. In 2009 alone, there
were at least 2,500 violent civilian deaths and more
than 350,000 people were displaced. Given the
likelihood of more violence in the lead-up to the 2011
referendum, there continues to be an urgent need for
more proactive protection of civilians.

In the course of the past few decades, grave
violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law have been a tragic common
denominator in armed conflicts, with civilian targets of
attacks by State and non-State actors. I have raised
today many situations needing serious and urgent
attention. I welcome this opportunity to strengthen the
cooperation of my Office with the Council, and I
remain at its disposal to answer any questions it may
have.

