Mr. Pressman (United States of America): We
welcome Foreign Ministers Thaci and Dacie back to
the Security Council. I commend both their countries
on their continued dedication to the normalization of
relations through the European-led dialogue between
Kosovo and Serbia. We believe that progress is indeed
being made, even if the tone of parts of today's
discussion did not evince it. Let us be clear. The hands
extended by Serbia and Kosovo for reconciliation
must be firmly grasped. The kind of nationalistic
rhetoric we have heard in the Council today needs to
end. It is wholly counterproductive. To that end, the
United States agrees with other colleagues who, While
recognizing that the situation in Kosovo remains an
important matter for the Councils' attention, believe
that the three-month reporting cycle has long outlived
its usefulness. The Security Council should extend the
reporting period for the Secretary-General to every six
months.

I would also like to thank Special Representative
Zarif for his briefing. We commend him for his service
and dedication to Kosovo and wish him well in his
next assignment, in Liberia. We welcome also the
appointment of Ambassador Tanin as the next Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.

The United States has been a champion of
accountability throughout South-East Europe for
the crimes committed during the Balkan wars. Our
commitment has been to the principle of justice and
accountability for all as an essential ingredient to
sustainable peace. The last time the Security Council
met to discuss Kosovo (see S/PV.7448), the United States
made it clear that Kosovo must uphold its commitments
to respond to allegations of serious crimes committed
between 1998 and 2000, by adopting the legal measures
required to set up a robust specialist court to adjudicate
those cases. The allegations made by a few individuals
must not be held against the legitimate aspirations and
honour of the people of Kosovo. The best way to ensure
this is to advance individual justice for the crimes that
have been alleged. As a steadfast friend and supporter
of the Republic of Kosovo, a sovereign, democratic and
multi-ethnic State that exemplifies Euro-Atlantic values,
we commend Kosovo's Government and Assembly for
having passed the constitutional amendment and law
to establish this specialist court, which will be able to
issue indictments and try cases in connection with the
evidentiary findings of the Special Investigative Task
Force.

There are serious allegations contained in these
findings, including of war crimes and other crimes
against humanity, and they deserve serious judicial
examination. Voting to establish this court was not easy
politically; voting to advance accountability rarely is,
but it is essential, and it was a major step forward in
fulfilling Kosovo's international commitments and a
clear demonstration of the commitment of the people
of Kosovo to the values of human rights and the rule of
law, values that we in the United States and our partners
in the European Union and so many of us around this
table hold dear.

We applaud Kosovo's leaders for their vision and
ability to put politics aside for the future of their country.
But the passage of this law is only the first step. The
Government must quickly conclude the negotiations on
a host State agreement with the European Union (EU)
and the Netherlands so that the specialist court can
indeed be established.

While Kosovo has worked diligently to improve its
judicial structures, the European Rule of Law Mission
(EULEX) and the NATO-led Kosovo Force continue
to play indispensable roles in building security and
rule-of-law capacity in the country. Kosovo's judicial
institutions will continue to need support to handle
highly complicated cases related to terrorism, war
crimes, human rights abuses, sanctions and corruption.

As the end of EULEX's mandate nears, in 2016,
consideration should be given to mechanisms for
addressing outstanding cases and for continued support
to Kosovo's judicial and law-enforcement institutions.
Increased coordination between EULEX and KFOR is
more important now than ever.

As I mentioned at the outset, we have been
encouraged to learn of progress towards normalization
of relations through the EU-facilitated dialogue. The
parties are closer than ever to resolving the outstanding
issues, including the principles for establishing
the association of Serb municipalities, energy,
telecommunications and freedom of movement on
Mitrovica bridge. We strongly encourage both sides to
find compromises on the outstanding issues from the
2013 Brussels agreement and reach agreements that
improve the lives of Kosovo residents regardless of
their ethnicity. We look forward to a positive outcome
in the next round of the dialogue, on 25 August.
Compromise on these issues will indeed be difficult but
remains essential to advancing the aspirations of both
Kosovo and Serbia to further integrate into European
and trans-Atlantic institutions.

We also commend both Serbia and Kosovo for
their continued commitment to fighting terrorism and
addressing the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters.
Both countries have worked to develop effective
preventive and response mechanisms to counter violent
extremism. We support efforts by both Serbian and
Kosovo officials to find practical ways to cooperate
on critical law-enforcement and counter-terrorism
issues. To be effective, it is essential that international
cooperation on counter-terrorism, countering violent
extremism and law enforcement include all of the
Balkans. That is why we fully support Kosovo's
joining INTERPOL in the near term to enhance direct
coordination between Kosovo and the international
law-enforcement community.

In this vein, we repeat our call for all States Members
of the United Nations to acknowledge the importance
of Kosovo's membership in INTERPOL as a means
to further facilitate law-enforcement cooperation on
counter-terrorism and organized crime. It is in all of our
interests to approve Kosovo's bid for membership at the
INTERPOL General Assembly meeting in November.
Isolating Kosovo from participation in the instruments
of international cooperation on issues as important as
this only handicaps our collective efforts.

We also fully support Kosovo's bid for membership
in UNESCO. Kosovo's membership in UNESCO
would reinforce the importance that the international
community places on the World Heritage sites in
Kosovo and the responsibilities of Kosovo authorities
for preserving those sites. Based on the Vienna formula,
Kosovo is eligible for membership in UNESCO as
a result of being a member of two United Nations
specialized agencies, the International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank. We believe that it is important and
that all Member States should support Kosovo in this
effort.

