Mr. Amon-Tanoh (Cote d'lvoire) (Spoke in French): As this is the first time I take the floor at
an open meeting of the Security Council under the
French presidency, I am pleased to congratulate your
country, Mr. President, and to express Cote d'Ivoire's
appreciation for the smooth conduct of the Council's
work and for the well-chosen topics addressed.

I extend my warm and fraternal greetings to His
Excellency Mr. Soumeylou Boubeye Maiga, Prime
Minister of the Republic of Mali; Her Excellency
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and International
Cooperation and His Excellency the Minister of Social
Cohesion, Peace and National Reconciliation. Their
presence here today is sufficient proof of commitment
at the highest level of the Malian State to working
in concert with the United Nations and partners to
strengthen peace and security in Mali.

I also welcome the presence of my brother His
Excellency the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Cooperation
and Burkinabe Abroad, whose commitment to the cause
of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-S Sahel) is well
known by all. I reiterate my sympathy to him.

Similarly, I welcome the presence of His Excellency
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany,
and congratulate him in advance on the German
presidency of the Security Council for the month of
April. Lastly, I welcome all the Ministers who grace us
with their presence at this meeting.

I would also like to commend Mr. Mahamat Saleh
Annadif, Special Representative of Secretary-General
for Mali, and his team for the multifaceted efforts
undertaken by the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA),
in support of the peace process in the country, in
accordance with resolution 2423 (2018).

My delegation welcomes the holding ofthis meeting,
which once again demonstrates France's interest in
the restoration of peace and security in Mali and the
West African subregion. I congratulate the Secretary-
General on the quality of his reports (S/2018/207 and S/2019/262) and the interest to which they give rise.
It prompts Cote d'Ivoire to make observations on the
political, security and humanitarian situations in
Mali, as well as on the activities of MINUSMA in an
increasingly difficult context, which invites us to make
important adjustments in our collective response to the
situation in Mali.

At the political level, Cote d'Ivoire takes
note of the Secretary-General's assessment of the
initiatives undertaken by the Malian parties with a
View to implementing the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. It therefore welcomes the creation of the
Ministry of Social Cohesion, Peace and National
Reconciliation, an important institutional tool that
shows the Malian Government's concern to intensify
the coordination of Government action in the
operationalization of the aforementioned agreement.
In that regard, my country encourages Malian political
actors and civil society to further pool their efforts
with a view to creating the conditions for a rapid and
lasting return of peace, security and stability to Mali,
particularly in the northern and central regions.

The Pact for Peace, signed on 15 October 2018,
provides an encouraging and positive response on
the part of the Malian authorities to the expectations
of our Council and the international community. It
also reflects their commitment to a more inclusive
peace process. The commitment of the signatory
armed groups to joining an accelerated disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process, as
well as the integration of the elements of the Operational
Coordination Mechanism in Gao, Kidal and Timbuktu,
are all encouraging signals.

My country therefore welcomes the launch, on
6 November 2018, of the accelerated ad hoc DDR
process, which has enabled the integration of combatants
from the Operational Coordination Mechanism into the
security system of the Republic. The security sector
reform process should also be expedited. That is key to
reducing violence and creating an army of the Republic
of Mali, a crucial instrument in the service of peace
and stability.

We remain convinced that the Malian authorities
will be able to capitalize on the positive momentum
of the presidential elections to organize the upcoming
legislative elections, in accordance with their ongoing
concern to strengthen the anchoring of democracy in
their country.

Ensuring a successful end to the crisis in Mali is
everyone's business. It is essential that the efforts of
local stakeholders enjoy the ongoing support of the
international community, in particular the United
Nations, the African Union, the Economic Community
of West African States and the independent observer,
who must all maintain their level of mobilization in
support of peacebuilding in Mali and the subregion.

On the security front, my country shares the
concerns expressed by the Secretary-General about
the prevailing situation, particularly in the northern
and central regions of Mali, where attacks by extremist
groups andrecurrent episodes of intercommunal violence
are upsetting the social balance that is the foundation
for peaceful coexistence among populations. Those
attacks also undermine the stability of neighbouring
countries, such as the Niger and Burkina Faso, to which
I reiterate C6te d'Ivoire's condolences and compassion.
The fight against terrorism and organized cross-border
crime is therefore a regional security issue. It requires
a collective response and coordination of the efforts of
all actors.

In Mali itself, the latest act of outrageous violence
was the deadly attack perpetrated on 23 March against
vulnerable civilians in the village of Ogossagou, in
the centre of the country, where 160 people, mainly
defenceless women, children and elderly people, were
systematically massacred. Those killings, and many
others before them, require our Council to take urgent
measures to support the redeployment of the police and
judicial institutions, which should enable the Malian
State to fully discharge its sovereign functions. We
welcome the decision of the Government of Mali to
expedite an investigation to shed light on those crimes,
find the perpetrators of those heinous acts and bring
them to justice. That initiative must be supported by the
United Nations.

Cote d'Ivoire commends the joint efforts of the G-5
Sahel member States and international donors, which
made it possible, at the conference held in Nouakchott
on 6 December 2018, to mobilize €2.4 billion to finance
the 40 key projects included in the 2019-2020 Priority
Investment Programme.

In that regard, my country reaffirms its conviction
that the operationalization of the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
is of crucial importance to the effective fight against
terrorism and the restoration of peace and stability in
the subregion. It therefore calls on the international
community, in particular the United Nations and
international financial partners, to work together to
provide the Force with the necessary resources for its
action as soon as possible. That also requires a review of
the technical agreement, which defines the modalities
for MINUSMA's support to the Joint Force.

Turning now to the worrying humanitarian
crisis, which, according to the Secretary-General's
report (S/2019/262), could affect 7.2 million people in
2019, Cote d'lvoire welcomes the assistance that has
been provided by specialized agencies. It invites the
international community to show greater solidarity and
mobilization to provide emergency relief to populations
in distress. We remain convinced that multifaceted
responses to humanitarian challenges should be part
and parcel of an integrated approach to promoting
economic development, including the fight against
poverty and unemployment, which are the root causes of
insecurity and instability in Africa. That is a welcome
development for the launch of the Alliance for the Sahel
and the United Nations Support Plan for the Sahel,
which aim to intensify and better coordinate support to
States of the region in their development efforts.

With regard to MINUSMA - an essential
link in the current security system in Mali and
the subregion - my country believes that it must

undeniably enjoy the ongoing support of our Council.
Indeed, the complementarity of its actions with those
of the various forces involved - including the Malian
armed forces, the Joint Force ofthe G-5 Sahel, Operation
Barkhane and the European missions - constitute
a considerable asset in the fight against terrorism
and organized crime throughout the subregion. It is
therefore imperative to ensure that its capacities are
strengthened in order to enable it to react effectively
to or anticipate attacks against its civilian and military
personnel. To that end, Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the fact
that its readiness to contribute more to peacekeeping
operations has been materialized by the Secretary-
General's decision to deploy a contingent of 650 Ivorian
soldiers to MINUSMA's area of operations in the near
future, in addition to the 150 soldiers already present
on the ground.

Our debate is taking place in a worrisome regional
security context, characterized by the unprecedented
proliferation of terrorist groups, the worsening of
intercommunal conflicts and the alarming growth of
a structured criminal economy and trafficking of all
kinds, which undermine the foundations of our States.
The are many worrying signals, and we in the Council
must go further and be pragmatic in our support for the
fight against terrorism in the Sahel and West Africa.
Today more than ever, MINUSMA needs a regional
secular arm with a coercive mandate in the fight against
terrorist groups in order to effectively implement its
peacekeeping mandate. That is the thrust of President
Alassane Ouattara's ongoing appeal for the resolute
commitment of the major countries and the United
Nations, in particular our Council, to benefit the G-5
Sahel, which is designed with a View to the long term.

In that regard, the Cote d'Ivoire appeals to the
Council for unity and to the international community
for continued mobilization in support of MINUSMA's
mandate, which is more necessary now than ever before,
as well as for its logistical and operational support to
the G-5 Sahel Joint Force, in accordance with resolution
2391 (2017).

In conclusion, my country urges the Council to
strengthen its support for the Government of Mali in
its efforts to restore peace and stability and promote
economic and social development.
