Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Having voted against
today's resolution, I would like briefly to share with
the Council the reasons that compelled us to do so.

Turkey has never objected to the intention behind
the establishment of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) back in 1964, which was
to protect Turkish Cypriots. Our objections have
always been to the method through which resolutions
such as today's have been adopted and the language
they contain. Resolution 186 (1964), which set up the
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus, and
subsequent resolutions extending the mandate of the
Force have all made references to the Government of
Cyprus.

As all members know, the partnership State
established by the 1959 London and Zurich
Agreements in the shape of the Republic of Cyprus and
the Government of Cyprus, collapsed in 1963, when
Turkish Cypriots were expelled from all State
institutions, including the Government. Since that day,
there has not been a joint constitutional Government
representing all of Cyprus, either legally or
functionally, and the two peoples have been living
separately under their own administrations. Actually,
this wrong approach of considering the Government of
Cyprus as the Government of the whole island has been
the main obstacle in the way to finding a just, lasting
and comprehensive solution for over 45 years.

The spirit of goodwill and cooperation displayed
by the Turkish Cypriot side, which enabled UNFICYP
to function in the northern part of the island in
accordance with the modalities set by the Turkish
Republic of Northern Cyprus, does not change the fact
that the open consent of the two sides has to be sought
for the extension of the mandate of UNFICYP.
However, today's resolution once again fails to do so.
09-64656

In line with the provisions on contingency
planning in resolution 1873 (2009) and the intention to
keep all peacekeeping operations, including UNFICYP,
under review, the Secretary-General says in his report
(S/2009/609) that the two sides will decide what role
UNFICYP will play in the future. If the Turkish
Cypriot side has a say in the future of UNFICYP, why
is its consent not sought today? That looks like a
paradox.

The resolution adopted today also contained
elements dealing with the good offices mission of the
Secretary-General but unfortunately fails to make any
reference to resolution 1250 (1999), which lies at the
source of this mission. Turkey fully supports the
Secretary-General's good offices mission. We welcome
the solid progress achieved so far in the negotiations,
09-64656

which aim at establishing a partnership State on the
basis of well-established United Nations parameters,
namely bi-zonality, political equality and equal status
of two co-founder peoples. As the two leaders agreed
on 23 May 2008, this new partnership will have a
federal Government and two constituent States with
equal status.

In that regard, we would like to put on record our
full support to the efforts of the Special Adviser of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Alexander Downer, and his
team.

