Mr. McNee (Canada) (spoke in French): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for taking the
initiative to organize this meeting. I would also like to
acknowledge the presence of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Mulet,
and to thank him and his team for their extraordinary
work in Haiti. Canada would also like to thank the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) and the funds and programmes of the
Organization for the exceptional work they are doing.

Haiti continues to be one of Canada's top foreign
policy priorities. Our engagement in Haiti emphasizes
prosperity, security and democratic governance. Haiti
is the leading recipient of Canadian development
assistance in the Americas and the second worldwide.
This support was greatly strengthened in the aftermath
of the January 2010 earthquake. In that context,
Canada announced a contribution of $400 million for
reconstruction at the New York conference in March
and deployed additional personnel to MINUSTAH.

Canada continues to work together with the
Haitian Government and the international community.
The principles guiding that work are those of the
Montreal Conference on Haiti: ownership,
coordination, sustainability, effectiveness, inclusiveness
and accountability.

One of the major challenge Haitians will soon
have to face is that of the upcoming presidential and

legislative elections, to be held on 28 November.
Canada supports the Haitian people, who want
transparent and inclusive elections. Strong democratic
institutions and good governance, guided by capable
leaders who have the trust of the people, are essential
in order to ensure the success of reconstruction in
Haiti.

Canada also supports the electoral observation
missions of the Organization of American States and
the Caribbean Community, which demonstrate
unparalleled hemispheric solidarity with Haiti - a
solidarity that serves as a true lever of change by
helping the Haitian people in their development.

Although living conditions for many Haitians are
still precarious, it is important to underscore that, in
large part, most of the immediate humanitarian needs
were met. Reconstruction and development efforts are
also moving ahead. But the Government of Haiti and
its international partners will have to deal with some
considerable challenges, such as land issues, in order to
continue on that path.

We are pleased, however, to be able to count on
the leadership of the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission, co-chaired by the Prime Minister and the
United Nations Special Envoy. Canada encourages
donors to align their efforts with the Interim
Commission so as to facilitate coordination, avoid
duplication and ensure that the capacity exists to
absorb funds on the ground. But as the Secretary-
General underscores in his latest report on
MINUSTAH (S/2010/446), consolidating these gains
will depend, in large part, on sustained support from
the international community, including through
MINUSTAH.

In the light of the Secretary-General's most
recent report and in anticipation of the renewal of the
Mission's mandate in October, Canada stresses to the
Council that we support the Secretary-General's
cautious approach of maintaining Mission personnel at
their current level until the security environment has
been assessed following the inauguration of the new
President and the new Government. We will be
especially interested in the Secretary-General's
recommendations on any eventual need to make
changes to the composition of surge resources.

The Secretary-General also underscores the
authority given to MINUSTAH to provide direct
logistical support and technical expertise to Haitian
officials, although this is temporary. Because the
earthquake dealt a serious blow to the country's
bureaucracy and State infrastructure, it will be
important to allow MINUSTAH to continue to play that
role until other support mechanisms can take over. This
temporary direct support to Haitian authorities must be
part of a process of constructive cooperation with the
host Government that seeks, through training and
mentoring, to build that Government's capacity to
maintain stability and deliver services to its citizens.

(spoke in English)

Canada would also like to stress the importance it
places on the continuation of MINUSTAH's work to
strengthen Haiti's justice and security systems in the
areas of the police, penitentiary, border and correction
services. For example, we must revisit efforts to reform
the national police. We recall that the Secretary-
General presented a consolidation plan in his report
last year (S/2009/439). It is important that MINUSTAH
be able to continue to identify and pursue objectives in
those areas based on that plan, in cooperation with
Haitian partners.

In a post-quake context, we must re-examine
challenges such as the reform of the Haitian National
Police. Any progress in the legal and security realms
will help reconstruction and development in Haiti and
is a necessary framework in which to hold the
upcoming elections.

In that regard, Canada is pleased to have
significantly increased its personnel deployed to
MINUSTAH, in addition to having increased by
$10 million funds that will be used to rebuild key
infrastructure of the judicial system and the National
Police.

To conclude, Canada will continue to work with
our partners to ensure that MINUSTAH continues to
assist Haiti on the path to reconstruction.

