Ms. Jakubone (Lithuania): I would like to thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her report and briefing
on the situation in Darfur.

Next year will mark 10 years since the referral of
the situation in Darfur to the International Criminal
Court (ICC) - 10 years in which the people of Darfur
have continued to suffer. The ongoing security and
humanitarian crisis in Darfur is marked by widespread
violence, impunity and displacement. More than
359,000 people have been newly displaced by attacks by
pro-Government militias, including the Rapid Support
Forces. Armed clashes aimed at displaced people
outside and within the internally displaced persons
camps is another issue of major concern. Peacekeepers
continue to be subject to attacks throughout Darfur.
The months of September and October were marked by
the deaths of four peacekeepers, which raised the total
number to 61 from the beginning of the peacekeeping
mission in the Sudan. We call on the Government of
the Sudan to take all necessary measures to ensure the
security of peacekeeping personnel and their freedom
of movement.

We thank the Prosecutor for her information about
the preparations for the trial of Abdallah Banda Abakaer
Nourain. It is very disappointing that the trial could not
commence last month because of lack of cooperation
from the Government of the Sudan as well as from
Mr. Banda. My delegation still hopes that the trial will
go forward and that it will become a breakthrough in
providing justice to the many victims in the Sudan.

We remain concerned about reports of the mass
rapes of 200 women and girls in Thabit, North Darfur.
The Darfur conflict has long been marked by sexual
and gender-based violence. These allegations demand
full, impartial and unimpeded investigation. We call
on the Government of the Sudan to allow the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) full access so that it can fully discharge
its mandate to investigate allegations of human rights
violations in Thabit.

Attacks against civilians are made possible largely
because of impunity for those who continue to harm
civilians in Darfur. The prevailing climate of impunity
cannot continue, as violence breeds more violence. All
perpetrators of violations of international humanitarian
law and human rights law, including serious crimes
falling within the competence of the Court, must be
brought to justice. The Security Council has called
repeatedly on the Government of the Sudan to ensure
accountability and to bring perpetrators to justice.
Progress, however, remains modest. The Government
of the Sudan should do more to end attacks against
civilians, ensure accountability and guarantee justice
for the victims.

The Office of the Prosecutor continues to face
numerous challenges in fulfilling its mandate. We
reiterate our call on the Government of the Sudan to
meet its obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) and to
cooperate with the ICC, including on the enforcement
of the arrest warrants issued by the Court. As the report
of the Prosecutor reminds us, there is still a lack of
cooperation on the part not only of the Government of
the Sudan but of the other States of the region as well.
We call on all States, even if they are not parties to the
Rome Statute, to cooperate with the ICC, as required by
the Council's resolutions, and to meet their obligations
to arrest and surrender suspects to the Court.

My final point is on UNAMID's reporting. We
welcome the review carried out into the allegations
of UNAMID's underreporting and welcome the
efforts of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
to strengthen and unify the reporting procedures.
Accurate and timely reporting on the situation in Darfur
is essential not only for the protection of civilians but
also for the fulfilment of the Prosecutor's mandate,
especially in monitoring what could constitute crimes
against humanity under the Rome Statute.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Lithuania's
full support for, and cooperation with, the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court in carrying out her
important mandate.

