Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): Armenia would like
to express its appreciation to the United Kingdom
delegation for convening this open debate and providing
us with a comprehensive concept note (S/2018/586, annex). We also thank the Secretary-General, Lord
Ahmad of Wimbledon, the Archbishop of Canterbury
and Ms. Qadeem for their briefings today. The large
number of delegations participating in today's debate
reflects the level of interest in the topic, as mediation
continues to provide important avenues for the peaceful
settlement of disputes in many parts of the world.

Mediation can be a critical tool for resolving
existing disputes, as well as preventing emerging ones,
paving the way for durable peace, development and
cooperation, the core values that lie at the heart of the
United Nations. In that regard, we would like to pay
tribute to the memory and legacy of former Secretary-
General Kofi Annan, a dedicated multilateralist and
visionary for peace, whose contribution to conflict
prevention through mediation has inspired so many
in the ranks of United Nations diplomats and people
around the world.

Regional and subregional organizations play a
crucial role in mediation, the peaceful settlement of
disputes and conflict prevention. With their particular
regional experience and expertise, they often have a
better understanding of local circumstances and can
bring tailored approaches and effective tools. Well-
established and internationally mandated mediation
formats within regional organizations have the potential
and capacity to address the complex challenges in
specific situations. The effective use of the capacity
of regional agencies and arrangements in mediation,
conflict prevention and pacific settlement of disputes is
also provided for in Article 33 and under Chapter VIII
of the Charter of the United Nations.

For any mediation process to be credible and
effective, it must be based on a consensus and duly
mandated with a deep understanding of the root
causes and anatomy of the conflict. Furthermore,
every effort should be made to avoid the duplication
of mediation activities, whereby multiple and diffuse
processes often lead to fragmented responses and can
be counterproductive.

Armenia welcomes the unwavering and continued
support of the United Nations system and of the
Secretary-General to the mediating efforts of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Minsk Group co-chairmanship of France, the Russian
Federation and the United States for the peaceful
settlement of the Nagorno Karabakh conflict.

The consolidated support of the international
community for the negotiating process within the
agreed format is of the utmost importance, not least in
order to avoid procrastination, deviation from agreed
principles of the settlement and forum shopping. The
people of Nagorno Karabakh have exercised their right
to self determination. Within the past three decades,
an entire generation has been raised free from any
foreign domination.

Strengthening the role of women in peace and
security, particularly those affected by conflicts,
remains an important objective in translating
resolution 1323 (2000) into action. Armenia attaches
great importance to the implementation of resolution
1323 (2000) and we support calls to increase the
proportion of women in mediation processes. In 2017,
an inter-ministerial working group was been set up
in Armenia to elaborate a national action plan on the
implementation of resolution 1323 (2000). The drafting
process has been conducted through extensive public
consultations with the involvement of civil society
representatives, in particular women-led organizations.

The persistence and complexity of many crisis
situations around the world necessitate the careful
deliberation of early-warning mechanisms and
capacities for timely and effective mediation. Early
action and preventive engagement can help reduce
human suffering before conflicts develop into
humanitarian emergencies.
