The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of South Africa.

South Africa joins other delegations in thanking
the Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, Ms. Leila Zerrougui, for her briefing on
the activities of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO). My delegation recognizes and
commends the fundamental role played by MONUSCO
in addressing the perennial instability in the eastern
part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and in
protecting civilians. South Africa commends the role
and leadership displayed by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Zerrougui with regard to
the critical issues in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and in ensuring that MONUSCO discharges
its mandate effectively. Today I will focus on two key
issues - improving the political climate and the state
of affairs in the eastern part of the country.

With respect to the political situation, South
Africa welcomes the formation of the new coalition
Government in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
precisely because of the consensus approach to its
formation and the fact that the distribution of ministries
between the two main political platforms is in line
with the undertakings made in July. We especially
welcome the emphasis on promoting the role of women
in politics in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as
their representation has increased to 17 per cent from
10 per cent.

Since the publication of the last report of the
Secretary-General (S/2019/575), we have continued to
observe a positive trend in President Fe'lix Tshisekedi's
implementation of his strategic approach to conflict
resolution and peacebuilding in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the region. The trust and
confidence-building initiatives with neighbouring
countries demonstrate his personal commitment to fully
implementing the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework for the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Region. Those positive developments,
supported by relative stability in the western part of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, are giving impetus
to the resolution of other peace and security issues in
the region.

With regard to the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, a complex military and
humanitarian situation persists. As members may recall,
the Security Council was briefed on the Great Lakes
region last week (see S/PV.8630). As one ofthe countries
concerned, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
shared its concerns about the presence and activities
of armed groups and about intercommunal clashes and
the Ebola epidemic, concerns that are shared by the
Southern African Development Community (SADC).
However, we are encouraged by the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's strategy aimed at addressing its
peace and security challenges, which includes capacity-
building for the defence and security services as well as
the creation of national forums aimed at promoting the
peaceful coexistence of local communities, with a view
to bolstering national cohesion.

South Africa shares the concerns raised by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2019/776) about
the Ebola virus outbreak and its potential impact on
the region. The regional and international response
efforts continue to be hindered by insufficient funding
and poor access to the conflict areas, as well as low
levels of cooperation between the community and
the Government. Cholera and measles outbreaks are
further compounding the already fragile humanitarian
situation and weak health systems. My delegation is
also concerned about the attacks by armed groups on
Ebola treatment centres and staff, which we condemn.
Against that backdrop, we welcome the launch of
an African Union (AU) mission against Ebola in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, demonstrating the
willingness of African countries to work together to
address an important health concern. We also welcome
the continued work of the United Nations Emergency
Ebola Response Coordinator and the World Health
Organization in support of national efforts.

In regard to the general security and humanitarian
situation, my delegation recognizes the vital role played
by MONUSCO, in collaboration with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo's authorities, in addressing the
security challenges in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also recognize the efforts of
the Force Intervention Brigade in addressing the threat
posed by armed groups, as well as the work done through
the good offices of Ms. Zerrougui in meeting with
key stakeholders to discuss opportunities to support
institutional reform and the ongoing Ebola response.

Going forward, one of the key areas of focus for the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is the importance of ensuring the implementation
of effective disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration and security-sector reform programmes
and of establishing Government authority in areas
liberated from negative forces. That is especially
important given the progress registered in areas such
as Ituri with regard to the signing ofa peace agreement
and willingness to demobilize armed combatants. South
Africa therefore looks forward to the outcomes of the
Secretary-General's independent strategic review of
MONUSCO. Ultimately, however, we believe that any
adjustment of MONUSCO's mandate should be based
on developments on the ground.

South Africa supports SADC's continued commitment
to assisting the Democratic Republic of the Congo in
achieving sustainable peace, security and stability. The
communique issued after the thirty-ninth Ordinary
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of
SADC, held in August, highlights the concerns about the
security situation in the eastern part of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, on the basis of which SADC
agreed to collaborate with the International Conference
on the Great Lakes Region in consolidating efforts for
security stabilization in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the region. We are also encouraged by the
cooperation between the AU and the United Nations,
by which they have undertaken to continue to engage in
support of the consolidation of stability and democratic
governance in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

In our opinion, the international community,
including the Council, has continued to witness
a positive trajectory in the developments in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo since the peaceful
transfer of power in early 2019. To build on the current
momentum, the country will need genuine support
from bilateral, regional and international partners in
implementing its Government programmes, which
focus on political, security and socioeconomic efforts.
We are of the firm view that it is imperative for the
international community, working through SADC,
the AU, the United Nations and regional partners, to
continue to maintain solidarity with the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and provide the
necessary political, financial and other support in an
effort to ensure that there is no reversal of the gains
made so far.

I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.

I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

