Mr. Llorentty Soliz (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): First of all, Bolivia wishes to thank
Mr. Mladenov not only for his briefing but also for his
active work in such a difficult and complex situation. In
addition, we thank the delegation of the United States
for having called for today's meeting. We believe that
the situation in Palestine is a priority issue - and it
should be one - for the Security Council, and I believe
that we have not had enough meetings, and certainly
not enough results, on it.

Consistent with its pacifist policy, Bolivia
categorically condemns attacks against civilians
and civilian infrastructure in all their forms and
manifestations as unjustifiable, regardless of their
motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever
committed. Bolivia also welcomes the efforts made
by Egypt to seek a ceasefire in Gaza. We call on the
Government of Israel to act accordingly and desist from
its decision to continue the bombing and air raids.

As several members of the Council already stated,
this situation does not exist in a vacuum. The latest
escalation of violence that we are witnessing only
contributes to an intensification of the humanitarian
crisis in Gaza. More than 2 million Palestinians
continue to live without access to basic services, with
power cuts lasting more than 22 hours, overcrowded
hospitals and congestion in the delivery of health care,
lack of medicines and a shortage of water for human
consumption, inter alia, as a result of 11 years of a
systematic blockade by sea, 11 years of a systematic
siege by land and 11 years of being prevented from
returning to their homes.

As the occupying Power, Israel has an obligation to
comply fully and scrupulously with its legal obligations
under international humanitarian law, the Charter of the
United Nations and the Fourth Geneva Convention, to
resume without further delay the opening of crossings
for the flow of humanitarian aid, commercial goods
and persons. In that regard, we demand that the parties
comply with and respect international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, including on
the protection of civilians. We therefore call on the
membership of the Security Council to support the
draft resolution proposed by the Kuwaiti delegation,
which aims to adopt appropriate measures to guarantee
the security, well-being and protection of civilians.

We note with great concern that the atmosphere of
Violence in the region has so alarmingly deteriorated
in recent weeks. Mr. Mladenov has constantly and
repeatedly warned the Security Council that we are on
the verge of a clash with unpredictable consequences.
This is of course aggravated by the unilateral decision
of the Government of the United States of America
to move its Embassy to Jerusalem in violation of
various rules of international law. For those who have
forgotten, the last flare-up in Gaza, in 2014, resulted
in the deaths of 1,462 Palestinian civilians, of whom
551 were children, and 11,200 Palestinians injured, of
whom 3,400 were children. That is to say that if we do
not remember what happened, we are doomed to repeat
its bitter reality.

We reiterate once again our rejection of Israeli
settlement plans and their expansionist policies as
being in open violation of resolution 2334 (2016), on the
illegality of Israeli settlements in occupied Palestinian
territories. Accordingly, we wish to state once again that
the root cause of the situation in the occupied territories
in Palestine, which of course is worth repeating, is the
illegal Israeli occupation of the territories. We reaffirm
our conviction that the only long-term solution is the
two-State solution, in which a free, sovereign and
independent Palestinian State is finally built, within the
pre-1967 international borders and with East Jerusalem
as its capital in accordance with the resolutions of the
Council and the General Assembly.

