Mr. Kolby (Norway): I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency, and I thank
Ambassador Mahbubani for his excellent presidency
last month.

My delegation joins others in welcoming His
Excellency President Joseph Kabila to this meeting. We
commend him for his diplomatic initiatives and for his
very important statement. We also would like to join
others in expressing condolences to President Kabila
on the tragic death of his father.

The Government of Norway supports the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement as the way forward towards a
peaceful solution to the conflict in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We note with great interest
President Joseph Kabila's expressed desire to pursue a
policy of reconciliation, and we urge the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo to engage in
constructive dialogue with all involved parties in
accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement,
including through the rapid commencement of a
constructive inter-Congolese dialogue. Full
commitment to peaceful negotiations remains
indispensable in the search for a lasting solution to the
conflict in the war-torn country of the Democratic
Republic ofthe Congo.

Against that background, we look forward to
immediate and constructive initiatives from President
Joseph Kabila that will re-energize the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement, and we would also like to
welcome his expressed intent to cooperate fully with
the United Nations Organization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUC). It is
important to facilitate the full deployment of MONUC.
Furthermore, all parties involved in the conflict must
continue to exercise restraint and must comply with the
provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions.

The implementation of the Lusaka Ceasefire
Agreement must be based on full respect for the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and on the legitimate security
concerns of all parties, including States neighbouring
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
Government of Norway emphasizes the need for the
complete withdrawal of all foreign forces from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo based on schedules
drawn up by the United Nations, the Organization of
African Unity and the Joint Military Commission; the
disarmament and demobilization of armed groups; and
the subsequent safe return of refugees and internally
displaced persons. We urge all parties and ethnic and
armed groups to cease acts of violence against
civilians, to respect and protect human rights, and to
ensure the safety and security of all international
personnel.

Furthermore, the efforts to rebuild a peaceful and
democratic Democratic Republic of the Congo must
take due account of the ongoing illegal exploitation of
natural resources and other forms of wealth in the
country. We strongly urge the parties to the conflict to
cooperate with the United Nations panel of experts
established in that regard. The role of diamonds and
other forms of resource wealth in fuelling conflict is
well established, and any party's lack of cooperation
with the expert panel will be viewed in that light.

A number of high-level meetings have taken
place over the course of the past few months,
indicating the willingness of leaders to support peace
efforts in the Great Lakes region. My Government
wholeheartedly supports such regional initiatives.
Notwithstanding the responsibility of the Congolese
Government and of Congolese leaders in generating
democratic developments in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, the active and constructive involvement
of African leaders is crucial for the achievement of
comprehensive and sustainable peace in the region. My
Government attaches great importance to the planned
meeting between the Political Committee of the Lusaka
Ceasefire Agreement and the Security Council, to be
held in New York later this month. We urge the parties
to explore thoroughly, through prior regional
consultations, the political avenues that could be
available for further consideration at that meeting. In
that light, we note with interest the recent meeting in
Washington between President Kabila and President
Kagame.

The Government of Norway has supported
financially the efforts to facilitate the process towards
inter-Congolese dialogue, and we would consider
doing so again if tangible progress were to emerge.
Last year, Norway also allocated some $20 million to
humanitarian and peace-building assistance to the
Great Lakes region. Through our budget for 2001, a
similar amount has been tentatively allocated with a
View to contributing to conflict resolution in the
broader perspective of development.

In conclusion, let me compliment the work done
so far, under the most difficult of circumstances, by the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes region, Mr. Dinka; the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Morjane; the
MONUC Force Commander; military and civilian
personnel; and other United Nations and international
personnel, including those of non-governmental
organizations, operating in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.

