Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank the delegations of
Jordan and the United Kingdom for taking the initiative
to draft and present the timely resolution 2201 (2015)
on the situation in Yemen, which Angola was very
honoured to sponsor. It is our hope that its unanimous
adoption will make a tangible contribution to the
mediation efforts that Special Adviser Jamal Benomar
is deploying for a dialogue towards a peaceful political
settlement to the extremely grave situation in Yemen,
which was created by the strategy of the Houthi faction
to take over all Government institutions, dissolve the
Parliament and hold President Mansour and Prime
Minister Baha under house arrest. We urge their
immediate release. By their actions, the Houthis are
seriously harming the prospects for a peaceful transition
process, to which whey are signatories. The immediate
result of such an approach is to further alienate and
radicalize other political actors, thereby setting up a
scenario with unforeseen consequences - but certainly
including further suffering, pain and sorrow for the
Yemeni people.

We are aware that there are difficult times ahead,
but we hope that the situation will not degenerate
even further and that it is still possible to salvage the
political transition based on the Peace and National
Partnership Agreement. As events unfold, we are
particularly concerned about the growing threat of
the country's fragmentation, with southern Yemen
moving to secession, the increasing sectarian nature of
the conflict and the new opportunities that Al-Qaida
is enjoying - a trend whose reversal is absolutely
imperative.

By adopting today's resolution, the Security
Council is sending a clear and strong message to the
Houthi leadership and to all Yemeni stakeholders that it
is in everyone's best interest to resume dialogue under
the framework provided by the Gulf Coopderation
Council Initiative, the National Dialogue Conference
outcomes and the Peace and National Partnership
Agreement, and, by doing so, safeguard the political
transition framework that, by their actions, the Houthis
have dangerously undermined. We strongly urge all the
parties to abide by resolution 2201 (2015) and to reach
the much-neded compromises. Otherwise, mayhem,
civil war, totalitarianism and an Al-Qaida-like regime
might lie ahead for Yemen.

The countries of the region, the Gulf Cooperation
Council and all actors with some leverage on Yemeni
actors should assume their responsibilities towards
the Yemeni people and give a chance to political
compromise and, ultimately, to peace.

