Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to join previous speakers in thanking you,
Mr. President, for having convened this informative
debate on peacekeeping operations. Their role,
although crucial - as attested by their proliferation -
is increasingly being questioned today as a result of the
difficulties that they face in achieving their objectives
and the limited capacities of the United Nations.

The main point of holding this debate on our
quest for a pragmatic approach to the transition from
peacekeeping operations to peacebuilding is, we all
agree, to enable the United Nations to deepen its
consideration of the ways and means to make
peacekeeping operations more effective, of shorter
duration and more predictable in terms of their end
date. In so doing, as was rightly underscored by the
Secretary-General, our Organization should be able to
usefully reduce its presence in the security sector and
increase it in other, more decisive areas of
peacebuilding.

Indeed, it is not the length of a peacekeeping
operation that guarantees its success. In fact, a great
many peacekeeping operations of egregious duration
have not achieved significant progress. The reasons for
this failure - or paradox - were underscored by
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations
Alain Le Roy. Establishing a good mandate for a good
exit from a crisis requires more constructive political
commitment at the outset and, of course, a more
forward-looking approach in laying the foundations for
a country to emerge from crisis.

It is obvious that the key to a good exit strategy
lies in the mandates of peacekeeping operations. It thus
seems to be important, as the Brahimi report (see S/2000/809) recommends, to rethink them in an
objective way in order to have a clear idea about the
changes that are needed in their design and structure.

It is true that for a few years now, the United
Nations has significantly improved the design, conduct
and implementation of peacekeeping operations. It is
also true that these developments have essentially led
the United Nations to into account the need to clearly
define clear, credible and achievable mandates that can
guarantee the success of peacekeeping operations.
Rethinking peacekeeping mandates involves
revisiting both the philosophy and the process of their
implementation. As many speakers have stressed, a
good mandate must take the causes of a conflict into
account, and its implementation should be underpinned
by robust planning of its various phases and sequences,
and by the identification of criteria that define the
appropriate moment for exit. It is clear that mandate
implementation should be marked by realistic stages,
accompanied by anticipated achievements, quantifiable
benchmarks and well-defined priorities to prevent the
United Nations from being bogged down and resources
from being wasted that would be more useful in other
sectors.

Mandates should also include mechanisms for
cooperation with neighbouring States to prevent
possible incursions by destabilizing forces. Let us not
forget that the crises we face too often have regional
implications, which of course can be managed only
through an approach that takes this aspect into account.
I note that this crucial phase in the drafting of a
mandate should be subordinated to the dispatch to the
field of multisectoral and multidisciplinary scouting
teams to identify precisely the optimal conditions for
the conduct of the mission. It would be equally useful
to systematize the establishment of a technical
evaluation mission to determine a peacekeeping
mission's exit strategy.

The end of a peacekeeping operation increasingly
requires, on the one hand, that security conditions be
satisfactory and, on the other, the restoration of a
modicum of a functional State, characterized by the
resumption of basic systems of governance, such as
judicial institutions, police forces, penitentiary
services, civil administration and public services.
Elections are often considered to be the conclusion of
post-conflict transition. However, they can lead to the
withdrawal of the United Nations presence only if the
prior conditions are fulfilled. We must therefore ensure
that a country's stability is irreversible and that the
restoration of Government has been concluded.

We must also ensure that peace agreements
concluded between the parties concerned have been
applied and implemented in good faith to the
satisfaction of the parties, and that the immediate
causes of the conflict have been addressed. It is clear
that the progressive reduction and drawdown of a
peacekeeping operation and its transition to the
consolidation and peacebuilding phase depend to a
large extent on evaluation of progress achieved in
relation to the objectives laid out in the mandate.

We believe that, in order to better take these
stages of a mission into account, any peacekeeping
mandate should provide for a civil component that
would, in cooperation with local Government, assess
progress achieved by the mission pursuant to fixed
objectives, and that would propose a transition towards
peacebuilding. During the transition, the capacity-
building of security and defence forces should be
accelerated to ensure that national forces are in a
position to assume responsibility for the mechanism
deployed by the peacekeeping operation.

We believe that the success of a peacekeeping
operation also requires additional coordination efforts
within the United Nations to strengthen peacekeeping
partnerships. The Secretariat, the members of the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the troop-
contributing countries, donors and other partners
within and outside the United Nations system are all
called on to play a critical role in that respect.
Similarly, the United Nations should strive to
strengthen partnerships between the Government in a
crisis situation and international actors.

These, in our view, are the elements necessary to
the establishment of effective transition and exit
strategies for peacekeeping operations leading to the
peacebuilding phase. In conclusion, I express our
support for the draft presidential statement presented
by France.

