Ms. Hodzie (Bosnia and Herzegovina): At the
outset, I wish to thank you, Madam President, for
organizing this important debate on the working
methods of the Security Council. I would also like to
congratulate you, Madam President, for Argentina's
very active and successful two-year chairmanship of
the Informal Working Group on Documentation and
Other Procedural Questions. I would also like to thank
the Ombudsperson, Ms. Kimberly Prost, and Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for their respective comprehensive briefings.

With regard to increasing transparency and
interaction with non-Council members and bodies,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as former Chair of the
Informal Working Group, has raised the issue of
increasing transparency in the Council's work and has
suggested to Informal Working Group members that
they consider the idea of holding regular briefings
on Security Council working methods for States that
are not members of the Council. Keeping in mind the
complexity of promoting such an initiative, I wish to
congratulate Argentina on its able stewardship of the
Informal Working Group, which resulted in the note by
the President contained in document S/2013/515. We
call upon Council members to fulfil their commitments
set forth in that note, as it supports maintaining regular
communication with the Peacebuilding Commission
and the Chairs of the country-specific configurations,
enhancing cooperation with regional and subregional
organizations, and encouraging the subsidiary bodies
to improve the transparency of their activities.

With respect to non-members' contribution to the
Council's work, Bosnia and Herzegovina's experience
in the 1990s, when the first Arria Formula meeting was
organized, indicates that civil society and non-State
actors can contribute significantly to the understanding
of certain situations. We therefore invite Council
members to intensify informal forms of dialogue with
non-members, particularly in the form of Arria Formula
meetings.

On implementing the peacekeeping mandates with
more efficiency, Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a police
contributor, encourages frequent regular briefings and
consultations and more interactive dialogue by the
Council with troop- and police-contributing countries,
as outlined in the note by the President contained
in document S/2013/630. For 14 years, Bosnia and
Herzegovina has engaged in peacekeeping operations.
Until now, we have had 212 police officers, including
female officers, participating in United Nations
operations. Currently, 47 police officers from Bosnia
and Herzegovina, 21 per cent of whom are female,
have been deployed in United Nations peacekeeping
missions in Liberia, South Sudan and Cyprus.

One month ago, during the high-level week,
Ministers gathered to support the French initiative
on the voluntary commitment of the Permanent
Five to refrain from using the veto in situations of
genocide and mass atrocities. Bosnia and Herzegovina
wholeheartedly supports this initiative. At that event,
the Foreign Minister of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Mr. Zlatko Lagumdzija, said:

"Speaking from the lessons learned in my
country - from Tomasica to Srebrenica - the
international community needs to introduce a code
of conduct in working methods of the Security
Council that, through the refraining from the
use of the veto in cases of mass atrocities, will
strengthen the international community's capacity,
responsibility and commitment to protecting
civilians."

In that regard, we also support the work of the United
Nations Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide.

In accordance with the Charter, the Security Council
is responsible for the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is therefore crucial that the
Council ensures that a peace will be durable, which,
in cases of suspected genocide, war crimes and other
forms of mass atrocities, can only be attained through
the rule of law and achieving justice. One of the ways
thatjustice can be achieved is by referring certain cases
to the International Criminal Court (ICC). Bosnia and
Herzegovina joins the countries that have requested a
more efficient follow-up to the Council's referrals to
the ICC. Establishing accountability and achieving
justice are preconditions for success in peacebuilding
and reconciliation processes, as well as for durable and
stable peace and security in conflict and post-conflict
situations.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has always advocated for
more efficient, transparent and interactive working
methods in the Security Council, and we remain
committed to continue our engagement together with
the members and non-members of the Security Council
alike in initiatives and dialogue with a View to further
improving the Council's practices.

