Mrs. Perceval (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened today's open debate. I would also like to thank
you, Sir, for the concept paper (S/2014/30, annex).

The proposal made by Jordan for today's debate
leads to a discussion on how we can put into practice
the purposes and principles of the United Nations, the
Organization that was established as a result of the
tragic and traumatic experience of the Second World
War, its main objective being the promotion of peace
through the prohibition of the use of armed force. As
the concept paper states, today there are different types
of conflict and situations that, without fitting into the
traditional concept of war, still present threats and risks
to international peace and security. We are living in an
era that is almost completely dominated by internal
conflicts, an era where we have seen the commission
of serious human rights violations, including genocide.

We say that we live in a world without wars, if by
that we mean the brutal configurations of wars between
nations or groups of countries of the twentieth century,
such as those we saw in the First and Second World
Wars. However, we do not live in a world without
conflict or confrontations or fights over interests.
We believe that the attainment of a world without
wars in the sense of traditional wars is due to the
creation of military technology of terrible destructive
power. Indeed, contemporary weapons are capable of
destroying humankind many times over, so war between
great Powers has become nonsensical and improbable,
although not impossible.

However, we can also describe our era as being
one that is intensely destructive and marked by the
proliferation of indiscriminate violence that strikes,
terrorizes and kills innocent men and women, young
people, children, contradicting the ethnical principle
that no one should be used for others' purposes. Why
do I say that? It is clear that today the interests of power
centres with greater economic and military might in the
globalized world and the objectives of circumstantially
based and flexible alliances of power between different
Powers to control or condition the fate of certain
countries or regions, generally those of developing
countries, are alien to the peoples and communities that
need, desire and crave a life of dignity and a world of
peace. Proof can be seen in the exponential increase
in the number of civilian victims in conflicts - from
20 per cent during the First World War to 50 per
cent in the Second World War to 80 or 90 per cent in
contemporary armed conflicts, destroying thereby
the basic principle of personal responsibility and the
exclusion of responsibility for external factors that are
part of modern life.

It is important to point out that there are new
scenarios, new actors and different dimensions where
new forms of violence appear in relation to powerful
but age-old economic and military structures of
domination and discipline or new threats that come from
the actions of non-State actors. We are talking about
acts of terrorism, the globalization of organized crime,
savage and predatory struggles for natural resources,
and various forms of authoritarian fundamentalism.
But we are also talking about ethical and political
violence that generate and compound hunger, exclusion,
discrimination and inequality in order to protect the
privileges of powerful or affluent minorities in the
light of majorities that are devastated by poverty and
uncertainty. The actions and decisions of the globalized
financial power centres, for example, show that today
war can be done through other means.

Before the Charter of the United Nations, there
were humanitarian norms on war, such as The Hague
Convention of 1907, but only with the United Nations
did the principle of peace become a supreme standard
of international law and the relations between nations.
However, we know that there is a great gap between
what is said in the Charter and reality. We know that we
have contributed significantly in the Organization to
the objective of containing the deepening and expansion
of conflicts. But we also know that we have not been
extremely coherent and effective in preventing them.

It is crucial that the rule of law and the effective
exercise in equal conditions of all peoples of the right
to sustainable development and the harmonizing of the
goals of justice and peace through the strengthening
of national capabilities but also through international
mechanisms that fight against impunity, such as the
International Criminal Court, be recognized as some of
the most important challenges we have to take on.

To conclude, I believe that it is crucial that we
put into practice regional and universal early-warning
mechanisms to prevent atrocities, an aspect in which
regional and national scope becomes essential to
cooperation and dialogue in order for the rule of law
to be strengthened. I would like to highlight the Latin
American and Caribbean region's commitment to
observing and strengthening the rule oflaw, in particular
through the adoption of democratic instruments.

We face a number of challenges - economic,
social, environmental, political, ethical and cultural in
nature. One of them entails leaving behind the vestiges
of old imperialist vices, which emerge as colonial
anachronisms that persist in the twenty-first century
itself. To do so, we must redouble the Organization's
efforts for the eradication of colonialism, which was
one of the United Nations founding goals, taking into
account the particularities of each situation.

My country believes it appropriate to highlight
the need to resolve conflicts through dialogue in order
to contribute to their peaceful resolution. Among the
means for peaceful resolution at the disposal of the
Organization and its States Members is the role of the
good offices that the Organization can entrust to the
Secretary-General. Good offices missions or any other
means for the peaceful resolution of conflicts will
achieve their desired result if parties to the conflict
fulfil their responsibilities in good faith in those
processes.

Ensuring peace was the clear purpose of the
Organization's founders, but to ensure that it is lasting,
not only is the Security Council required to act,
but also all United Nations organs and the different
Member States as well, to build true multilateralism
in full equality, in accordance with the purposes and
principles of the Charter.

