Mr. Moriko (C6te d'Ivoire) (spoke in French): My
delegation commends Mr. Martin Griffiths, Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for Yemen, and Mr. Mark
Lowcock, Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs and Emergency Relief Coordinator, for their
detailed briefings on developments in Yemen. We also
thank Ms. Virginia Gamba, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed
Conflict, and Ms. Muna Luqman, Chairperson of the
Food for Humanity, for their briefings and their strong
commitment to the peace process in Yemen.

Cote d'Ivoire welcomes the adoption of resolutions

2451 (2018), 2452 (2019) and 2456 (2019), which
respectively established the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and the United Nations Mission to Support
the Hudaydah Agreement (UNMHA) and renewed the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2140 (2014) and the mandate of the Panel of
Experts. However, we note with regret that despite the
progress that has been made, including the conclusion
of the Stockholm Agreement, providing for a ceasefire
and the withdrawal of forces, there have been more than
3,000 cases of violations of the truce. Since 2015, the
continuing hostilities have forced Yemen to endure the
worst humanitarian crisis in the world, according to
the United Nations. It has affected nearly 22 million
Yemenis, 14 million of whom are acutely food insecure
and exposed to endemic diseases that are difficult to
eradicate. In addition, C6te d'Ivoire remains particularly
concerned about the resurgence of the problem of child
soldiers in the Yemeni crisis.

We are also deeply concerned about the extent
of the dropout rate affecting children in Yemen.
According to the United Nations, more than 2 million
of the 7 million children of school age are not in
school. According to several non-governmental human
rights organizations, that situation is the result of the
non-payment of teachers' salaries and the destruction
of school buildings. We condemn the attacks on
schools and call on all the parties to the conflict to
implement the United Nations action plan to end the
use of child soldiers in Yemen and respect the Optional
Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child
on the involvement of children in armed conflict. In
that regard, my delegation would like to commend
UNICEF for all its efforts in support of education in
Yemen and encourage it to continue its programme for
paying the salaries of approximately 100,000 teachers
in arrears. We welcomed the holding on 26 February of
a pledging conference in Geneva at which donors raised
the significant amount of $2.6 billion for financing the
United Nations humanitarian response plan in 2019.
My country also urges the warring parties to respect
their commitments and calls on them to observe the
ceasefire, which is an essential condition for the safe and
unhindered delivery of food, aid and basic necessities
to populations in distress.

In conclusion, my country urges the actors in the
Yemeni conflict to prioritize dialogue with a view to
reaching a political settlement of the crisis, respect
their obligations under international humanitarian
law and refrain from any unilateral action that could
undermine the peace process. We affirm our support to
Mr. Griffiths and Mr. Lowcock for their commitment
to a definitive and lasting resolution of the crisis in
Yemen, as well as to the Redeployment Coordination
Committee and UNMHA observation teams for their
determination to bring the peace process to a successful
conclusion. We once again commend Ms. Gamba for her
commitment to taking action to combat the systematic
use of child soldiers in the crisis in Yemen and urge
Ms. Luqman to continue her efforts as part of a more
inclusive peace process.

