The President: I shall now make a statement in my
national capacity.

I thank Mr. Mladenov for his briefing.

I have listened to my colleagues' statements this
afternoon with great interest. I have always been open
about my belief that this Middle East debate has been
excessively and unfairly focused on Israel. Today, I will
go one step further. The Palestinian-Israeli conflict
is serious and worthy of the Council's attention, but
if there is one country that is the source of conflict
and instability in the Middle East - one country that
merits a quarterly debate in the Security Council - that
country is not Israel. It is Iran.

For almost 40 years, the Iranian regime has existed
outside the community of law-abiding nations. It is
difficult to name a conflict in the Middle East that does
not have Iran's fingerprints on it. The Iranian regime
has backed dictators who gas their own people. It
stokes conflict. It funds foreign fighters and terrorists.
It transfers missiles to militants. It acts against the
interests and policies of the Security Council time and
time again. Across the Middle East, Iran has trampled
on the sovereignty of its neighbours in Lebanon, in
Syria and in Yemen, and the Iranian regime has shown
a total disregard of the sovereignty of a country that is
at a critical stage in its political development - Iraq.

Iran's leaders pretend that their interference in
the sovereignty of other nations is done in the name of
religious affiliation. They like to claim that they have
been invited into the affairs of other countries. In fact,
the motives of the mullahs are much less elevated. They
are interested in power. In the case of Iraq, their goal
is to exploit uncertainty in order to create an Iranian-
controlled corridor for weapons and fighters from
Tehran to the Mediterranean.

In recent months, Iran's aggression has escalated.
Iranian proxies in Iraq operate openly, with funding,
training, and weapons supplied by Tehran. The Iranian
regime has reportedly begun over the past few months
to transfer ballistic missiles to those proxies in Iraq.
It is reportedly developing the capability for its proxy
militias to produce their own missiles inside of Iraq.

In a blatant violation of Iraqi sovereignty, the
Iranian regime recently fired a barrage of missiles
from Iran into Iraq. Iran attacked the headquarters
of the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran, killing 11
people. This was an act not of Iranian proxies but of the
Tehran regime itself. It was Iran's first direct military
strike into Iraqi territory in over a decade. That Iranian
interference in the sovereignty of Iraq should be of
great interest to the Security Council for many reasons,
not least of which is because it occurs in clear defiance
of Security Council resolutions.

Iranian General and Head of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps Quds Force Qasem
Soleimani is leading an effort to influence the
composition of a new Iraqi Government. I remind my
colleagues that Soleimani was banned from travelling
outside of Iran by the Security Council in 2007. That
ban was reaffirmed in 2015 with the adoption of
resolution 2231 (2015). Despite that unambiguous
travel ban, Soleimani has practically taken up residence
in Iraq since the May elections. That fact was noted by
the Secretary-General in his most recent report on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/602).
And let us be clear about what Soleimani is up to in
Iraq. He is not there to help create a Government in
Baghdad that is responsive to the Iraqi people. He is
there to build an Iraqi Government that is under the
control of the Iranian regime.

Iran treats Iraq as if it were not an independent
nation. Iran sees Iraq as merely a transit point for
Iranian weapons and a training ground for Iranian
proxies. Iran seeks to keep Iraq economically weak and
dependent on its exports, even though Iraq has plenty
of its own resources. Why? Because Iran wants to use a
weak Iraq to illicitly fund its terrorist activities.

There is one more recent Iranian escalation that
bears special consequence to Americans. Two weeks
ago, two Iranian proxy groups launched rocket attacks
on the American Embassy in Baghdad and the United
States Consulate in Basra. Using proxy forces in Iraq
does not give the Iranian regime plausible deniability

when attacks like this occur. The Trump Administration
does not and will not buy that. Iran could have stopped
its proxies' attacks. It chose not to, so the White House
responded by putting Tehran firmly on notice. We hold
the Iranian regime fully accountable for its proxies'
attacks on United States facilities and personnel in
Iraq, and we will not hesitate to vigorously defend
American lives.

The sovereignty of Member States is an issue
that comes up a lot in the Security Council - for
good reason. Every nation has the sovereign right to
govern itself, protect its people and defend its borders.
No less than any nation, Iraq has that right. And yet,
at a critical time in its history, as Iraqis build their
Government, Iran is acting in shameless disregard
of Iraqi sovereignty. It is threatening populations to
promote its own political leaders. It is undermining a
key feature of sovereignty - a State monopoly on the
use of force - by promoting its own militias.

The United States is committed to working with
Iraq to help it create an inclusive and independent
Government. Iraq is working to recover from years of
conflict against the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham,
and still to overcome the legacy of Saddam Hussein's
tyranny. Not only is Iranian interference preventing
forward progress for the Iraqi people; it is pulling them
backward to the conflict and division they are striving
to put behind them. That is the very same conflict
and division that Iran promotes in Syria, Yemen and
Lebanon and across the Middle East. All members
of the Security Council that respect the principle of
national sovereignty should be concerned, and all that
respect the right to self-determination of the Iraqi
people should come to their defence.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my list.

The meeting rose at 5pm.
