Mr. Buallay (Bahrain) (interpretation from Arabic):
The Security Council adopted many resolutions to confront
the Iraqi occupation of the State of Kuwait in 1990,
including the imposition of a comprehensive embargo on
Iraq, because it violated the principles of international
legitimacy. Asking Iraq to comply fully with the
implementation of the relevant Security Council
resolutions is nothing more than the consequence of my
country's desire to have the imposed embargo lifted
thereafter. This is the embargo whose negative effects
have been borne by the Iraqi people.

The information emanating from various United
Nations specialized agencies, particularly from the United
Nations Children's Fund, the Food and Agriculture
Organization and the World Health Organization reveal
the deteriorating health and nutritional conditions of Iraqi
people from all sectors of the population, including the
elderly, women and children. The mortality rate has
reached frightening proportions. Subsequently, the
Security Council adopted resolution 986 (1995) as a
contribution towards addressing the deteriorating situation
by allowing Iraq to export a quantity of its oil, valued at
$2 billion, every six months. That sum is earmarked to
meet the increasing needs of the Iraqi people for food and
medicine, which is known as the oil-for-food programme.

With the continuation of sanctions and since the
adoption of the resolution mentioned earlier, whereby the
international community is asking Iraq to implement the
relevant Security Council resolutions, resolution 986
(1995) has proved itself unable to deal sufficiently with
the deteriorating situation of the Iraqi people because the
amount provided by that resolution is not sufficient. In
addition, the resolution faced difficulties in its
implementation. Hence, the Security Council has
discussed the deteriorating situation with concern, and, as
a result, it adopted resolutions 1111 (1997) and 1129
(1997). Furthermore, the Security Council has asked the
Secretary-General, in accordance with its resolution 1143
(1997), to study that deteriorating situation and to submit
a report in that regard, including his recommendations to
address the situation. The report of the Secretary-General
(S/ 1998/90) explained in detail the unsettling living
conditions affecting the health and living standards under
which the Iraqi people have suffered as a result of the
continued sanctions. The Secretary-General's
recommendations were positive with respect to their
contribution towards meeting that situation in connection
with doubling the value of the medicine and food protein
basket. They also included bolstering the health and
medical treatment assistance and the repair of the
infrastructure, education, agriculture, and so on. The
report also stressed the need to ensure that this assistance
reaches the Iraqi people.

 

Conscious of the depth of its responsibility towards
addressing the negative social situation in Iraq, the
members of the Council have worked seriously and
strenuously for 20 days to produce an integrated draft
resolution, which is before us today for adoption. The
crystallization of this draft was accompanied by an
exchange of viewpoints reflecting some divergence. This is
natural in view of the multiplicity of elements of the oil-
for-food programme and the concomitant complexity of the
means of its implementation. However, we have at last at
the end of our endeavours reached a positive result.

The State of Bahrain finds that the present draft
resolution is to be regarded a necessary measure with
respect to its taking into consideration the recommendations
of the Secretary-General concerning the increase in the
amounts allocated to food and medicine. However, we have
a few observations as follows:

First, the draft resolution should be implemented with
the full cooperation of the Iraqi authorities. Secondly, the
measures proposed in its operative paragraphs are not
characterized by flexibility and by distancing from
bureaucracy. These are the two conditions which must
obtain in order to ensure quick and streamlined
implementation, so that the humanitarian assistance can
reach the Iraqi people in a timely manner. We understand
the Security Council's cautious approach which aims at
ensuring that the assistance reaches its real destination. But
too much control would definitely lead to a degree of delay
in the delivery of that assistance to the Iraqi people, which
is embodied in the resolution before us today.
Thirdly, my delegation supports all the
recommendations contained in the Secretary-General's
report on which today's draft resolution is based, including
his recommendations concerning permission of the export
of the necessary equipment to Iraq in order to enable it to
export its oil. Therefore, the group proposed to be formed
for this purpose, mentioned in operative paragraph 12 of the
draft resolution, should finish its job within the time
specified as necessary for the exportation of the Iraqi oil, in
accordance with this draft resolution.

Fourthly, my country, once again, reaffirms before the
Council that the present draft resolution is not in any way
linked to resolution 687 (1991), related to the destruction of
weapons of mass destruction. Thus we are focusing on the
purely humanitarian nature of today's draft resolution,
which concentrates on addressing the deteriorating
conditions of the Iraqi people. Fifthly, my delegation
affirms the need to respect the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Iraq. This is stressed in the eighth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution that is before us today.

Finally, the State of Bahrain considers the present
resolution as the climax of positive and important
responsiveness by the Security Council resulting from the
Council's efforts in support of humanitarian assistance
directed to the Iraqi people. My delegation also finds that
this draft resolution is very well timed as it coincides with
the peaceful mission of the Secretary-General, which he,
at present, is undertaking in Baghdad in pursuit of his
good offices to deal with the current crisis between Iraq
and the United Nations Special Commission.

The adoption of this draft resolution could be an
incentive to give more weight to the peaceful solution of
the crisis with a view to the protection of the Security
Council's credibility and position, and the enabling of
Iraq, the region and the world to avoid the scourge of
non-pacific options in view of their devastating
consequences. We therefore will support the draft
resolution and vote in its favour.

