The President (spoke in Russian): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of the
Russian Federation.

We are grateful to Mr. Kubis and Mr. Fedotov
for their detailed briefings, and to Mr. Tanin for his
interesting statement.

The Russian delegation aligns itself with the
statement to be made by the Permanent Representative
of the Kyrgyz Republic on behalf of the member States
of the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO).

For our part, we also wish to emphasize the historic
importance of the presidential and provincial elections.
The fact that they were successfully conducted, despite
attempts by terrorists and extremist forces to disrupt
them, confirms the Afghan people's commitment to a
strong, independent and democratic State. However,
we find it unsettling that the process has been fraught
with uncertainty, which arose after the second round
of presidential elections. We hope that all grievances
and disputes related to the electoral process and vote
counting will be settled legally, in the higher interests
of the Afghan people.

At this critical juncture, we reiterate the need for a
fair and comprehensive analysis of the risks and threats
facing Afghanistan. The aggressive activities of the
Taliban, Al-Qaida and other terrorist and extremist
groups is causing a significant increase in civilian
casualties and losses among the Afghan security forces
personnel. Despite their dedication, armed opposition,

fuelled by internal and external sources, including
through drug production and drug trafficking, are
entrenching themselves in large areas of the country,
including regions that had been completely controlled
by the Government. There is a deteriorating situation
in the south, south-east and east, where more than
60 per cent of all security incidents have occurred.
It is troubling that Al-Qaida affiliated groups have
felt increasingly free to conduct brazen attacks on
Government forces in coordination with the Taliban
and other extremist groups.

We are particularly concerned about the
growth of terrorist activity and the strengthening of
anti-Government forces in the north and north-east,
directly bordering our friends and allies in the CSTO
and the Commonwealth of Independent States. The
armed opposition groups now total more than 10,000,
while three to four years ago, north Afghanistan was
relatively peaceful. There is a clearly visible trend of
terrorist activity overflowing Afghanistan's borders,
as evidenced by the increasingly frequent cross-border
incidents. This creates new challenges to the security
of Central Asia.

We hope that, by the end of this year, the International
Security Assistance Force (ISAF) will fully report to the
Security Council on the implementation of its mandate.
The question remains of a possible foreign military
presence in Afghanistan after 2014. In any case, when
deciding what stabilization actions are necessary, a
foreign military contingent should no longer be needed
in Afghanistan.

Russia fully supports the efforts of the Afghan
Government to promote national reconciliation. We
agree with our Afghan friends that a leading role should
be played by the Afghans themselves. Dialogue with
the armed opposition should be organized based on a
triad of principles: fighters must renounce violence,
recognize the Constitution and cut ties with Al-Qaida.
There can be no attempts to dilute those principles or
weaken the Security Council sanctions regime with the
allegedly noble goal of speeding up dialogue, because
the results will indeed be the opposite of those desired.

Today's debate on the situation in Afghanistan is
held on the eve of the International Day against Drug
Use and Illicit Trafficking on 26 June. Unfortunately,
we regret that despite the concerted efforts of the
international community and the Government of
Afghanistan, the situation of the illegal production
and trafficking of drugs and narcotics in the country
is not improving, but actually tending to worsen.
Afghanistan is turning into one of the global hubs of
drug production, as evidenced by data from the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. The volume of
illegally cultivated Afghan opiate poppy continues to
rise. In the past year, areas under cultivation increased
by 36 per cent as compared with those of 2012. At the
same time, there has been a 50 per cent increase in the
production of opium.

In that regard, the presence of many thousands of
ISAF troops withdrew, under various pretexts, from
active combat related to narcotics production, despite
the obvious risks that the trafficking presents for
stabilization in Afghanistan. We encourage the new
Afghan leadership to make counter-narcotics efforts a
priority. Without solving that issue there can be neither
healthy development nor stability in the country or
the region. It would seem that this moment could be a
turning point in terms of scaling up international efforts
to combat the scourge of drug trafficking, in close
coordination with the Government of Afghanistan.
Of particular importance in that regard is the need
for consistent steps towards furthering cooperation in
bilateral, regional, subregional and multilateral formats,
primarily with the countries of the region, based on the
principle of common and shared responsibility.

Among the most urgent measures to combat the threat
of drugs we would place the consolidation of counter-
narcotics institutions, along with the development
of international, inter-State and non-governmental
mechanisms for drug rehabilitation, enhanced targeted
pressure on the Afghan drug industry, strategic
anti-drug operations, increased police cooperation
and the pursuit of a common agricultural policy,
including through the implementation of alternative
development programmes in Afghanistan that speed up
the industrialization of the country.

We believe that the promotion of alternative
development programmes could be the key to freeing
Afghan society from the domination of the drug
economy. Such programmes should be extended to the
whole of Afghanistan, and should be made the major
thrust of the country's economic development. In
that context, I would like to note that the Ministerial
Conference on Counter-Narcotics held in Moscow on
15 May adopted an outcome document providing for
a set of measures that would strengthen international
efforts to eradicate the drug problem, in particular
by drawing up a comprehensive plan for alternative
development in Afghanistan from 2015 to 2020, and by
creating a global alliance for alternative development.
The participants at the meeting also agreed on the need to
create an international drug rehabilitation fund to assist
individual countries in establishing national systems for
comprehensive rehabilitation and re-socialization for
drug users. And there was support for Russia's proposal
to establish an international headquarters to combat
the Afghan drug threat with the aim of consolidating
the disparate anti-drug programmes in Afghanistan
and establishing effective, internationally controlled
mechanisms for eradicating drug production.

Given the massive negative geopolitical impact of
the industrial production of Afghan narcotics, it would
seem pertinent to consider including that issue on
the agenda of the 2016 special session of the General
Assembly on the global narcotics problem. At the same
time, preparations for that meeting should be based on
a comprehensive approach to the drug issue, relying on
the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs as a
key United Nations body in that area.

In conclusion, we fully believe that there is a
need to bolster regional cooperation in order to assist
Afghanistan in building a peaceful, independent and
economically prosperous State. We believe that the
ideal platform for synchronizing regional efforts
to assist Afghanistan is the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization, in which practically all countries in the
region, including Afghanistan, are represented.

Achieving tangible results in the stabilization of
Afghanistan and its development as an independent
and peaceful State, free of terrorism and drug-
related crime, requires collective, coordinated effort.
Invaluable assistance to that end will be provided by
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan,
whose role as the international military presence draws
down will only increase. For its part, Russia is open to
mutually beneficial partnerships with all stakeholders
in the implementation of significant projects that will
help Afghanistan guarantee sustainable development,
well-being and prosperity for all its citizens.

The President (spoke in Russian): I will now
resume my role as President of the Security Council.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council welcomes the holding
of the second round of the Afghan presidential
election on 14 June and reiterates the importance of
these historic elections to Afghanistan's transition
and democratic development. It commends the
participation and courage of the Afghan people to
cast their ballot despite the threat and intimidation
by the Taliban and other violent extremist
and terrorist groups. It further commends the
participation of Afghan women in the electoral
process, and underlines the key role that they play
in Afghan-led peace, democracy and stability.

"The Security Council notes positively the
efforts of the Afghan people to prepare for and hold
these elections, including security arrangements,
and reiterates the important role of the Afghan
electoral institutions, including the Independent
Election Commission and the Independent
Electoral Complaints Commission. It calls upon
Afghan electoral institutions to uphold the highest
standards of integrity throughout this important
and historic process, and emphasizes that all efforts
must be made to ensure the integrity, neutrality and
transparency of the electoral process, including the
detection and prevention of fraud.

"The Security Council calls on all stakeholders
to engage with the electoral institutions and
processes with patience and respect, refrain from
any acts that incite imminent violence and civil
disorder or lead to instability, and to channel
complaints through the established institutional
mechanisms in line with Afghanistan's electoral
laws and Constitution.

"The Security Council looks forward to the
conclusion of the electoral process in accordance
with the relevant laws and mandates of the electoral
institutions and the orderly transition to a new
administration and welcomes the ongoing support
role of the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council calls on all political
entities to work together in accordance with the
Afghan Constitution, with the aim of strengthening
Afghanistan's sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity in order to
achieve a peaceful and prosperous future for all the
people of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council condemns the actions
of those who attempted to disrupt the elections,
such as terrorist attacks against civilians, including
election personnel and candidates, as well as attacks
against election infrastructure. It condemns violent
and terrorist activities by the Taliban, Al-Qaida
and other violent and extremist groups and illegal
armed groups aimed at destabilizing the situation
in the country.

"The Security Council recognizes the sacrifices
of the Afghan people and Afghan National Security
Forces during the election period, and reiterates
that no terrorist act can reverse the path towards
Afghan-led peace, democracy and stability."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/ll.

Following consultations among Council members,
I have been authorized to make the following statement
on their behalf:

"The Security Council reaffirms its strong
commitment to the sovereignty, independence,
territorial integrity and national unity of
Afghanistan.

"The Security Council recognizes the threat
posed by the production, trade, trafficking of
illicit drugs to international peace and stability in
different regions of the world and the important
role played by the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) in this regard.

"The Security Council expresses concern at
the increase in poppy production as noted in the
UNODC Afghanistan Opium Survey 2013, noting the
serious harm that opium cultivation, production,
trafficking and consumption continues to cause
to the stability, security, social and economic
development and governance of Afghanistan as well
as to the region and internationally, and stresses the
important role of the United Nations to continue
to monitor the drug situation in Afghanistan.
The Council encourages International Security
Assistance Force to further effectively support,
within its designated responsibilities, Afghan-
led sustained efforts, including efforts by the
Afghan National Security Forces, to address drug
production and trafficking, in cooperation with
relevant international and regional actors.

"The Security Council notes that according to
the World Drug Report 2013, Afghanistan remains
one of the foremost source countries for opiates and
cannabis resin.
"The Security Council reaffirms that
Afghanistan's peaceful future lies in the building
of a stable, secure, economically sustainable state,
free of terrorism and narcotics and based on the
rule of law, strengthened democratic institutions,
respect for the separation of powers, reinforced
constitutional checks and balances and the
guarantee and enforcement of citizens' rights and
obligations. The Council renews its commitment
to assisting Afghanistan on its path towards peace,
democracy and reconstruction.

"The Security Council welcomes the efforts of
the Government of Afghanistan in fighting drug
production in Afghanistan.

"The Security Council stresses the importance
of a comprehensive approach to address the
security, economic, governance and development
challenges in Afghanistan, which are of an
interconnected nature, and recognizes that there is
no purely military solution to ensure the stability
of Afghanistan.

"The Security Council calls on the United
Nations, with the support of the international
community, to support the Government of
Afghanistan's national priority programmes
covering the issues of security, governance, justice
and economic and social development and to support
the full implementation of mutual commitments
made on those issues at international conferences,
as well as on continuing implementation of the
National Drug Control Strategy, and requests
that the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan (UNAMA), in an increasingly enabling
function, assist the Government of Afghanistan on
its way towards ensuring full Afghan leadership
and ownership, as defined by the Kabul process.

"The Security Council reiterates its support for
the transition (inteqal) process, which will entail the
assumption of full responsibility by Afghanistan's
institutions in the security sector, consistent with
the London, Kabul, Bonn and Tokyo Conferences
and the NATO Lisbon and Chicago Summits.

"The Security Council stresses the central
and impartial role that the United Nations will
continue to play in promoting peace and stability
in Afghanistan by leading the efforts of the
international community.

"The Security Council reiterates its concern

about the security situation in Afghanistan, in
particular the ongoing violent and terrorist activities
by the Taliban, Al-Qaida and other violent and
extremist groups, illegal armed groups, criminals
and those involved in the production, trafficking or
trade of illicit drugs, and the strong links between
terrorism activities and illicit drugs, resulting in
threats to the local population, including women,
children, national security forces and international
military and civilian personnel, including
humanitarian and development workers.

"The Security Council notes with concern
the existing links between international security,
terrorism and transnational organized crime,
money-laundering, trafficking in illicit drugs and
illegal arms, and in this regard emphasizes the need
to enhance coordination of efforts on the national,
subregional, regional and international levels in
order to strengthen a global response to that serious
challenge and in particular to the close connections
between international terrorism and illicit drugs.
The Council welcomes the recent efforts carried
out under the Russian presidency of the Financial
Action Task Force on Money Laundering on the
identification of illicit financial flows linked to
Afghan drug production and trafficking.

"The Security Council emphasizes the need to
enhance existing interregional and international
cooperation and coordination mechanisms in
order to develop an integrated, comprehensive and
balanced response to the drug problem, including
as part of a long-term security, development and
institution-building agenda.

"The Security Council encourages an enhanced
collaboration between all relevant entities, including
the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the United Nations Assistance Mission
in Afghanistan, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations, including the United Nations Police
Division, and the United Nations Development
Programme in order to have an effective and
detailed coordination mechanism to prioritize
activities, support the National Drug Control
Strategy and ensure coordinated implementation
of a comprehensive United Nations comprehensive
approach. It encourages the inclusion of combating
drug trafficking and transnational organized crime
in the work of all relevant United Nations entities
involved in Afghanistan, in accordance with their
respective mandates and actively maximizing their
synergies.

"The Security Council reaffirms specifically
in that context its support for the implementation,
under the leadership and ownership of the Afghan
people, of the commitments set out in the London
(S/2010/65) and Kabul Conference communiques,
and of the Afghanistan National Development
Strategy and of the National Drug Control Strategy
as part of the comprehensive implementation
strategy to be taken forward by the Government
of Afghanistan with the support of the region and
the international community and with a central and
impartial coordinating role for the United Nations,
consistent with the Kabul process and in line with
the national priority programmes.

"The Security Council, stressing the crucial
importance of advancing regional and interregional
cooperation, welcomes in that regard the continued
commitment of the international community to
support stability and development in Afghanistan,
and calls on the Afghan Government, with the
assistance of the international community, to
accelerate the implementation of the National Drug
Control Strategy, including through alternative
livelihood programmes, encourages additional
international support for the four priorities identified
in that Strategy, and commends the support
provided by the UNODC to the Triangular Initiative
and the Central Asian Regional Information and
Coordination Centre within the framework of the
Paris Pact initiative and the Rainbow Strategy,
the UNODC regional programme for Afghanistan
and neighbouring countries, relevant efforts by
the Istanbul Process on Regional Security and
Cooperation for a Secure and Stable Afghanistan,
the European Union (EU) through the EU Border
Management Programme in Central Asia and
Border Management Northern Afghanistan, the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization, the Collective
Security Treaty Organization, the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation and the
Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on
Afghanistan process, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) engagementwith
Afghanistan, based on the 2011 Vilnius ministerial
declaration, and by means of implementation of the
OSCE project at the OSCE Border Management
Staff College in Dushanbe, inter alia, the training

of Afghan law enforcement officers in combating
illicit drugs at the Domodedovo Police Academy of
Russia and their continued training in the United
States Drug Enforcement Administration Training
Academy, the Siberian Law Institute and the North-
Western Training Institute of the Russian Federal
Drug Control Service.

"The Security Council calls upon States to
strengthen international and regional cooperation
to counter the threat to the international
community posed by the production, trafficking
and consumption of illicit drugs originating
in Afghanistan, with a view to its progressive
elimination, in accordance with the principle of
common and shared responsibility in addressing
the drug problem of Afghanistan, including
through strengthening law enforcement capacity
and cooperation in countering the trafficking
in illicit drugs and precursor chemicals and
money-laundering and corruption linked to such
trafficking. The Council also encourages Member
States to undertake further action, as well as to
consider, on the basis of concrete proposals by
UNODC and theInternational Narcotics Control
Board, through the United Nations Commission
on Narcotic Drugs and possible new international
initiatives aimed at strengthening the combat
against illicit trafficking in chemicals.

"The Security Council notes the ongoing
importance of the counter-narcotics issue to the
United Nations engagement in Afghanistan. It
reiterates the need for the Council to be kept
informed, including by the UNODC, of the threats
of drug-trafficking and related transnational crime
on situations on the Council's agenda, notably
when examining the mandates of peacekeeping
operations and political missions.

"The Security Council reiterates its invitation
to the Secretary-General to consider the threats
resulting from drug trafficking and related
illegal activities as a factor in conflict prevention
strategies, conflict analysis, integrated mission
assessments, planning and peacebuilding support
and to consider including in his reports, analysis of
the role played by those threats in situations on the
Council's agenda.

"The Security Council welcomes further

briefings on the situation of drug trafficking
in Afghanistan, as necessary, by the Executive
Director of UNODC."

This statement will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2014/12.
I now give the floor to the representative of India.


