I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. Today, once again, the Council is discussing the subject of the use of chemical weapons in Syria. Contrary to what some delegations may lead us to believe, this regular meeting is still very relevant and necessary. Resolution 2118 (2013), on the use of chemical weapons by Syria, was adopted by the Council seven years ago, in 2013. But to date, Syria has failed to take the steps necessary to make progress in its implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention and of resolution 2118 (2013). That was also the conclusion of the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Executive Council in its July decision entitled "Addressing the Possession and Use of Chemical Weapons by the Syrian Arab Republic". As an international community, we cannot accept this lack of progress. Syria itself became a member of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in 2013, after the regime had used chemicals as weapons in several indiscriminate attacks, causing immense suffering and death to its own population. In order to secure a future without chemical weapons, we have the responsibility to protect and uphold the norms and rules to which we all agreed, as enshrined in the Chemical Weapons Convention. The CWC, the global norm against chemical weapons, is not only a legal agreement but also a moral declaration about the dignity of humankind. If we do not react when our own rules and core values have been violated, we invite a repetition of the use of chemical weapons. Therefore, the OPCW undertook all possible efforts to engage with the Syrian authorities, in an independent, professional and factual way, to assist the authorities to take the necessary steps to implement the CWC and resolution 2118 (2013). A joint OPCW-United Nations mission was established in October 2013. A Fact-Finding Mission was set up in 2014 to establish the facts surrounding the alleged use of toxic chemicals. Also in 2014, a Declaration Assessment Team was put in place to engage the Syrian authorities to resolve the identified gaps and inconsistencies. But, as said before and confirmed today in the briefing, far too little progress has been made, owing to the lack of cooperation by Syrian authorities. To date, Syria's declaration of chemical weapons remains incomplete. That leaves open the unacceptable possibility that Syria still maintains stockpiles of chemical agents, so those agents could be used again against the Syrian population. As Director General Arias said earlier, "the full nature and extent of chemical weapons research and development activities are still unclear. Results of sample analyses taken by the [Declaration Assessment Team] are indicative of undeclared activities, including undeclared chemical-warfare agents and undeclared chemical-weapons-related activities." The OPCW Fact-Finding Mission concluded that chemical weapons had been used, or likely used, in at least 18 instances. The previous report of the Investigation and Identification Team concluded that the Syrian Arab Air Force was to be held responsible for the use of chemical weapons in March 2017. This latest report confirms the wider pattern and reminds us why it is absolutely essential that all outstanding issues be addressed conclusively, without any doubt. Syria does not cooperate with the OPCW and does not allow the Team to access its territory. In view of what I have mentioned, one can conclude only that this issue remains of prime importance to international peace and security, and thus to the Council. Furthermore, we look to the deliberations to be held at the twenty-fifth session of the Conference of States Parties, beginning in December, to take any further measures in the absence of compliance with the CWC and the decisions of the Conference. Beyond the measures taken by the OPCW, the perpetrators of those crimes should be held accountable. Only justice can prevent the re-emergence of chemical weapons. It is our common responsibility to support all procedures and bodies that contribute to this, including by the International, Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March 2011, or by the International Criminal Court. Finally, we deplore the recent attempts at misinformation and to polarize discussions in the Security Council. The Council should focus on the essence of the matter at hand, namely, Syria's unwillingness to comply with its obligations.
