Mr. Wibisono (Indonesia): The Indonesian delegation
welcomes the convening of this formal meeting of the
Security Council, for it provides an opportunity for Member
States to express their views on an issue which has
historically preoccupied our Organization.

During the past few months, we have witnessed a
steady deterioration of the situation in the occupied
territories, characterized by an increasing tension that has
been aggravated by a stalemate in the peace process. The
hope engendered by the international community that the
provisions of the peace accords would be scrupulously
implemented are in jeopardy, as the Government of Israel
persists in its refusal to honour its obligations and
commitments. This is incompatible with the norms of
international conduct and principles of justice.
Consequently, the peace process remains paralysed due to
Israel's intensification of its provocative policies and
practices. Foremost among those are the establishment of
new settlements, the expansion of existing settlements, the
building of roads and other auxiliary sites adjacent to and
between settlements, the issuance of plans for the creation
of new settler units and the revocation of residency rights
and confiscation of identity cards of Palestinians living in
Jerusalem.

Further compounding the already volatile situation is
the recent unilateral and arbitrary decision taken by Israel
to expand the city of Jerusalem's administrative and
political control beyond its borders, in total violation of
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions
pertaining to Jerusalem. This is a calculated and cynical
plan to consolidate Israel's claim to the Holy City as a
united and eternal capital. It pre-empts the outcome of the
permanent status negotiations by changing the legal status
and demographic composition of Jerusalem. Thus, it
threatens to further undermine the peace process, with

 

serious repercussions not only for the Middle East but
also beyond it.

The Security Council cannot remain indifferent and
passive to the series of Israeli onslaughts on the peace
process, as we have a vital stake in ensuring that this
region will not relapse into a flashpoint of crisis fraught
with far-reaching consequences. In this regard, we laud
the efforts for peace undertaken by the parties involved
and their perseverance in the face of formidable obstacles
erected by Israel. The peace process must indeed move
forward and be made irreversible.

For this to materialize, Israel must fully observe the
agreements already reached and negotiate in good faith on
the remaining key issues on the basis of a recognition of
the right of the Palestinians to an independent State with
al-Quds Al-Sharif as their capital.

My delegation also wishes to reiterate that the
attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people is an essential prerequisite for a durable and
comprehensive peace in that region. In the attainment of
this objective, the Security Council must ensure the
unconditional withdrawal of Israel from all occupied
territories, in accordance with its resolutions 242 (1967),
338 (1973) and 425 (1978).

The Indonesian delegation deems it essential that the
Security Council, as the body responsible for the
maintenance of international peace and security, send a
clear and unambiguous message to Israel to end its illegal
policies and actions. What is at stake is not only the
future of a nation, but also our shared vision of a Middle
East region transformed from an arena of war, devastation
and antagonisms to one of peace, cooperation and shared
prosperity.

