Ms. Dirie: It is an honour for me to address the
Security Council on the state of women's political
representation in Somalia. Because of time constraints,
I cannot cover all of the key milestones, achievements,
challenges and lessons learned in the 2016 electoral
process. However, a document has been distributed.

The Committee of Goodwill Ambassadors, which
I have the privilege of chairing, was appointed by the
Federal President of Somalia to help women secure
30 per cent ofthe seats in both houses ofParliament. That
was the goal agreed by the country's political leaders in
the National Leadership Forum. As in other countries,
advancing women's political empowerment in Somalia
is a challenging task. Despite the huge contributions
that they make to society, women are often excluded
from decision-making and leadership roles. In 2012,
women were selected for only 14 per cent of the seats
in the Federal Parliament. The National Leadership
Forum's decision for the 2016 electoral process to
reserve a minimum of 30 per cent of the parliamentary
seats for women was therefore very encouraging.

To achieve that goal, the Goodwill Ambassadors
first carried out a clan-mapping exercise showing the
distribution of reserved seats per clan. The detailed
mapping schematic has also been attached to my notes,
which were just circulated in the Chamber. We then
launched an advocacy campaign involving civil society
actors and political lobbyists, as well as Federal and
state Women's Affairs Ministries, to secure the buy-
in of political leaders and clan elders. We received
enormous support and encouragement from the United
Nations, and from the international community in
general, in our quest to realize the 30 per cent goal, and I
would like to express my thanks for the partnership and
collective efforts of the Somali Federal Government,
the National Leadership Forum, the Women's Affairs
Ministries, civil society, women activists, the United
Nations-African Union Integrated Gender Office, the
United Nations Development Programme, UN-Women,
the European Union, the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development and members of the diplomatic
community. Women were elected to 25 per cent of the
seats in both houses of the new Parliament, among them
my fellow Goodwill Ambassadors. That is a substantial
and unprecedented achievement for Somali women
and for the society as a whole. We faced numerous
challenges and learned important lessons in the course
of our work. I would like to mention several of those
lessons that should be considered in preparation for the
2020 universal elections.

In the absence of a legally binding provision, the
political decision to reserve 30 per cent of the seats for
women was extremely difficult to enforce. No one was,
or could be, held responsible and accountable for their
action or inaction. A secured legal provision is therefore
critical to advancing women's political equality.
Securing the reserved seats for women relied in large
measure on the will of clan elders, who are traditionally
opposed to women's political participation. That
affected women's ability to secure clan endorsement
and to operate freely without threats and intimidation.
A massive structural transformation is required to
advance women's representation in politics and the
democratization process in Somalia.

Throughout the electoral process, women
presented a unified position that served as a source of
strength. Together with the Goodwill Ambassadors,
civil society and the Women's Affairs Ministries, we
all worked in a united fashion that had a very positive
impact on our campaign. The lack of adequate financial
and logistical support posed a significant challenge
to women candidates during the campaign period.
Furthermore, women were disproportionately affected
by election-related corruption and abuses that weakened
their position vis-a-vis the clan elders, the state-level
Electoral Implementation Teams and state authorities.
Provisions for adequate support and the establishment
of a level playing field will be critical to the success of
women candidates in the future.

On behalf of Goodwill Ambassadors, I would like
to thank the Government of Sweden, current President
of the Security Council, and UN-Women, which
facilitated my trip to New York.

