The President: I would now like to comment
briefly in my national capacity.

The Permanent Representative of Belgium will
shortly deliver a statement on behalf of the European
Union Presidency, with which Ireland is in full
agreement. My delegation takes the opportunity of this
meeting, perhaps the last public Council meeting on
this item before Kosovo-wide elections on 17
November, to thank Mr. Haekkerup for his excellent
work as Special Representative and to commend him
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) in preparing for the elections and
in implementing other aspects of resolution 1244
(1999).

The draft presidential statement which will be
delivered after this meeting confirms the importance
attached by the Security Council to their efforts in this
regard. As we have said many times before, all
communities in Kosovo must work towards achieving a
multi-ethnic society based on respect for minority and
human rights. We join the call of many other
delegations today for Kosovo Serbs to participate fully
in the election process in order to ensure that they, in
turn, are fully represented in the future Kosovo. We,
too, urge the authorities in Belgrade to encourage
Kosovo Serbs to vote in the upcoming elections and to
reaffirm the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo by
participating in all aspects of its life. In doing so, we
stress that the Constitutional Framework for
Provisional Self-Government is an interim document
and does not in any way prejudice the future status of
Kosovo.

The draft presidential statement also makes clear
that the international community will not countenance
any form of extremism. In addition to the efforts of
UNMIK and KFOR, Kosovo parties and civic leaders
must do everything possible to encourage a positive
climate for Serb participation in the elections and in
daily life in Kosovo, before and after.

We welcome the intensification of relations
between UNMIK and Belgrade, and we encourage
continued cooperation, including in relation to the
return of refugees and internally displaced persons. We
also encourage further progress in relation to missing
persons and political prisoners. In this regard, we
would be grateful if Mr. Haekkerup could clarify the
position regarding the remaining political detainees in
Serbia.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

I give the floor to the representative of
Yugoslavia.

