Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Mr. Fernandez-Taranco for his briefing. I
also thank the Permanent Observer of Palestine and the
Permanent Representative of Israel for their statements.
France associates itself with the statement to be made
by the head of the European Union delegation.

I would like to make four points.

First, it is important not to squander the
opportunity created on 2 September in Washington,
D.C., by the resumption of direct negotiations on the
establishment of a viable and contiguous Palestinian
State living side by side in peace with Israel within
secure and recognized borders. Relaunching the
negotiations was a brave decision by the Palestinian
and Israeli leaders, backed by the efforts of the United
States and the Quartet under the sponsorship of Jordan
and Egypt. The status quo will only lead to further
instability and violence in the Middle East.

The direct negotiations are stymied by the issue
of settlements. We have unceasingly reiterated that
settlements are illegal and an obstacle to peace. Every
day, they compromise a little more the desired two-
State solution. In that regard, they jeopardize Israel's
security. Settlement, including in East Jerusalem, must
stop.

In that regard, the settlement policy pursued in
Palestinian neighbourhoods with the support of the
Israeli authorities justifies this Council's concerns. Not
only is it illegal, but it increases the specific threat of
violent incidents in the holy city, with all conceivable
political risks. That is why France, the European
Union, the Quartet, the United States and the entire
international community continue to advocate
extending the moratorium.

However, we must transcend that impasse and not
lose sight of the primary objective of an in-depth
discussion of all final status issues. We welcome the
fact that the Arab Peace Initiative follow-up committee
has left the way open for a continuation of the process,
but progress must urgently be made.

The international community must commit itself
to assisting the negotiations. Naturally, France
welcomes the United States efforts that have enabled
that process to be relaunched, as well as the personal
commitment of President Obama and the Secretary of
State. However, in order to tackle the task of peace, so
often relaunched in the region, and to finally achieve it,
broader assistance to that process is vital because it
would increase the essential trust between the parties
and make it possible to better share the political risks
that the choice of peace requires.

When he met President Abbas, President Sarkozy
recalled that France was ready to work in that
direction, together with the Quartet, whose role is
essential, and the European Union, which, owing to its
links to and involvement in the region, must also
participate. The States of the region have a key role to
play by showing their willingness, when the time
comes, to turn the Arab Peace Initiative into concrete
steps towards Israel. To that end, we are working to
create conditions conducive to a resumption of Syrian-
Israeli talks, in close cooperation with the United
States and Turkey.

Secondly, changes must arise on the ground to
create conditions conducive to the success of the
negotiations. The Palestinian and Israeli populations
must be able to see that improvements on the ground
go hand in hand with the negotiations process, in
particular with regard to freedom of movement and
access and security.

All provocation must be avoided. We deplore the
decision of the Israeli Government to launch calls for
tender for the construction of 238 housing units in East
Jerusalem. There can be no peace that excludes
Jerusalem as the capital of both States, as the President
of the French Republic said to the Knesset on 23 June
2008. In addition, the Palestinian Authority must
continue its efforts to strengthen the security sector and
establish the rule of law. The ongoing fight against
terrorism must remain a priority.

With regard to Gaza, France continues to call for
the immediate opening of crossing points to allow
humanitarian access to the civilian population and the
development of the economy. France welcomed Israel's
adoption of measures to facilitate the entry of goods.
Additional steps - such as an increase in the
throughput of crossing points, the resumption of
exports from Gaza, and relaxing conditions for
individual freedom of movement to and from Gaza -
are needed for economic activity to resume.

In addition to humanitarian and reconstruction
issues, the blockade imposed on the population does
not promote positive development of the political
situation. Alongside those efforts, we continue to call
for the unconditional and immediate release of Gilad
Shalit and for a halt to all violence, in particular the
firing of rockets into southern Israel.

Thirdly, the international community's support
for efforts of the Palestinian Authority and President
Abbas to bolster the institutions of the future
Palestinian State must continue. Israel must also
resolutely assist that process, including in the West
Bank. Token steps have been taken on the ground, but
they remain insufficient, in particular concerning
freedom of movement and access.

We reiterate our full support for the reforms
implemented by Palestinian Prime Minister Salam
Fayyad. We share the World Bank's assessment that "If
the Palestinian Authority maintains its current
performance... it is well positioned for the
establishment of a State... in the near future".

In addition to the pledges made, which must be
honoured, we have voiced our readiness to organize in
Paris, in pursuit of the ongoing political process, a
second donor conference for the Palestinian State,
which would facilitate the support needed for the new
plan to be submitted by the Palestinian Authority
shortly.

Fourthly, we are also continuing our efforts in
Lebanon. We call on all parties to implement resolution
1701 (2006) and to fully respect the Blue Line. We
continue to provide our support to the Government of
National Unity, headed by Prime Minister Saad Hariri,
but we are concerned about the current tensions. In that
regard, we regret the statements made by the President
of Iran, calling into question the existence of a Member
of the United Nations.

We also condemn efforts to undermine the work
of the Special Tribunal for Lebanon. We wish to recall
that the Special Tribunal for Lebanon was established
pursuant to resolution 1757 (2007) at the express
request of the Lebanese Government. That resolution is
binding on all. The creation of the Tribunal was a
significant step forward in the fight against impunity.
In the interests of Lebanon and the entire region, the
Tribunal must be allowed to continue to work
completely independently, as it currently does, and in
peace. No one can or should prejudge the outcome of
its work or attempt to exert any undue influence on it.

