Mr. Tang Jiaxuan (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me begin by thanking Mr. Blix and Mr. ElBaradei for
reporting to the Security Council on their inspection
work in Iraq. Last November, this Council adopted
resolution 1441 (2002) by consensus, reiterating the
firm determination of the international community to
verify and destroy weapons of mass destruction in
Iraq's possession. Now the Iraqi issue has reached its
most critical juncture. The international community
shares the universal hope to see a political resolution of
this issue within the United Nations framework and
places tremendous expectations on the inspection work
of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and
Inspection Commission and the International Atomic
Energy Agency. Here, I wish to share some of my
views with the Security Council.

First, Iraq must implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions strictly, comprehensively and
earnestly. We urge the Iraqi side to recognize fully the
importance and urgency of the inspections and to
provide greater cooperation in a more proactive way.
The latest visit to Baghdad by the two chief United
Nations inspectors has achieved some positive results.
The Iraqi side has made some commitments. We
request Iraq to make good on those promises as soon as
possible and to provide clarifications and explanations
as soon as possible regarding the questions raised by
the two chief inspectors in their briefings earlier.

Secondly, it is necessary for the inspection work
in Iraq to continue. Resolution 1441 (2002) provides
explicit authorization and specific requirements for the
inspections.

Pursuing the implementation of this resolution
remains an important task for us. In that respect, a
great deal of work still needs to be done by the
Security Council and by the two inspection bodies.
Judging from what has been done in the recent past, the
inspection work has made progress and has clarified
quite a number of issues. However, new elements have
also been discovered in that process. The two bodies
are duty-bound and justified to further the inspections
with the aim of finding out the truth and fulfilling the
mission conferred on them by the Security Council.
Thus, in agreement with the majority opinion among
Council members, China believes that the inspection
process is working and that the inspectors should
continue to be given the time they need so as to
implement resolution 1441 (2002).

Thirdly, the Security Council has to step up its
efforts with regard to the inspections. The Iraqi issue
bears on peace and stability in the Gulf region and on
the credibility and authority of the Security Council.
The Council should deal with this complex situation
appropriately and responsibly, in accordance with the
purposes and principles of the Charter, in order to carry
out its important task of maintaining international
peace and security. Top priority must now be given to
strengthening its guidance of and support for the
inspection work and to facilitating a productive
political settlement. Intensifying inspections is aimed
at seeking a peaceful solution to the Iraqi issue. China
stands ready to continue to provide the two bodies with
personnel and the necessary technical assistance,
thereby continuing our efforts towards a political
settlement of the Iraqi issue.

China is an ancient civilization. Our ancestors
proposed long ago the idea of peace being the best
option. At present, peace and development are common
aspirations of all peoples around the world. Sitting on
the Security Council, we simply have no reason not to
make every effort to reach that goal, and we are
obliged to try our best, and to use all possible means to
avert war. Only by pursuing a political settlement can
we truly live up to the trust and hope that the
international community places in the Security
Council.

