Mr. Le Roy (spoke in French): The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2009/210) was prepared at the
Security Council's request pursuant to resolution 1863
(2009), in which it requested the Secretary-General to
prepare recommendations on the possibility of
establishing a United Nations peacekeeping operation
in Somalia.

At the outset, I should like to echo Under-
Secretary-General Pascoe by recalling that today's
meeting is taking place in a very alarming security
context in Mogadishu. It is clear that we are at a
watershed moment for Somalia and the Transitional
Federal Government (TFG). The international
community must now firmly support the TFG and
leave no stone unturned in preventing extremist
elements from frustrating this unique opportunity to
stabilize Somalia.

The peace process remains extremely fragile.
Progress generated by the Djibouti peace process
requires the ongoing support of the international
community. At the same time, we must ensure that the
role of the international community is accepted by
Somalis and that it not exacerbate tensions on the
ground.

It is in that spirit that the Secretary-General's
report offers a holistic approach that takes into account
all the United Nations strategic objectives in Somalia,
including the political aspect, security, development
and the distribution of humanitarian assistance. The
report notes the Security Council's expression of
intent, as formulated in paragraph 4 of resolution 1863
(2009), to establish a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia, and seeks to define a cautious
and carefully calibrated approach to that end. In that
respect, the report takes the volatile security situation
into account and attempts to craft a strategy tailored to
the new risks and opportunities in the field.

(spoke in English)

As indicated by Under-Secretary-General Pascoe,
the report recommends a three-phase incremental
approach. In the first phase, the United Nations would
maintain its current engagement, approved in
resolution 1863 (2009). This consists of support for the
African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) to
enable it to fulfil its core functions of providing
security for TFG personnel, key infrastructure and
strategic installations, and assistance in building
Somalia's security institutions. Under-Secretary-
General Malcorra will shortly provide further details
on that very important point. This would be pursued
alongside support for the political process and the
humanitarian and recovery activities of the United
Nations country team. Progress in the implementation
of the first phase would be assessed after three to four
months.

If security conditions permit, United Nations
engagement would then be extended to the second
phase, which would entail adding a light United
Nations footprint in Mogadishu consisting of elements
from the United Nations Political Office for Somalia,
the Department of Field Support and the United
Nations country team, which would continue to pursue
the strategic objectives laid out in the first phase.

These two phases would form transitional steps,
allowing the United Nations to implement the full
support package to AMISOM, assess the progress of
the efforts of the TFG to build security and develop its
own security institutions, and, more importantly, gauge
the acceptability of a United Nations presence in
Mogadishu.

The second phase, like the first, would be
assessed three to four months after the commencement
of its implementation. Depending on progress, the
Security Council would then review the United Nations
role and decide whether conditions are conducive to a
shift to the final phase, in which a United Nations
peacekeeping operation could be established to take
over from AMISOM. That operation could be
authorized and deployed along the lines set out in the
Secretary-General's present and previous reports.

It is important to emphasize that this incremental
approach is a flexible strategy. While an indicative
timescale for review of progress is appropriate,
movement from one phase to another should be based
on the evolution of prevailing conditions, and not on a
rigid timetable.

Throughout all three phases, it will be important
to maintain contingency plans for continuing United
Nations engagement on the political and humanitarian
fronts in case of a degeneration in the security situation
that makes it untenable to establish and retain an
international presence in Mogadishu. At the same time,
we should be ready to move quickly to take advantage
of security improvements should they occur.

In that regard, I recall to the Council the advice
of the Secretary-General that, while the deployment of
a United Nations peacekeeping operation remains our
goal, such an operation should be deployed only after
the fulfilment of certain basic preconditions for
success. Important benchmarks will include the
implementation of a credible ceasefire, consent to the
deployment by all the major Somali actors on the
ground, and adequate pledges of troops and required
military capacities by Member States. It remains the
assessment of the Secretary-General that the
deployment of a United Nations peacekeeping
operation at this stage, in the absence of those
conditions, would be a high-risk operation and that an
ill-timed mission would fail. Inserting a United Nations
peacekeeping operation under the current conditions
5
would attract resistance, which could detract from the
political process.

As Council members are aware, some key Somali
political players, as well as religious and clan elders,
are deeply divided over the issue of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation. As such, deploying a
peacekeeping operation under the current
circumstances could undermine ongoing efforts at
political reconciliation. It would also risk attacks
against peacekeepers, which could draw the United
Nations force into the conflict.

In that regard, it is important to bear in mind
lessons from previous United Nations peacekeeping
experiences in Somalia and ensure that the
Organization decides on the appropriate engagement
this time. The Secretary-General's report argues for the
prudent approach I have outlined. At the same time, it
acknowledges that the peace process is at a fluid stage
and that all options must remain on the table.

The Secretariat has continued to engage possible
troop contributors in preparation for an eventual United
Nations peacekeeping operation. On 19 February 2009,
as set out in the report, the Office of Military Affairs,
which is in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
(DPKO), sent notes verbales to 60 Member States to
ascertain if they would be willing to contribute troops,
should the Security Council decide to establish a
peacekeeping operation for Somalia.

To date, 14 Member States have responded. Ten
of the responses were negative. However, on 27 April,
DPKO received an offer from Bangladesh indicating its
willingness to contribute naval and air force assets.
Bangladesh noted that it would require United Nations
assistance to ensure that its contingents received the
necessary equipment to enable their deployment. Since
the publication of the Secretary-General's report,
DPKO has also received verbal indications from
Indonesia that it would be ready to provide troops and
to take a lead role in a United Nations peacekeeping
operation in Somalia. Pakistan has also indicated
willingness to provide maritime assets, while Uruguay
has offered to contribute military observers. We are
now ascertaining the details of those offers as part of
our ongoing contingency planning for the possible
eventual establishment of a United Nations
peacekeeping operation under the right conditions.
As has been said, the path to durable security in
Somalia lies in the hands of Somalis themselves. The

central aspect of the strategy set out in the Secretary-
General's report is the building of the Somali National
Security Force and a police force that are capable of
taking over responsibility for security in the country. In
that regard, we of course encourage Council members
to continue to lend their support to the Government in
developing security institutions, in line with a clear
plan and in the framework of the rule of law.

We all hope that, in the coming weeks, the
Government will expedite its preparation of a strategic
plan for the building of national security forces. That
would enable bilateral partners to determine the nature
of assistance required and what they can best
contribute in a coordinated way. The United Nations
has been providing expertise to that process through
the Joint Security Committee. We are also working
with AMISOM. to build on the existing effort of the
United Nations Development Programme to train the
Somali police.

(spoke in French)

In the coming weeks, the United Nations will
continue to contribute to that process by providing
experts and deploying its good offices. That will, of
course, be done under the leadership of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. We hope that
the international community will also provide its
support and effectively coordinate its efforts through
the Joint Security Committee in order to support the
Government's own efforts. Of course, also in the
coming weeks, we will continue to closely monitor the
situation and regularly inform the Council of all
ongoing efforts, including as regards contingency
planning for a United Nations peacekeeping operation.

