Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile would like to thank you, Madam, for convening
this open meeting to examine the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), and we would like to commend
the work of the Ambassador of Spain in the Security
Council's non-proliferation committees.

Resolution 1540 (2004) was a milestone whose
drafting my country contributed to in its prior
membership on the Security Council. We value the fact
that under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations it responds to the threat of the proliferation of
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons in the hands
of non-State actors. Almost 12 years later, the threat
continues to be as present as ever, and the very idea
that non-State agents could have access to weapons of
mass destruction is a source of great concern. In this
period, we have managed to raise the awareness of
the international community about the terrorist threat
and the serious dangers of proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction, thus facilitating implementation,
assistance and cooperation.

While we have made progress in implementing
resolution 1540 (2004), there remains much to be
done, so we need to take advantage of the political
opportunity offered in 2016, when the Comprehensive
Review of the Status of Implementation of Resolution
1540 (2004) is carried out, in accordance with paragraph
3 of resolution 1977 (2011). The resolution requests
the same of all States, but no country is the same as
another. On the other hand, many countries have
reported on the measures adopted, but we know that
the adoption of measures does not necessarily imply
proper implementation. Those are issues to consider in
the comprehensive review.

The challenge that the resolution dealt with when
it was adopted has changed. In the course of the
comprehensive review, the Council will need to assess
whether it would be appropriate to agree, for example,
on a new mandate for the Committee and its Panel of
Experts that would grant them greater flexibility to
act more proactively. Indeed, a preliminary analysis
of the data reveals a disparity in the implementation
of resolution 1540 (2004) among the various regional
groups. It is therefore necessary to enable a more
flexible and proactive role that would include a regional
focus on assistance and cooperation. It is also important
to focus on the financing of proliferation, a topic on
which much remains to be done.

In 2016, Chile will host a training course for
the focal points in the region, and we, together with
Colombia, will undertake the development of a
voluntary national plan of action and a peer review. We
also recently coordinated a retreat for Working Group
I on international monitoring and implementation. For
us, it is a matter of commitment, because whatever any
Member State does or does not do can have an impact
on collective security.

As Chile's term as a non-permanent member of
the Security Council for 2014 and 2015 will end in a
few days, we would like to express our gratitude to all
those who have supported us in our effort to contribute
to maintaining international peace and security. I
would like to thank my colleagues, the Permanent
Representatives and their teams, the whole United
Nations system, particularly the Secretariat, the staff of
the Security Council Affairs Division, the interpreters
and naturally, civil society, which has provided us their
perspectives on the ground.

Although we must continue moving forward to
address the effectiveness, transparency and coherence
of the Council, I believe we have contributed to
achieving that, in such measures as the adoption of the
code of conduct, the declaration on abstention from
the use of the veto, and the recent joint draft letter
of 16 November from the Presidents of the General
Assembly and the Council aimed at moving forward on
the process of appointing the next Secretary-General.
We hope that the Council's transparency will continue
to be reflected in the formal wrap-up sessions in the
Council Chamber, so as to allow Members States to
participate equally and record their statements, which
can accompany the respective presidency's informal
briefing, interactively updated during his term.

We trust that the Council will continue its in-depth
focus on the protection of civilians and the most
vulnerable populations and on resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions that maintain efforts
to eradicate the use and recruitment of children,
accompanied by the troop-contributing countries,
all within the perspective of the contribution that
inclusive development makes to the maintenance of
international peace and security. The critical situations
on the Council's agenda require additional efforts
to make it possible to respond in a timely fashion to
the needs brought to its attention and to deal with the
abuses and violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law, guaranteeing and ensuring that it will
fight against impunity and reconciliation on situations
for which we assume responsibility.

