Mr. Mehdiyev (Azerbaijan): At the outset, I
would like to welcome the presence at this meeting
of the Foreign Minister of Timor-Leste, Mr. Jose Luis
Guterres, and to thank him for his statement. We are
also grateful to the Acting Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Mr. Finn Reske-Nielsen, for
his briefing and for presenting the latest report of the
Secretary-General (S/20l2/765) on the United Nations
Integrated Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT).

Azerbaijan welcomes the continued progress
and impressive advances in achieving a secure and
stable political situation in the country. During our
recent visit to Timor-Leste, we had an opportunity to
witness those encouraging developments. Along with
maintaining a stable security situation and low crime
rate, Timor-Leste has managed to advance the country's
democratic agenda. The presidential and parliamentary
elections held earlier this year were major milestones
in the country's political life in 2012. We commend
the Timorese authorities for successfully carrying out
the three rounds of elections in a peaceful and credible
manner, and convey our congratulations to the newly
elected Government and President of the country.

The Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste (PNTL), with
the support of UNMIT, played a major role in providing
security throughout the electoral process, and thereby
proved to be capable of ensuring stability and security
in the country. It is encouraging to note that public
confidence in the PNTL has significantly increased.
We note that UNMIT has continued to support the
institutional strengthening and capacity-building of
PNTL, focusing on five priority areas, as outlined in the
PNTL-UNMIT Police Joint Development Plan. UNMIT
has also continued to provide operational support to the
PNTL, including by conducting joint patrols.

Azerbaijan welcomes the progress made in
strengthening the country's institutional and human
resources capacities and the role of State institutions
in safeguarding stability and democracy. There is
nevertheless a need for further support from the
international community in that regard. Although
relatively high economic growth has been observed
in Timor-Leste this year, the country is still facing
substantial challenges in tackling poverty, malnutrition
and unemployment. We support the Government's
efforts to address those challenges and to ensure
economic sustainability.

As noted in the report of the Secretary-General,
the Government and UNMIT, together with other
stakeholders, has continued to collaborate and advance
further in the transition process, as well as to facilitate
the completion of UNMIT's mandate. We take note of
the View of the Government on the post-2012 presence
of the United Nations in Timor-Leste, which was
expressed in the letter dated 20 September, 2012, from
the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2012/736, annex). We support
the desire of the Government of Timor-Leste to turn
a new page in its relations and cooperation with the
United Nations by switching from the presence of the
United Nations peacekeeping or political mission to
enhancing the relationship with a focus on institutional
strengthening and development.

Despite remarkable achievements, Timor-Leste
continues to face a number of challenges, with remaining
weaknesses and gaps. Further efforts are required to
develop sustainable national capacities, strengthen
State institutions and tackle socioeconomic challenges.
We agree with the Secretary-General that it is critical to
continue to support national efforts so as to preserve the
gains made today. The commitment of the Government
and the people demonstrated so far convince us of their
firm determination to resolve the remaining issues and
to move forward in building a prosperous future based
on sustainable peace, development and the rule of law.

