Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic):
I am delivering this statement on behalf of Belgium,
Germany, Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru and my own country,
the Dominican Republic.

In April, the Council had the honour of listening
to Nujeen Mustafa, the first person with a disability to
brief the Security Council (see S/PV.8515). Her story
about how she left Syria and arrived in Germany in a
wheelchair was so compelling that we will remember it
for years to come. Her willpower and resilience are an
example to all of us.
The adage that no one should be left behind means
going beyond simple words. The situation of people with
disabilities in armed conflicts deserves more attention
from the Council than it has received in the past. It
touches directly on human rights and international
humanitarian law and is inextricably linked to peace
and security. That is why we thank Poland and the
United Kingdom for bringing this important text before
the Council today. With resolution 2475 (2019), the
Security Council affirms that inclusiveness is important
everywhere. The importance of the issue was also
highlighted by the Secretary-General on the occasion
of the twelfth Conference of States Parties to the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
when he stated,

"I want our humanitarian, development and
peace operations to fully recognize and advance
the rights of persons with disabilities".

In situations of armed conflict, people with
disabilities can be disproportionally affected and often
excluded from the humanitarian response. The actors in
the field should therefore listen to and empower persons
with disabilities in order to assess how their needs can be
met. Governments of countries in conflict should ensure
access to basic services as well as education, health
care, information and communications technology and
transportation systems. All the parties to a conflict
should take measures to guarantee the rights of persons
with disabilities and protect them from violence. When
a conflict is over, they need access to justice if their
rights have been violated.

In order to focus our response, we need reliable
data. And we should not forget people with disabilities
that are not visible or who are subject to multiple and
intersecting forms of discrimination.

The rights ofpersons with disabilities are enshrined
in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities. It is a landmark of international law and in
the protection of the rights of persons with disabilities.
It contains explicit provisions for Governments on
ensuring the protection of persons with disabilities
in humanitarian emergencies, including conflict
situations. People with disabilities should be able
to enjoy those rights, free from discrimination and
stigma. We therefore call on all United Nations Member
States to ratify the Convention and fully implement
its provisions.

In conclusion, in order to achieve a more durable
peace, it is fundamental to include persons with
disabilities and the organizations that represent them in
conflict resolution.

