Mr. Kodama (Japan): I would like to begin by
extending a warm welcome to His Excellency Mr. J ose
Ramos-Horta, President of Timor-Leste, and to thank
him for his very encouraging statement. I would also
like to express my appreciation to Ms. Ameerah Haq
for her comprehensive briefing to the Council in her
capacity as Special Representative of the Secretary-
General.

Allow me to recall today in the Council Chamber
the efforts and achievements of the people of Timor-
Leste witnessed by the international community since
the country achieved independence more than a decade
ago. The journey has been far from easy, but the
Timorese people are successfully taking steps forward,
with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated
Mission in Timor-Leste (UNMIT) and its contributing
countries.

Now, the signs of steady progress can be seen
everywhere. The Policia Nacional de Timor-Leste
(PNTL) has now fully assumed primary security
responsibility and has been maintaining a situation of
calm in the country. The Timorese army, the Falintil-
Forcas de Defesa de Timor-Leste, has greatly improved
its capabilities, assisted by regional friends such as
Australia and New Zealand, and has now begun
dispatching its personnel to United Nations
peacekeeping operations.
To consolidate such achievements and to open the
door to further progress on the part of this young,
promising country, the two elections to be held this

year will be of the utmost importance. If the people of
Timor-Leste are to express their political will through
the democratic process, it will be critical to maintain
the security situation before, during and after the
election. In that regard, Japan calls for the further
enhancement of the PNTL's capabilities with the
assistance of UNMIT, as well as the sustained
cooperation of the UNMIT police and the international
security forces.

Above all, Japan expects the elections and the
subsequent political process to underpin Timor-Leste's
first steps as a genuinely self-sustaining sovereign
country. For the friends of Timor-Leste in the
international community, the successful withdrawal of
UNMIT will represent a great success story and the
fruit of the peacebuilding endeavours undertaken by
the Timorese people.

We have seen a number of such examples in
various areas. Timor-Leste showed active engagement,
and was highly commended by the participants, in the
promotion and protection of human rights through the
Universal Periodic Review process of the Human
Rights Council last year. The implementation of the
National Strategic Development Plan covering the
period 2011 to 2030 is already under way. In the
context of diplomacy, Timor-Leste is playing a leading
role in the Group of Seven Plus, and the country's
entry into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
is anticipated in due course.

It should be noted at the same time that sound
development always comes with significant challenges.
This year's elections will include approximately
100,000 more citizens than the polling five years ago,
most of whom are members of the younger generation.
Those young people have great potential as a source of
human resources. If we ensure that they acquire the
necessary skills through education and training, they
will be in a better position to exert a positive influence
towards the successful future of the country,
particularly in light of the current high rate of youth
unemployment.

With respect to the economy, Timor-Leste's
continuing disproportionate dependence on oil requires
gradual reduction so as to make its economy more
resilient to any adverse impact from unforeseen
fluctuations of the global economy.

In that regard, the Member States consultation on
Timor-Leste just held this morning was quite timely.
Japan would like to reiterate in that context that it has
already begun the implementation of assistance in the
amount of $1.66 million for both elections through the
United Nations Development Programme.

Following the elections, Japan also looks forward
to seeing the new Government of Timor-Leste conduct
a discussion on post-UNMIT plans and make efforts to
ensure that support from the international community
is consolidated and strengthened.

Japan's commitment as an old friend in the region
remains steadfast as Japan attempts to keep its
assistance flexible in order to extend a hand in support
to our neighbours. It is our great honour and pleasure
to continue to walk side by side with the people of
Timor-Leste as self-sustaining international partners.

It is also reassuring to know that a draft
resolution on Timor-Leste has been prepared by the
delegation of South Africa. Japan strongly supports the
elements of the draft, and particularly looks forward to
the report by the Secretary-General after the elections
have been successfully completed. Japan believes that
the report will provide a strong basis for constructive
discussion in the Core Group and in the Council with
regard to UNMIT's smooth transition and the future of
Timor-Leste.

In conclusion, I would like to reiterate Japan's
continuing commitment to strengthening the friendship
between our countries and cooperating with the Timor-
Leste people to support their nation-building efforts.

