Mr. Holliday (United States of America): Thank
you, Mr. President, for having presented an instructive
briefing on the overall work of the sanctions
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1267
(1999) on Al Qaeda and the Taliban. It has clearly been
a busy year for you, Sir, and for all delegations, as well
as for the Secretariat and the Monitoring Group. The
frequency of meetings reflects both the importance and
the complexity of the Committee's tasks. Members of
the Committee, the Secretariat, Chairman Munoz and
his assistant, Carla Serazzi, have worked especially
hard to meet the challenging time line and expectations
laid out in resolution 1455 (2003) - a demanding
resolution. We appreciate that hard work and your
leadership, Mr. President.

The United States considers the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999), which
you chair, Sir, to be a central component of the
international community's counter-terrorism efforts.
Freezing terrorist assets in particular, via the
Committee's consolidated list, remains a top
Government priority. But we must focus on more than
just bank accounts. We must keep our attention on the
other ways in which terrorists move funds, including
through informal money-transfer systems and via
certain charities. Finding, following and freezing
terrorist assets requires vigilance and creative
enforcement approaches. We are pleased that the
Committee intends to pursue a more in-depth analysis
of these topics, among others, in the coming year,
including through more visits to selected States and
direct dialogue in capitals.

We believe that it is, indeed, time for the
Committee's work to become more focused. The new
draft resolution, on which we are currently working
with the Chilean and Russian delegations and which we
expect to present soon, will reflect that. We look
forward to constructive negotiation that is in line with
the importance that all members attach to more
effectively combating the Al Qaeda threat to
international peace and security.

The United States position in this is
straightforward. Counter-terrorism expectations for
States should be set high, not low. In order for the
Committee's future work to take on greater relevance,
it must be able to explore key issues and examine Al
Qaeda hotspots in more detail. We should not pretend
that all States and all issues pertinent to the work of the
Committee are equally relevant; they are not. Some
States and some issues warrant closer Committee
attention than others. The Committee's resources will
be best spent where they are most needed.

We strongly encourage willing and able States to
do more. My own Government is included in this
group. The United States can do better, for example.
We are still learning how best to address possible
terrorist threats at our borders, in our skies and across
our territory. Recent revisions and procedures at our
border entry and exit points underscore the seriousness
with which, given the shifting threats, we believe that
new actions are needed. We remain concerned about
security at our ports and at those of other States that do
business across the oceans with us. Our container
security initiative has been established to raise the level
of accountability regarding cargo shipments moving in
and out of our seaports.

We also realize that coordination with our
geographical neighbours, Canada and Mexico, must be
supplemented by robust international cooperation that
extends beyond our physical boundaries. Joint police
work and intelligence-gathering are central to all of our
efforts to identify Al Qaeda terrorists and to take the
necessary preventive actions.

The United States remains strongly committed to
helping willing but currently unable States to
achieve greater counter-terrorism successes. Increased
assistance and capacity-building are key in this effort.
Here the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1267 (1999), in close coordination with the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, can match needs with resources.

However, we must also recognize and not
sidestep a fundamental distinction. Unwilling States, if
any, that lack sufficient political will to address the Al
Qaeda threat must first be encouraged and, if
necessary, later pressured to do more. We the Security
Council would be negligent in our duties if we were to
allow any weak links to undermine our shared counter-
terrorism objectives. Al Qaeda would surely exploit
them.

The United States, too, is disappointed that
only 93 States - less than half of United Nations
Members - have so far submitted the reports called
for under resolution 1455 (2003), an issue we have
formally raised bilaterally in relevant capitals. Without
this information, the Committee is greatly hindered in
its work. While so-called reporting fatigue may be a
very real issue in some capitals, excuses should never
lead to a less than robust approach regarding the
ongoing Al Qaeda threat and compliance with Security
Council-mandated counter-terrorism obligations. Our
draft resolution is designed to address this problem and

prompt better outcomes.

Finally, Ambassador Mufioz today has helpfully
framed where concrete progress has been made to
improve United Nations Members' implementation and
sanctions measures.

Solid counter-terrorism work is evident in many
parts of the world. However, it is clear that much more
remains to be done. Ambassador Mufioz has rightly and
frankly identified the challenges ahead. We must not
lose sight of our shared goal in this regard.

The bottom-line message is that our work and
that of the Committee is far from over. Almost a year
ago, at the counter-terrorism ministerial convened in
this very Chamber, Secretary Powell underscored the
commitment of the United States to the international
community's efforts to address the Al Qaeda danger.
Our efforts, he emphasized, should not come to an end
until the terrorism threat no longer remains.
Let us all work together so that that day will
come sooner and not later, via concrete efforts, full
cooperation with this Committee and in other
multilateral frameworks, and not least through
sufficient political will and demonstrated national
priorities across the world's capitals.

The United States will do its part. We encourage
other Governments to do theirs, and, acting together,
we will succeed.

