Mr. Goussous (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you every success in
conducting the Council's business. I also cannot fail to
express our gratitude to the brotherly delegation of
Syria for its efforts during its presidency of the Council
last month.

In the light of Israel's continued unacceptable
policies in the occupied Palestinian territories, its
ongoing occupation of Palestinian cities, its violation
of the Fourth Geneva Convention, its continuance of
settlement activities and its construction of a wall of
separation around the Palestinian people - which
violates the line of 4 June 1967 and imposes a fait
accompli on the future of the Palestinian State - and
given its continuing threat against the Palestinian
leadership, the sharp increase in the suffering of the
Palestinian people and Israel's employment of arbitrary
security measures, including extra-judicial killings, as
well as the continuation of violence and the collapse of
the ceasefire declared by Palestinian factions, we find
ourselves facing an extremely serious situation that
threatens the political and peace process.

In this regard, we condemn the Israeli
Government's decision in principle to remove President
Yasser Arafat, who was legitimately elected by his
people. We call on the Israeli Government to reverse
that decision. We stand against all uses or threats of use
of force against the Palestinian people or its leadership.

We listened with great interest to Mr. Terje Roed-
Larsen and wish to reiterate once again our
condemnation of the killing of civilians on both sides.
The continuation of violence in the occupied
Palestinian territories will lead not to peace, but to the
further entrenchment of the extremists' positions.
Peace in the Middle East will be achieved only through
the end of Israel's occupation of the Arab territories it
has occupied since 1967; on the basis of land for peace
and the resolutions of international legitimacy -
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1397 (2002) -
and the Arab peace initiative; and through the
commitment of all parties to the road map and the
implementation of its provisions in order to achieve the
goal of establishing a Palestinian State by the year
2005. Any other option will take much longer and
require a far greater mobilization of international
support.

