Ms. Murmokaite (Lithuania): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to present the
outgoing Chairs' views on the work done in steering the
Council's subsidiary bodies. I have had the privilege
to set up and preside over two sanctions committees:
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2127 (2013) concerning the Central African Republic
and the Committee established pursuant to resolution
2140 (2014) concerning Yemen, as well as the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. I am afraid my text will be rather
long because those are three bodies to which we have
dedicated a lot of effort and passion.
I would first like to touch upon some of the
working methods and good practices in the work of the
subsidiary bodies that I presided over and then move on
specifically to the Counter-Terrorism Committee. With
regard to the working methods, lessons learned and
suggested good practices, whether with the sanctions
committees or other subsidiary bodies, we have sought
to promote transparency and openness. While the
work is done among the 15 members of the Security
Council, we believe it would defeat the purpose for
respective bodies to keep it all to themselves. Because
even if it is the 15 members that deliberate and make
decisions, all States Members of the United Nations
are expected to implement the sanctions regimes and to
report accordingly. In both areas we have considerable
problems, as my colleague, the Jordanian Ambassador,
referred to.

For that to happen, the entire United Nations
membership needs to understand clearly what the
subsidiary bodies are doing and what is expected of
them in particular. From the outset, we have therefore
insisted on open briefings to Security Council members
on the work of the bodies we presided over. We have
also organized the first-ever open briefing to the wider
United Nations membership on the Yemen sanctions
regime, and I wish I had organized a similar one on
the Central African Republic sanctions regime. I am
well aware of the scepticism from some quarters within
the Council on the merits of such openness. To that, I
can only say that my delegation is happy to see more
and more chairs of subsidiary bodies choosing open
Council briefings on their work. To us, that is proof that
we have chosen the right path. Better compliance and
implementation can come only through such openness
and better communication.

To that end, we have also issued regularly press
statements on the work of the sanctions committees
aimed at sensitizing the wider audience on the work
we do. Such statements may not be the most exciting
read, but they allow to better disseminate relevant
information, develop better understanding of the aims
of and expectations from the respective committees
and can remind the spoilers that we are watching very
closely and are ready to take further action. We have
also considered introducing Chair's statements where
appropriate, but I would leave that idea for the incoming
Chairs to consider.

In the case of the Counter-Terrorism Committee,
we have used the Chair's discretion to organize a series
of open briefings and thematic meetings on specific
counter-terrorism and counter-violent extremism
issues, which have seen large audiences and active
participation. We think it is a good practice that should
continue because if counter-terrorism efforts are to
be effective, we need the engagement of all United
Nations membership. With the terrorist threat as grave
as ever and even more serious than before, work behind
close doors must be combined with transparency and
inclusiveness.

A related issue is access to information. Again, it
matters if we want sanctions regimes to be implemented
and have an impact on the ground. In that respect, we
welcome the efforts taken by the Secretariat to improve
the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions lists by
standardizing the formats and creating a consolidated
list. Such lists and other related information should
be readily available in all official languages of the
Organization. How can we speak about the Yemen
sanctions regime, for example, if the information is
not available in Arabic? The Secretariat has done some
work on making the sanctions committee websites
more user-friendly, but there is clearly scope for further
improvements in that respect. Introducing simplified
user-friendly matrixes of exemptions requests is
another improvement, which we implemented with the
Central African Republic sanctions regime, and I think
it represents a good way forward.

My next point concerns outreach and engagement
with a diverse range of actors concerned. Again, my
colleagues have spoken on some of those issues from
their own perspective. From the very outset, we have
sought to engage the respective countries - Yemen
and the Central African Republic - their neighbours,
and other interested partners, inviting them to formal,
informal and informal informal meetings, which we
held regularly at our Mission. We have also provided
informal briefings to countries concerned on the
work of the Committees. Such interaction is vital for
the sanctions regimes to work, and needs to be done
consistently and persistently. For example, as a result of
engaging with the Central African Republic Transitional
Authorities on the arms embargo, including by video-
teleconference with Government authorities in Bangui,
the Committee's guidelines were amended, for the first
time, to allow the Central African Republic itself to
submit arms embargo exemption requests. However,
the Committee remains of the opinion that lethal arms
cannot be provided until there are credible assurances
regarding proper storage of and accountability for
weapons and until proper vetting and restructuring of
the Forces armees centrafricaines has taken place. Such
was also the view I heard from representatives of the
African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of
Central African States (ECCAS) during my visit on the
ground.

I believe that geographical contacts need to be
expanded beyond the immediate neighbourhood
because sanctions trails tend to take us to quite
distant destinations from time to time with serious
consequences for compliance. Involving regional
organizations should be further explored, and I thank
the AU, ECCAS and the mediator's office in Bangui for
being ready and willing to engage on the issues related
to the sanctions regime.

We have also sought to expand the range of briefers,
both in sanctions committees and in the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. To that end, we have organized
briefings by the Special Representative ofthe Secretary-
General on Sexual Violence in Conflict, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children
and Armed Conflicts, the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the United Nations Mine Action
Service (UNMAS), the Office ofthe High Commissioner
for Human Rights; INTERPOL, the International
Civil Aviation Organization and the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. On the Central African
Republic, we have suggested that Kimberly Process
representatives be involved. We have not done that, but
I think it is important because about 1 million people
in the Central African Republic depend on the diamond
industry. We have also suggested engagement with
the Peacebuilding Commission country configuration
on the Central African Republic and the International
Criminal Court, as we see clear links between the work
of the sanctions committees and those bodies. I can
only regret that we could not proceed along those lines,
owing to the individual objections.

In the case of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
again, emphasis was placed on expanding the
geographical, as well as regional and thematic
engagement. I am pleased to note that we organized
the first-ever briefings by the European Union and the
Council of Europe, and expanded contacts with NATO
on very practical matters, such as the early response
to terrorist attacks and foreign terrorist fighters. We
have also involved the World Tourism Organization,
the World Health Organization and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, and engaged
with the International Civil Aviation Organization and
INTERPOL, in particular, on a regular basis, because
those organizations have very practical and accessible
tools that could allow countries to reduce the threat
of foreign terrorist fighters travelling. Unfortunately,
those tools are dramatically underutilized by countries,
and I believe that work should continue to bring to the
attention of Member States the tools that are readily
available.

Concerning coordination and synergy building, I
believe that we have also taken innovative and practical
steps in that respect. On Yemen, in June 2014, the 2140
Sanctions Committee held a common meeting for the
first time with the Committee pursuant to resolutions
1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and
associated individuals and entities and the Counter-
Terrorism Committee, because there are overlapping
and common interests that had to be discussed in the
context of Yemen in its fight against terrorism. As
terrorist groups continue to benefit from instability
in the country, another result-oriented meeting of
that kind, I believe, is in order. We also initiated joint
meetings between the Central African Republic and
Yemen sanctions committees and the Working Group
on Children and Armed Conflict, with biefings from
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Zerrougui. We are very satisfied with the cooperation
that we have received on the part Malaysia in its
capacity as Chair of the Working Group on Children
and Armed Conflict.

While such joint formats are practical in saving
resources and reducing the burden placed on the
briefers, they also enable to combine forces in seeking
better responses to the problem at hand. I believe that
travel to the countries concerned - the Ambassador of
Jordan has spoken extensively of her recent trip - is
a most useful tool. I regret having been unable to visit
Yemen because of conditions on the ground. I would
suggest that the incoming Chairs undertake annual
visits, where possible. My visit to the Central African
Republic from 25 to 28 August provided an important
opportunity to receive feedback on the ground from
a wide range of actors, including the Transitional
Authorities, diplomatic missions, senior management
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
mining authorities, the United Nations family,
UNMAS, aid workers on the ground, and local civil
and opinion leaders. During my visit, I also met with
representatives of ECCAS, the African Union and the
Office of the Mediator. The visit also served to pave
the way for improved communication and collaboration
between the Panel of Experts and the Central African
Transitional Authorities. It also helped to better
understand existing misconceptions with regard to the
sanctions regime, as well as local expectations. My
suggestion for the future would be for the Chairs to
include not only the country concerned in their visits,
but also some key actors in the region while on such
trips.

With regard to what could be improved, we believe
that there is a clear need for a dedicated capacity on
sanctions regimes within the Secretariat. For the
time being, Secretariat work is rather patchy in that
regard, depending as it does on the enthusiasm of
individual staff members. We extend our huge thanks
to David Biggs, whose advice and initiative have been
a tremendous help in our work on the Central African
Republic Sanctions Committee. However, I believe that
that should be a standard practice and not depend on
individual good will, passion or enthusiasm, especially
with regard to the huge need for capacity-building
mobilization, because, besides the lack of political will,
it is often the lack of capacity that prevents countries
from complying. We need to design ways to help the
countries concerned, especially focusing on capacity-
building with multiplier effects on the ground.

There are additional concerns, including the lack
of compliance and reporting, and the Ambassador of
Jordan has just spoken extensively on that subject.
Despite all the explanation and outreach work that
we have carried out informally in our mission, that
has been a constant source of concern. In the case of
the Central African Republic, sanctioned individuals
have been travelling freely, and on some occasions
their travel has been facilitated by Member States of
the region, despite repeated communication on the
part of the Chair and the Panel of Experts and the
express requests of the Transitional Authorities of the
Central African Republic, including the Transitional
President herself. We call on all the States concerned
to abstain from any further actions that interfere
with the extremely fragile transition process in the
Central African Republic and to respect the will of the
Transitional Authorities and the people of the Central
African Republic in that regard. Spoilers should not
be allowed to travel freely, and messages of incitement
should not be allowed to be aired from outside the
country. It hurts the transition and, above all, it hurts
the people of the Central African Republic. As long as
the conflict in the Central African Republic continues,
it will hurt the neighbouring countries too. There are
therefore regional consequences to non-compliance.

I continue to call for more resolute action on the part
of Committee with regard to sanctions designations.
The Panel has provided a total of 25 detailed statements
of cases involving individuals and entities that, in the
Panel's view, meet the designation criteria set by the
Security Council. Only five individuals and one entity
have been sanctioned to date. Today, the Committee is
to conclude its consideration of two additional names
for designation, but I believe that we should send a
stronger message at this particularly crucial moment in
the history of the Central African Republic, ahead of
the elections, as spoilers continue to interfere with the
transition and lives continue to be lost in the Central
African Republic.

On Yemen, I regret to note that the Committee
acted too little and too late when the processes on
the ground were spinning out of control. I also regret
the unintended humanitarian consequences that have
been hitting the civilian population and the lack of
reporting on sanctions implementation, including
on the implementation of the arms embargo. Cutting
off the flow of financial resources to the sanctioned
individuals, in the case of Yemen, also requires more
effort. With regard to both Yemen and the Central
African Republic, I sincerely thank all countries
for their cooperation with the respective Panels of
Experts, enabling visits and information-gathering on
the ground. It has been a tremendous help. I hope that
full and continued cooperation with the Panels will be
extended in the future.

Finally, I would like to say a few general words
on sanctions, which are very much in line with what
the Ambassador of Jordan has said. Sanctions are not
a cure-all, but they do have a role to play in tackling
impunity and restraining perpetrators, especially
wherever and whenever other means of bringing the
perpetrators to account may not be at hand. Imposing
sanctions is a way of telling the rapists, murderers,
abusers, child recruiters and spoilers of fragile political
processes that the world, and the Council in particular,
are watching and are ready to step up and put an end to
the harm that they inflict. It is especially important, as
I have already stated, in cases in which there is no other
recourse to accountability andjustice.

I would like to turn to the Counter-Terrorism
Committee, specifically. We live in a world where
business as usual is no longer an option. My delegation
has sought to make the Committee more proactive,
forward-looking and operational in its work, while at
the same time seeking to promote greater interaction,
coherence and synergies among the various counter-
terrorism actors within the United Nations system.
We have worked to identify specific measures that
States need to take in order to further strengthen their
implementation of resolutions 1373 (2001), 1624 (2005)
and 2178 (2014), including measures to address the
aforementioned issues, trends and developments. The
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
(CTED) has completed detailed assessments of
the progress made by 39 States in implementing
resolution 1373 (2001) on measures introduced by
States to strengthen counter-terrorism legislation,
financial monitoring regimes, border control and law
enforcement mechanisms, criminal justice systems,
international cooperation, human rights mechanisms
and strategies to prevent and counter violent extremism.
In accordance with resolution 2178 (2014), CTED has
also prepared five analytical reports for the Council on
foreign terrorist fighters.

We have strengthened our engagement with civil
society and academia, including through the launch of
the Global Counter-Terrorism Research Network. Our
interaction with our Network partners has deepened
our analytical capacities and strengthened our ability
to identify new and emerging terrorism threats and
developments and to advise Member States on how to
deal with them. In order to raise awareness of the main
challenges arising from new and emerging terrorism
issues, as well as the good practices developed to
address them, the Committee, assisted by CTED,
has convened a number of special meetings and open
briefings.

In July, in accordance with the presidential
statement S/PRST/2014/23, the Committee held a
special meeting in Madrid on stemming the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters. At this very moment, the
Committee is holding a special meeting on preventing
terrorists from exploiting the Internet and social media.
Among other innovations that we sought to include were
the first high-level political regional visit conducted
by myself, the CTED Executive Director, the Special
Envoy of the Secretary-General for the Sahel and the
African Union Special Representative for Counter-
Terrorism to Mali and the Niger at the beginning ofthis
year, following which I transmitted a letter directly to
the Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs and
the Chair of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force (CTITF) Office, conveying the Committee's
request that the CTITF and United Nations Counter-
Terrorism Centre give priority consideration to the
list of capacity-building projects identified. We also
focused on vulnerable regions in a targeted way. We
convened two such meetings on the Horn of Africa and
Central Asia.

I believe that such regional approaches could be
continued, in addition to individual country assessments
and individual approaches. We have also sought to bring
the Committee's work up to date by shortening the time
between country visits and reporting, because what
good does it do to discuss today a visit or assessment
that took place two or three years ago? I have also
introduced specific proposals to activate the role of the
Vice-Chairs of the Committee.

During my period as Chair, I have worked with
members of the Committee, CTED and other United
Nations system partners to improve the speed and
efficiency with which capacity-building assistance is
delivered, reaching out to the Department of Political
Affairs and CTITF, in particular. As part of our
continuing efforts in that area, the Committee recently
held its first retreat with key United Nations partners.
Participants included CTITF, the Rule of Law Unit
in the Executive Office of the Secretary-General,
the Assistant Secretary-General for Information and
Communications Technology, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Legal Affairs, the
1267 (1999) Committee, the Department of Safety and
Security, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations,
the Office for the Coordination ofHumanitarian Affairs,
the Department of Public Information, International
Monetary Fund, INTERPOL, the International
Organization for Migration and the World Bank. The
discussions focused, inter alia, on the effective delivery
of counter-terrorism strategies and measures, the
assessment of their impact on ground, shortening the
road from assessment to assistance and the improved
delivery of capacity-building.

Looking ahead, as a matter of priority the Committee
and CTED must continue working with Member States
on the implementation of the recommendations of
the analytical reports on foreign terrorist fighters,
as well as the priority recommendations identified
during the Committee's two special meetings. The
Committee will also need to devote particular attention
to a number of emerging thematic issues, including the
problems associated with children and adolescents in
the terrorism environment, and the diversification of
terrorism financing. Compliance with human rights

and the rule of law has always been and should remain
a key pillar of the Committee's and CTED's efforts.

I would like to take this opportunity to convey
my most sincere thanks and appreciation to all those
who have worked with and supported us during the
implementation of our mandate: the Secretariat; the two
Panels of Experts, in particular the Panel of Experts of
the Central African Republic Committee; the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic; every country
with which we have interacted during the past two
years; my colleagues within the Council; my own team,
which has done its utmost; and the interpreters, who
have suffered through the rapid delivery of my remarks
today.

In conclusion, I encourage the incoming Chairs to
do their jobs with their hearts. It cannot be bureaucratic
task. We deal with the most vulnerable and fragile
countries, where tremendous tragedies are taking place
at the individual and community levels. I do not think
that doing it in a bureaucratic frame of mind is the right
way to go. Only with the full engagement of both the
heart and mind in this work can a difference be made.

