Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank the
Equatorial Guinean presidency for organizing today's
meeting, which comes at a particularly important
time for the Central African Republic, two weeks
after the signing of the Political Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic,
on 6 February. I would also like to extend a special
welcome to the important and appreciated presence of
the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Central Africans
Abroad of the Central African Republic, and thank all
our speakers for their very informative briefings.

I would also like to express our warm and
heartfelt thanks to Special Representative Parfait
Onanga-Anyanga for his exemplary and multifaceted
commitment to the outstanding work he has done for
nearly three and a half years at the helm of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA).
On behalf of France, I would like to express to him our
deep gratitude. Allow me also to express our gratitude
to Commissioner Sma'i'l Chergui, not only for his
presence here today but for his important contribution
to the conclusion of the peace agreement.

France welcomes the signing ofthe peace agreement
between the Central African Government and the 14
armed groups in Bangui on 6 February after two weeks
of negotiations in Khartoum within the framework of
the African Initiative for Peace and Reconciliation,
under the auspices of the African Union and with the
support of the United Nations. This Agreement is an
important step towards lasting peace in the Central
African Republic and the restoration of State authority
throughout the Central African Republic. In other words,
this agreement can and must mark a new beginning for
the Central African Republic. In this context, France
welcomes the commitment of the Central African
parties to the negotiations, and commends the decisive
role played by the African Union and the United Nations,
whose exemplary partnership has once again proved its
full effectiveness, as well as the support provided by
the countries of the region.
We are already hearing sceptics claiming that
many other agreements have already gone unheeded.
But the main difference with the other agreements is
the unanimous commitment of the Central African
actors and the Central African Republic's partners in
support of the agreement. The political will is there; it
is strong, and it is a tremendous reason for hope, even
if it is obviously not a question of underestimating
the difficulties that remain on the way ahead. The
challenge of the coming period is therefore to seize this
historic opportunity.

The signing of this peace agreement is a decisive
first step on the road to peace. All efforts must now
focus on its full implementation. That is why it is
essential for Central African parties, and in particular
the armed groups, to honour their commitments
immediately and in good faith. We see three immediate
priorities in that regard.

The first test will be ending the violence committed
by armed groups against civilians, humanitarian
personnel and MINUSCA. The abuses committed by
armed groups since last October, which have left more
than 100 people dead in Alindao, Bakouma and Ippy,
are unacceptable. The attacks against the Central
African defence and security forces and MINUSCA in
Bambari, during which French forces were compelled
to use force at the request of the United Nations, are
also unjustifiable. Armed groups must therefore lay
down their weapons, cease all forms of destabilizing
activities, including the recruitment and use of children,
and be held accountable for violence, including sexual
violence, before the courts, in particular the Special
Criminal Court. In that regard, I welcome cooperation
between the Central African Republic and the
International Criminal Court.

We also hope that the implementation of the
Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in
the Central African Republic will make it possible to
meet the aspirations expressed by the Central African
people at the Bangui Forum in May 2015, in particular
with regard to demands for justice, inclusiveness and
national reconciliation. We welcome the commitments
made by President Touadera and the establishment
of a mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
agreement at the national and local levels, which is
an important innovation compared to previous peace
agreements signed in the Central African Republic.
It is essential - and I would like to underscore this
point - that women be able to participate fully.

Lastly, the role of the international community in
supporting the implementation of the agreement will be
decisive, politically, financially and technically. France
reiterates its full support for President Faustin-Archange
Touadera and will remain fully committed, alongside
the Central African Republic, to supporting the
implementation of the agreement. In that regard, France
has decided to increase its bilateral aid contributions
to the Central African Republic, including through the
funding of quick-impact projects for the benefit of the
people in Central Africa. It essential that the people
concerned quickly see some initial tangible benefits of
the new peace agreement. It is vital that the countries of
the region support and assist with the implementation of
the agreement. Finally, it is absolutely necessary for all
partners of the Central African Republic to coordinate
their actions on the ground and act in a transparent
manner to ensure that peace is achieved.

Before concluding my statement, I would like to
reiterateFrance'sfullsupportforMINUSCAandconfirm
our full support to the new Special Representative,
Mr. Mankeur Ndiaye, as he carries out his important
mandate. As we all know, MINUSCA operates in a
difficult environment. That is another reason for us to
be committed to supporting it and providing it with the
necessary means to conduct its mission, as it plays an
indispensable role in stabilizing the Central African
Republic - in particular with regard to the protection
of civilians, support for the delivery of humanitarian
aid and support for the redeployment of the Central
African Armed Forces, trained by the European Union
Military Training Mission in the Central African
Republic. I would again like to commend the work and
central role played by the Mission in supporting security
sector reform. The involvement of MINUSCA will also
be decisive, alongside other partners of the Central
African Republic, in supporting the implementation of
the peace agreement.

Lastly, I would like to pay tribute to the Blue Helmets
who have paid a heavy price for their commitment
to the Central African Republic and commend all of
the efforts undertaken by MINUSCA to increase its
mobility, improve its operational performance, seek the
full safety of its personnel through effective medical
evacuation capabilities but also continue the work
undertaken to prevent cases of sexual exploitation and
abuse and ensure that they do not remain unpunished.

I would like to conclude my statement by
reiterating that it is important for the Council and for
the international community to remain mobilized and
united in support of the Central African Republic and
MINUSCA. That is the compass that guides France and
that must guide each Council member.

