The President: Partnerships are, indeed,
important in increasing and improving the overall
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations in stabilization processes. As the
representative of the United Kingdom underlined, we
should make those partnerships work. The United
Kingdom has proposed several further steps for
pursuing cooperation between the United Nations and
regional organizations. Hopefully, we can continue this
encouraging discussion during Romania's second
presidency, in 2005.

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Prime Minister of Romania.

I remember a previous occasion, more than a
decade ago, when I sat, somewhere in the middle of the
left half of this celebrated table, representing Romania
as its Foreign Minister, dealing together with other 14
representatives with the first challenges and
opportunities of the post-cold war era.

At the outset, I would like to express my
appreciation to the Secretary-General, as well as to the
heads of regional organizations for their participation
in today's debate. I am grateful for the insightful
recommendations and contributions they have made
during the consideration of our chosen theme.

Today, we are addressing one of the main issues
of modern thinking on international relations. With the
support of regional organizations, we can build a more
stable foundation for peace and security in all regions

of the world. Indeed, synergetic partnerships between
the United Nations and regional organizations invite
optimal use of stabilization resources and capabilities.
Recent remarkable illustrations of this have been the
European Union peace enforcement mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, NATO's command
of the International Security Assistance Force and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's
field activities in South-East Europe and the Caucasus.
In the wake of the Istanbul Summit, NATO is poised to
pursue stabilization efforts in Afghanistan. These
examples show the numerous advantages of
cooperation between the United Nations and regional
organizations and the wide variety of possible inter-
institutional architectures for stabilization.

While we search for modes of cooperation, we
must keep in mind that the differing characteristics of
regional organizations in terms of membership,
resource availability and institutional capacity, as well
as the uniqueness of each conflict situation, defy the
construction of a universal model of cooperation.
Nevertheless, as we heard today, some general
principles should guide cooperative processes, namely,
the primacy of Chapter VIII of the United Nations
Charter and the Security Council's role in preserving
international peace and security. If our discussions
today are to serve a meaningful purpose, cooperation
should be based on the respective comparative
advantages of the United Nations and regional
organizations. Such comparative advantages should
also determine which organization it would be most
appropriate to engage in a given conflict situation. For
that reason, cooperation must be an ongoing process
culminating in the evaluation of lessons learned and
best practices based on experience.

We can all agree that today we have gathered a
real wealth of valuable proposals. Indeed, channels of
communication should promote the coordination of
efforts at Headquarters as well as in the field. They
should be developed in accordance with the mandates
of each relevant organization and in response to the
requirements of each conflict situation.

Further engagement with regional organizations
can be based on the joint appointment of special
representatives, the exchange of liaison officers
between mission headquarters and the pursuit of
regular dialogue between the United Nations
Secretariat and the secretariats of regional
organizations. Those practices could enhance the
exchange of information at the operational, strategic
and policy levels and ensure coordinated activities
based on a common security agenda.

A noteworthy development in the synergy
between the United Nations and regional organizations
is cross-sector cooperation between Security Council
committees and regional organizations. The Security
Council's Counter-Terrorism Committee thus convened
three special meetings with international, regional and
subregional organizations.
We have at our disposal several means which can
be usefully employed to oversee the effectiveness of
cooperative arrangements in the different areas of
stabilization processes. For example, one can create
monitoring mechanisms which, based on the regular
and systematic exchange of lessons learned, best
practices and joint projects, would themselves
contribute to strengthening synergetic efforts.

However, there is greater need for capacity
development in regional organizations in order to make
full use of their potential assets in stabilization
processes. We should not lose sight of the fact that
while some States belong to several regional
organizations, not all States are members of a regional
organization. For that reason, support should be given
to fostering the creation of regional organizations in all
parts of the world and to the consolidation of emerging
regional entities. Such efforts must begin with the
development of standards and norms, as well as the
creation of the political, military, economic, social and
cultural mechanisms needed for their promotion.

There is growing cooperation among regional
organizations themselves, as witnessed by partnership
agreements for logistical and military support. Such
cooperation also focuses on capacity-building; an
example is the European Union's arrangement with the
African Union for conflict resolution, conflict
prevention and peacekeeping capacity development.

A praiseworthy illustration of effective
multilateralism at work, aimed at alleviating the
suffering of more than 2 million people in need as a
result of the Darfur crisis, is the trilateral cooperation
that is emerging among the African Union, the
European Union and the United Nations in addressing
the first humanitarian crisis of such dimensions in the
twenty-first century.

As the world body responsible for international
peace and security, the Security Council has a clear
role to play in assisting in capacity-building and
funding for regional organizations. Thus, the Council
might consider appealing for more energetic support
from the international donor community to regional
peace and security initiatives.

Interaction with regional organizations in
stabilization processes should favour a
multidimensional strategy that focuses on preventing
regression into conflict, promoting consolidation of
peace and ensuring long-term stability. This requires
full and long-term engagement in post-conflict phases,
as the consolidation of peace is frequently reversible.
Synergetic efforts should also focus on post-
conflict economic development, given the linkage
between security and development. The expertise of
regional and subregional organizations whose original
mandates focused on the promotion of economic
integration, such as the Caribbean Community and the
Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), might be of value in ensuring the success
of strategies for long-term economic growth and
stability.

There is also great need for coordinated activities
between regional organizations and United Nations
departments and agencies in addressing the complex
issues of conflict-torn countries. Guinea-Bissau is a
good example of common efforts by ECOWAS, the
Security Council and United Nations agencies. In
addition, the contributions of civil society
organizations are important, as their input can always
enhance peace consolidation and reconstruction efforts.

I would like to comment on the stability and
democratization of my country and, indeed, of Eastern
and Central Europe, which can largely be attributed to
regional integration dynamics.

Support from the European Union and NATO,
and the emulation of governance patterns in countries
members of those organizations, strengthened
Romania's advance towards democracy and the rule of
law. Not only were we recipients of multilateral
expertise in the field of regional peace and stability; we
ourselves gradually became promoters of cooperative
frameworks and initiatives aimed at enhancing regional
cohesiveness in addressing the security climate in the
Balkans.

Given its membership in the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), as well as
its chairmanship of the OSCE in 2001 and its current
chairmanship of the South-East European Cooperation
Process, as well as its bid for membership in the
European Union, Romania rightly values regional
undertakings and can contribute to the identification
within the Security Council of the most adequate
means to foster cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in peace and
security activities.

Exploring possible synergies between Security
Council meetings with regional organizations and the
Secretary-General's high-level meetings with heads of
regional organizations would enhance the architecture
of interaction between the United Nations and regional
organizations.
The consideration of today's topic is not meant as
a one-time event. It will, however, constitute the
central theme of Romania's elected mandate in the
Security Council. Romania hopes that the Council will
agree to revisit this subject during the landmark year of
2005, and beyond, as a legacy of our membership in
this body.

The stakes are very high. Reaching this kind of
cooperation between our universal Organization and
our regional arrangements will enable us to address
every case of tension, to respond to every crisis, to end
any conflict and, ultimately, to create a safer world for
generations to come. It is also my hope that our
dialogue today and the initiatives emanating from this
debate will be considered by the High-Level Panel on
Threats, Challenges and Change in its consideration of
how to ensure better responses to present-day threats to
security.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.

Following consultations among members of the
Security Council, I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council:

"The Security Council met on 20 July 2004
to consider 'Cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations in
stabilization processes'. Members recalled that
Articles 52 and 53 of the United Nations Charter
set forth the contribution of regional
organizations to the settlement of disputes, as

well as the relationship between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

"The Security Council recalls its invitation
of January 1993 to regional organizations to
improve coordination with the United Nations,
the Declaration of the General Assembly of
December 1994 on the enhancement of
cooperation between the United Nations and
regional arrangements or agencies, and its
meeting on 'The Security Council and regional
organizations: facing the new challenges to
international peace and security', held on 11
April 2003 under the Mexican presidency of the
Council.

"On 20 July, members expressed their views
on the cooperation between the United Nations
and regional organizations and acknowledged the
important role that can be played by the latter in
the prevention, resolution and management of
conflicts, including by addressing their root
causes.

"The statements emphasized that the
Security Council has primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and
security and that effectively addressing the
numerous conflict situations confronting the
international community would require an
increased level of cooperation with regional
organizations, where appropriate.

"Member States and heads of regional
organizations participating in the meeting
stressed their interest in enhancing cooperation
between the United Nations and regional
organizations in the maintenance of international
peace and security. They also considered that
regular dialogue on specific issues between the
Council and regional organizations would bring
significant added value in this respect.

"It was stressed that common and
coordinated efforts undertaken by the United
Nations and regional organizations in
stabilization processes should be based on
complementarity and their comparative
advantages, making full use of their experience,
in accordance with the United Nations Charter
and the relevant Statutes of the regional
organizations.

"The statements reiterated the importance of
a coherent approach to stabilization processes
through improved cooperation and collaboration,
including increased and timely exchange of
information between United Nations and regional
organizations, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 54 of the United Nations Charter.

"The Security Council welcomes the
ongoing practice of high-level meetings of the
Secretary-General with regional organizations
and the consensus reached over modalities of
cooperation in conflict prevention and principles
of cooperation in peace-building. It invites the
Secretary-General to give consideration to the
relevant views expressed in this debate in
preparation of the next high-level meeting and to
keep the Council informed as appropriate.

"The Security Council invites regional
organizations to take necessary steps to increase
collaboration with the United Nations in order to
maximize efficiency in stabilization processes
and also encourages enhanced cooperation and
coordination among regional and subregional
organizations themselves, in particular through

exchange of information and sharing experience
and best practices.

"The Security Council invites all Members
of the United Nations to contribute to the
strengthening of the capacity of regional and
subregional organizations in all parts of the world
including through the provision of human,
technical and financial assistance.

"The Council invites all Members of the
United Nations, and other parts of the United
Nations system with relevant experience and
expertise, to contribute to this process."

This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol
S/PRST/2004/27.

There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.

May I take this opportunity to extend my
gratitude to all the participants in this joint exercise
aimed at strengthening cooperation between the United
Nations and regional organizations.

The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.
