Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): South Africa
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
Mr. Ban Ki-moon, for his briefing to the Council. We
thank the delegation of the United Kingdom for
organizing this important debate. It is indeed important
that we reflect on the momentous events that have
resulted in significant political changes in the Arab
world. More importantly, this is an opportunity to share
ideas on how to deal with those countries that are still
embroiled in conflicts and those that are going through
a post-conflict phase. The year 2011 will forever be
ingrained in the memory of the world as the year of
Arab uprisings, characterized by, inter alia, mass
protests and armed insurgencies.

Our assessment of the uprisings in the Arab
States, many created as colonial constructs resulting
from the Sykes-Picot Agreement, shows that those
protests, were, among other things, a cry for political
emancipation from decades of totalitarianism, a cry for
proportionate distribution of wealth and power, and a
call for participation in democratic processes,
including governance, and access to economic
opportunities.

It is clear that the patience of those peoples, who
had lived under repressive regimes for many years, had
been tested to the maximum. Indeed, the social
contract in those societies had broken down
irretrievably. The Arab Spring is a clear indication of
how much the people of those countries yearn for
freedom, democracy and other basic human rights.

The five volumes of the United Nations
Development Programme's Arab Human Development
Report provide relevant insights into the causes and the
warnings of the Arab revolutions. The first edition,
published in 2002, noted that the freedom deficit in the
Arab world undermined human development and was
one of the most painful manifestations of lagging
political development.

Subsequently, seven years later, the 2009 edition
further noted that approximately 30 per cent of young
people in Arab countries were unemployed, that more
than 50 per cent of the population was under the age of
24, and that 51 million new jobs needed to be created by
2020 in order to avoid an increase in the unemployment
rate. Those and other similar reports should have raised
alarms in the Arab world and compelled Governments to
realize that the socio-economic and development needs
of the people - particularly young people - needed to
be addressed. The fact that most if not all of the
uprisings were initiated by young people should not be
surprising.

Obviously, in today's rapidly globalizing and
integrated world, the turmoil in the Arab world does
not only affect Arab peoples and is not limited to the
Arab world. The rest of the world has been affected in
many ways, including through rising oil prices, the
growing number of refugees, the rise in the number of
illegal weapons, and increased tensions between
nations. Given the umbilical cord that connects Africa
to the Arab world, the African continent has been
adversely affected as a result of the undesirable
spillover effects of the Arab revolutions. In that regard,
we humbly offer the following thoughts for
consideration.

First, South Africa strongly believes that it is
essential that Governments should respect the will of
the people. It is therefore essential that the peoples of
the region gain the opportunity to determine their
future. That can happen only if the systems established
reflect the aspirations of the people of the various
countries in the region, including of women and youth.

Secondly, security and development are
interlinked. As the Security Council acknowledged in

its presidential statement of February 2011
(S/PRST/2011/4), development can no longer be
divorced from deliberations and interventions that are
traditionally security-related. The Council also
recognized that that is an essential element of its work
in the maintenance of international peace and security.
We emphasize that that does not necessarily mean that
the Council has to usurp developmental functions
undertaken by other bodies within the United Nations
system, but rather that it should take social and
development issues into account in relevant
deliberations within its Charter mandate. Given the
nature of the developments in the Middle East and
North Africa in the past year, more focus should be
placed on the relevant developmental challenges that
the people of that region face.

Thirdly, South Africa reiterates its view that the
Council should strengthen its conflict prevention
mechanisms by elaborating a comprehensive
prevention strategy. At the centre of that strategy
should be the strengthening of the United Nations and
regional early warning apparatus. In our view, it is vital
that developmental aspects should also be integrated
into our efforts at conflict prevention, resolution,
management and post-conflict peacebuilding.

Fourthly, related to what I have just mentioned,
partnerships with international financial institutions, in
particular the World Bank and regional development
structures, are critical in buttressing peace efforts in
countries in transition. Equally, we emphasize the
importance of context-specific and nationally owned
interventions.

Fifthly, as those countries transition into
democracy, there is a need to address the wrongs of the
past through efforts aimed at reconciliation and
transitional justice. Reconciliation efforts should be
undertaken and supported by the Council. We would
warn against prescribing how such efforts should be
undertaken, as each conflict is unique, but the
international community should support the people of
the region in that important area.

Related to reconciliation efforts is the need to
ensure adherence to the rule of law. In January, the
Council emphasized the need for universal adherence
to, and implementation of, the rule of law, and that the
promotion of the rule of law and justice was an
indispensable element for peaceful coexistence (see S/PV.6705). The discussions underscored the
inextricable link between the promotion of justice and
the attainment of peace in conflict and post-conflict
situations.

Lastly, we should warn that it is not in the
interests of international peace and security for the
international community, including the Security
Council, to use the plight of the Arab peoples to pursue
self-interest and execute regime change. As the United
Nations, we should abide by the same international law
of which we purport to be the master protagonists.
Therefore, the United Nations itself and countries
implementing its mandates should at all times adhere
to international law.

In dealing with those many challenges, it is
important that we work together with regional and
subregional organizations, which, more often than not,
have the relevant insights into the dynamics of a given
conflict and often what solutions to employ. We have
seen such collaboration produce positive results
recently in Yemen, and we hope that it will equally
assist with respect to the situation in Syria.

Whereas the Arab Spring has brought a glimmer
of hope to many in the Arab world, it has unfortunately
left some of the long-standing issues of human rights
abuses and colonization unresolved. In that regard, we
are reminded of the plight of the people of Western
Sahara and Palestine, who still yearn for freedom
despite the seismic political and economic shifts that
have engulfed the region.

In conclusion, the observation of former
Secretary-General Kofi Annan, the current envoy to
Syria, remains valid today when he stated that:

"We will not enjoy development without security,
or security without development. We will not
enjoy either without respect for human rights.
Unless all these causes are advanced, none will
succeed."

Flowing from those words, we offer our support to the
peoples of the Arab world as they chart a better future
for themselves. We hope that, at the centre of our
efforts to improve the lives of those peoples, we will be
guided by the notion of creating an environment within
which citizens can live in harmony, fulfil themselves
and enjoy life in greater freedom.

