Mr. van Walsum (Netherlands): We would like
to thank you, Sir, for calling this open meeting on
Somalia, Under-Secretary-General Prendergast for his
briefing and Ambassador Roble Olhaye for his
extensive oral report on the Djibouti peace initiative.

The Netherlands is certainly not surrendering to
cynicism with regard to Somalia. To use Sir Kieran
Prendergast's words, we are not giving up on Somalia,
and we applaud the initiative of the President of
Djibouti.

Meanwhile, we are aware that we are dealing
with a country that has been without the structure of a
state for several years. If we expect such a country to
readopt statehood, it has to be a good State.
Ambassador Olhaye made the same point, and we
agree with him. We are not calling for statehood at any
price.

Later in this debate, the representative of Portugal
will make a statement on behalf of the European
Union, which my delegation endorses. In addition to
that statement, we would like only to make an
observation of a more general nature.

I believe we all support the Djibouti peace
initiative because no one wants Somalia to disintegrate
beyond repair. We want Somalia to be reborn as one
State, because we subscribe to the doctrine of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU) on the sanctity
of borders. Our support for that doctrine, however, is
not entirely unqualified. Inviolate borders are a
blessing if they enclose a country where fundamental
rights are respected. If not, the borders themselves can
become an instrument of coercion. If a State has not
existed for a number of years, but certain parts of it
have managed to organize themselves more or less
successfully, the doctrine of inviolate borders cannot
imply that these parts are expected to surrender their
freedom and their success to just any political entity
that is supposed to be the successor of the earlier State.
The rebirth of Somalia, if it is to succeed, will have to
be perceived as progress in all parts of the country. In
the end, the responsibility for achieving national
reconciliation and peace rests with all the Somali
people.

