Mr. Zbogar (Slovenia): Allow me to say first a
word of condolence at the passing of His Highness
Shaikh Isa Bin Salman Al-Khalifa, the Amir of Bahrain.
Shaikh Isa Khalifa was a pillar of peace in his region and
commanded wide respect internationally. He will be
missed by the international community as a whole. My
delegation wishes to express its sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of Bahrain and to the
bereaved family.

The last time the Security Council considered the
situation in Sierra Leone in a formal setting was nearly
three months ago, on 18 December 1998. During that
meeting, the representative of Sweden, Ambassador Hans
Dahlgren, briefed the Council on his visit to the region in
his capacity as the Chairman of the Sierra Leone
sanctions Committee. Ambassador Dahlgren's insightful
presentation contained a number of sobering warnings
about the increased tensions in Sierra Leone and the
intensified rebel activity in the north-western part of the
country. In the following days, the prescience of these
warnings was painfully corroborated as the rebels
launched a series of attacks, which brought them back to
the gates of Freetown.

The most recent offensive of the rebel forces has
been described as one of the biggest single calamities to
have befallen Sierra Leone since March 1991, when
members of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF)

 

entered the country for the first time from the territory of
Liberia. Resorting to their trademark habit of inflicting pain
and misery on defenceless civilians, the rebels have killed
hundreds of people and engaged in a veritable orgy of rape
and rapine. Much of the capital of Sierra Leone lies in ruins
and the reconstituted Sierra Leonean police force has been
literally wiped out.

The destruction and mayhem would have been even
greater were it not for the valiant efforts of the forces of
the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS) Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), which
managed to check the rebel advance. The fact that a
measure of order has now been restored to Freetown and its
immediate vicinity speaks volumes about the vital
importance of ECOMOG to the maintenance of peace and
security in Sierra Leone. We therefore commend the
ECOWAS countries for all the support they have provided
to the beleaguered democratically elected Government of
President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah. We would also like to
express our gratitude to those States Members of the United
Nations which contribute their forces, logistical support and
other forms of assistance to ECOMOG.

The Security Council has always favoured a peaceful
settlement of the conflict in Sierra Leone. Resolution 1132
(1997), adopted by the Security Council on 8 October 1997,
specifically insists on support "for the peaceful restoration
of the constitutional order" in the country. We therefore
strongly support the willingness to negotiate with the rebels
and commend the efforts of Special Representative Francis
Okelo to facilitate such dialogue. But we also believe that,
while the Government of Sierra Leone should continue to
refine its policy with regard to negotiations with the rebels,
it must also continue to rely on military action to maintain
law and order. This dual-track approach is all the more
necessary in the light of the publicly expressed
determination of some rebel commanders to seize power at
any cost.

Nonetheless, emphasis should be placed on a
negotiated solution. Despite the fact that the rebels have
already violated two peace agreements, it is important that
the RUF representatives bring their grievances and their
plans for the future of Sierra Leone to the negotiating table.
This would also be an opportunity to listen to their
justifications for mass killings, widespread mutilations and
other atrocities of international notoriety against a people
they apparently wish to govern.

In this connection, we strongly support the appeal of
the draft resolution before us for the provision of assistance
in the creation of a new Sierra Leonean army. In the
years since independence, Sierra Leone has experienced
a wide variety of attempts by its previous armed forces
either to influence the political system or to dominate it
altogether. Even the incarcerated rebel leader Foday
Sankoh is a product of this culture of military
praetorianism. As a corporal in the signals section of the
old Sierra Leonean army, he was cashiered and jailed for
seven years under suspicion of involvement in a coup plot
in 1971. It would therefore be our hope that, through
assistance to the Government of Sierra Leone, members
of the international community could help in the
construction of a new Sierra Leonean military, which
would be mindful of its appropriate role in society and
capable of defending the country.

At this critical juncture in the history of Sierra
Leone, the support of the international community is of
vital importance. The presence of United Nations
personnel on the ground would go a long way towards
demonstrating the continued concern of the outside world
for the predicament of the people of Sierra Leone.
Slovenia therefore supports the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone
(UNOMSIL) and its re-establishment in Freetown, as
envisioned by the Secretary-General in his latest report.

