Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): At the outset, we would
like to express our appreciation to you, Mr. President,
for having organized this important debate. We would
like to extend our thanks to Under-Secretary-General
Alain Le Roy for his introductory remarks and to the
Force Commanders of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan (UNMIS), the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO), the United Nations Mission
in Liberia (UNMIL) and the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), and the
Head of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United
Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO), for
their respective comprehensive presentations.

Lebanon believes that the success of United
Nations peacekeeping operations requires a partnership
among the Security Council, the Secretariat, troop-
contributing countries and the host country, a
partnership that emphasizes the key role of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations in policy
formulation and the Fifth Committee in resource
allocation.

We further believe that the main underpinnings of
success of United Nations peacekeeping and the
transition to peace and development rest on the
following elements.

First, peacekeeping should not be an end in itself
but rather part of a political solution. Comprehensive
resolution of conflicts by dealing with their core causes
should remain the objective. The second element is
developing clear and achievable mandates matched
with the required resources is essential. The third is
adherence to the general principles of peacekeeping,
namely impartiality and the United Nations Charter
principles of sovereignty and political independence.
The fourth element is a strong link between
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. The fifth is
strengthening the role of regional and subregional
organizations, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter. Finally, the sixth element is respect for the
safety and security of United Nations peacekeepers and
positions. Crimes like the 1996 Israeli attack on the
quarters of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) in Qana, south Lebanon, and the
2006 Israeli attack on the UNTSO post, also in south of
Lebanon, should not be repeated.

After paying careful attention to the presentations
of the Force Commanders and the Head of Mission, we
would like to express our hope that such direct
interaction will continue in the future. Such candid
interaction avails us of the opportunity to understand
urgent and direct needs from the field and in turn helps
us, as the Council, to better respond to those needs.

In this regard, we would like to know from Major
General Moses Bisong Obi of the African Union-
United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) and Major General Babacar Gaye of
MONUSCO about the ongoing cooperation among the
United Nations missions in the region: UNMIS,
UNAMID, MONUSCO and the United Nations
Mission in the Central African Republic and Chad.
What are the tools needed to improve cooperation and
the sharing of lessons learned in order to enhance the
combating of transborder rebel activities being carried
out mainly by the Lord's Resistance Army in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African
Republic and the south of the Sudan?

In Liberia, we know that UNMIL is concluding
the third phase of its drawdown to 2,029 military
personnel from its previous level of 9,150. Here, we
hope that Lieutentant General Sikander Afzal will tell
us more about the risk of a security vacuum as the
Mission draws down and about the logistical problems
it faces in concluding this drawdown.

With Haiti, we renew our solidarity in the
aftermath of the humanitarian tragedy caused by the
earthquake. We highly appreciate the efforts of
MINUSTAH, particularly in terms of relief and
assistance to civilians, as well as peacebuilding efforts.
We hope that Major General Luiz Guilherme Paul Cruz
can tell us about the major logistical challenges that the
United Nations and MINUSTAH are facing in
coordinating donor assistance for the relief and
rebuilding efforts.

Turning now to my region, an end to the Israeli
occupation in Palestine, Syria and the remaining parts
of Lebanon - the core cause of the conflict - is a
prerequisite to any comprehensive resolution and to the
success of United Nations peacekeeping missions in
the Middle East. Lebanon fully supports UNIFIL and
UNTSO, and the Lebanese Government is strongly
committed to the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) in its entirety. Both UNIFIL and UNTSO enjoy
excellent coordination with and cooperation from the
Lebanese Government and the Lebanese Armed Forces
in carrying out their mandates. We seek one
clarification from Major General Robert Mood
concerning the current mode of reporting that is
undertaken by UNTSO in terms of whether such
reporting to Headquarters in New York is done directly
or through UNIFIL.

Finally, we salute the dedication, courage and
sacrifices of the peacekeepers deployed in
peacekeeping operations around the world, and we
express our sincere thanks and appreciation to the
peoples and Governments of each and every troop-
contributing country.

