Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): I congratulate you, Sir, on
your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of May. I pledge the full support and
cooperation of my delegation during your tenure of office.
I also wish to pay a warm tribute to your predecessor,
Ambassador Somavr'a, for the charismatic way in which he
guided the work of the Council last month.

Nine months ago, the peace process in Angola was
moving at an encouraging pace, and this led the Security
Council to draw the conclusion, in preambular paragraph
seven of resolution 1008 (1995), that the peace process had

"... entered a new and promising phase".

Since then there has been no accelerated and consistent
forward movement to consolidate the gains of the earlier
period. The latest report of the Secretary-General
(S/1996/328) contains a thorough and realistic analysis of
the situation in Angola and the status of progress, or lack
of it, concerning the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. We agree with the Secretary-General when he
points out in paragraph 33 of his report that UNITA's
procrastination

"if continued, could bring about the collapse of the
whole peace process".

My Government is extremely concerned about the
dangerously slow pace of implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. The peace process in Angola remains fragile
and reversible. It requires the commitment of the
Government of Angola and UNITA not only to stay the
course, but to hurry the pace of implementation. In that
respect, we welcome the calendar of tasks to be
accomplished in May 1996, to which the Government of
Angola and UNITA agreed on 2 May 1996. The tasks to
be completed during the month, as shown in the calendar
agreed to by the two parties, are so vital that their
fulfilment would have a profound and positive impact on
the outcome of the negotiations on the rest of the
outstanding issues. We commend the Government of
Angola for the efforts it has made to fulfil its obligations
under the Lusaka Protocol. These efforts have made it
possible to advance the peace process and for the
international community to identify the real obstacles to
the attainment of peace in Angola and determine how best
to address them.

We encourage the Government of Angola to
continue its exemplary work by completing the
withdrawal of the armed forces to barracks, by the
integration of UNITA soldiers into the Angolan Armed
Forces and by commencing the disarmament of the
civilian population.

The grudging pace at which UNITA has been
quartering its troops represents the greatest obstacle to the
peace process in Angola. It is a matter of grave concern
that nine months before the expiry of the mandate of the
United Nations Angola Verification Mission (UNAVEM. III), half of UNITA's troops are still to be quartered. It is
alarming that more than 2,000 UNITA troops have
deserted the quartering areas, and yet UNITA
commanders find it appropriate to prevent UNAVEM. III
personnel from conducting rollcalls.

UNITA's dissemination of negative information
about conditions in the quartering areas is also unhelpful,
as it can only serve to discourage its troops from going to
the quartering areas or encourage them to desert. The

 

quartering of baby soldiers and old men in the twilight of
their lives is another serious indictment against UNITA. So
is the surrendering of antiquated weapons and the obvious
concealment of its real weapons by UNITA. We call upon
UNITA to emulate the good example of its compatriots, the
Government of Angola, to have courage and the necessary
political will to move the peace process forward - and
rapidly. The next few days will be crucial. The credibility
of UNITA's commitment to the peace process is at stake,
and the international community cannot understand or
tolerate the party's apparent reluctance to bring about
concrete progress in the quartering of its troops.

The draft resolution which the Security Council is
about to adopt is one of the longest resolutions that the
Security Council has adopted on the situation in
Angola.The draft represents the concern of the international
community about the need for the Angolan parties to abide
by the timetable for the implementation of the Lusaka
Protocol. The draft correctly outlines in paragraphs 10 and
11, specific tasks and goals which must be achieved if
crucial deadlines are to be met. This is the essence - the
very heart of the draft resolution. The prospects for peace
in Angola are very much dependent on what can be
achieved in these crucial areas. The mandate of UNAVEM
III is being extended for a period of two months, and we
strongly believe that substantial progress can be achieved
within this period. What is really needed in abundance is
the political will on the part of the Government of Angola
and UNITA at the highest level to remove any and all
obstacles to the implementation of what is, in a very real
sense, the last hope for peace in Angola - the
implementation of the Lusaka Protocol, timeously.

