Mr. Wyzner (Poland): Speaking on the last day of
your term as President of the Security Council, Sir, I would
like to convey our appreciation for the leadership you have
provided to the Council during the month of March. May
I also congratulate your predecessor, Ambassador Dangue
Rewaka of Gabon, on his successful conduct of the
Council's work in the month of February.

I should also like to associate myself unequivocally
with statement made on behalf of the European Union by
Mr. Richmond.

Like other members of the international community,
Poland is seriously concerned at the situation in Kosovo.
Without being addressed in an adequate way, contained and
eventually resolved, the crisis is bound to adversely affect
the still fragile peace and security in this part of Europe.

On 10 March 1998, Professor Bronislaw Geremek, the
Polish Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Chairman-in-
Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE), presented "The Action Plan for Kosovo".
It was later endorsed by the Permanent Council of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in its
Decision 218 of 11 March 1998, which contains a number
of concrete measures that, if implemented by the parties
concerned, could help in decreasing existing tensions and
creating the climate necessary for starting meaningful
dialogue between the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia and the Albanian community in Kosovo.

During the last 10 days the Head of the OSCE,
together with other members of that Organization's Troika
visited Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
main conclusion drawn from the extensive talks with
leaders of the countries bordering the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia is that they perceive the situation in Kosovo as
a real threat to the stability of the whole area and,
consequently, that they expect the international
community to play a role in resolving the crisis. As for
the talks in Belgrade, it is clear that the decisive steps
remain to be taken by the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
and the Serbian authorities in order to make the peaceful
resolution of the Kosovo dilemma a reality.

My country fully shares the assessment of the
situation in Kosovo formulated at the London and Bonn
meetings of the Contact Group, held on 9 and 25 March
1998 respectively, and supports the ensuing conclusions.
I refer in particular to paragraph 6 of the Bonn statement,
according to which Belgrade has not yet fully complied
with the requirements of the Contact Group. May I
emphasize at this point that consent for the mission of
Mr. Felipe Gonzalez, as Personal Representative of the
OSCE Chairman-in-Office and European Union Special
Representative, is long overdue. We also deem it
important to add our voice to those calling for the urgent
start of the process of unconditional dialogue with the
leadership of the Kosovar Albanian community, involving
the federal Yugoslav and Serbian republican levels of
government. It is imperative that both sides promptly
convene talks in order to agree on a framework for a
substantive negotiating process, with the participation of
an outside representative or representatives.

We support the Kosovar Albanians' right to enjoy a
substantially greater degree of autonomy, including
meaningful self-administration within the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia. Any attempt to suppress this
right, especially by using force, deserves condemnation.

At the same time, my country unequivocally opposes
all terrorist activities. The only way to resolve the
situation in Kosovo is through peaceful dialogue and
negotiation. Violence leads nowhere: this is true with
regard to extremist elements among the Kosovar
Albanians, and it is also true with regard to the excessive
and indiscriminate use of force by the police in Kosovo.

The threat of violence still present in Kosovo has to
be removed. We understand that this is one of the main
objectives of the resolution that was adopted a short while
ago by the Council. By its adoption, the Security Council
sent an appropriately strong signal that the international
community is determined not to allow further
deterioration of the situation in Kosovo and that it expects
the parties concerned to implement the steps leading to a
genuine, lasting and peaceful solution to the crisis, as

 

stipulated in the relevant documents of the OSCE and the
Contact Group.

