Mr. Kawamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to extend my hearty congratulations to you, Madam,
on your country's assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council during the month of April. Japan very
much looks forward to working closely with you in the
successful management of the Security Council.

I also express my deepest gratitude to Ambassador
Rycroft forhis splendid work at the helm of the presidency
during the month of March. I join previous speakers
in expressing our deepest condolences and sympathy
to the people and Government of Russia, following the
heinous terrorist attack that took place yesterday.

I thank Ambassador Jeremiah Kingsley Mamabolo
for his informative briefing and congratulate him on his
appointment as Joint Special Representative for Darfur
and Head of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). Japan looks forward
to continuing to work with him in his new capacity.

Japan is encouraged that there has been no major
fighting in Darfur during the current reporting period. To
avoid any relapse and to completely eliminate conflict,
all parties must reach a permanent peace agreement
based on the African Union High-level Implementation
Panel road map. In that regard, we continue to support
President Mbeki and the Joint Special Representative's
good offices. We are also pleased with the Sudanese
Government's improved cooperation with UNAMID
and encourage further cooperation to enable the
mission to implement its mandate with full freedom of
movement. We understand that a new Government of
National Reconciliation will soon be formed with the
participation ofa wider range ofparties. The new Prime
Minister of the Sudan stated that the new Government
would make an effort to implement the outcome of
the national dialogue. We strongly hope that the new
Government will continue to play an active role in
achieving more inclusive political participation.

Ongoing intercommunal Violence should be
addressed. Many of the root causes of that violence lie
in conflict over resources such as water and land. We
must support efforts made by the national and local
Governments to address that issue, and we appreciate
UNAMID's dedicated mediation and facilitation
efforts. Japan, the African Union and UNAMID
recently completed a project to rehabilitate 100 natural
water storage areas called rihoods. We believe that such
projects can play an important role in addressing the
root causes of conflicts.

We welcome the confirmation in the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2017/250) that the humanitarian
situation has improved in most of Darfur and that some
progress has been observed in the return of internally
displaced persons (IDPs). However, we must also
recall the report of the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs that there are still 3.7 million
IDPs in Darfur. The problem is far from over. Support
for the safe and voluntary return of IDPs should be
prioritized with the utmost respect for the wishes of
the IDPs. Japan believes that development assistance
to consolidate peace in Darfur plays a major role in
preventing the relapse into conflict and supporting the
return of IDPs. To that end, we pledged an additional
$4.3 million to United Nations agencies in January.
It is particularly important that the people of Darfur
experience peace directly.

There is no doubt that the situation in Darfur has
improved, and the Council has the responsibility to
review UNAMID's mandate accordingly. Japan looks
forward to concrete recommendations after the strategic
review on UNAMID's possible reconfiguration, as well
as an assessment ofprogress and benchmarks. The time
is right for the Council to reconsider how UNAMID
can most effectively undertake Vital tasks such as the
protection of civilians, the safe and voluntary return of
IDPs, the reduction of intercommunal violence and the
strengthening ofinstitutions and police capacity, in close
coordination with the United Nations country team.

