Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): Portugal welcomes
your initiative in organizing today's open debate,
Mr. President, and giving Member States an opportunity
to express their views on such an important topic.

Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered on behalf of the European Union, and I would
like to add a few words in my national capacity.

The declaration adopted by the African Union (AU)
at its 2013 Summit set the ambitious goal ofa conflict-
free continent by the end of 2020. That is now a key
pillar of the AU's Agenda 2063 and the road map for

the African Peace and Security Architecture. We all
agree that it is not an easy task, but it should not be
impossible to achieve. The strengthening of the United
Nations-AU strategic partnership, in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations,
particularly through strengthened dialogue and well-
designed cooperation between the Security Council and
the Peace and Security Council of the AU, is crucial to
helping to achieve that ambitious goal. We believe that
closer and more fruitful cooperation between those two
bodies will make a difference in bringing about a more
sensible approach to peace and security in Africa and a
more efficient response to major security threats, such
as transnational organized crime and terrorism, which
will be key to preventing conflicts in the future.

The recently concluded reviews of the United
Nations peacebuilding architecture and peacekeeping
operations, and of the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, clearly
emphasize that. They also explain why the role of
partnerships between the United Nations and regional
and subregional organizations in conflict prevention
and conflict situations, and in post-conflict-affected
countries, is so fundamental. Regional and subregional
organizations enjoy additional legitimacy that channels
regional and national ownership. They can also keep
a closer eye on and have a better understanding of
situations of common concern and in need of attention
on the ground. They are, and must be, on the front line
of action and responsibility, and the United Nations
must partner with them closely.

With regard to conflict prevention, mediation
activities and peacekeeping operations in Africa,
cooperation and coordination between the United
Nations and the AU, and between both those
organizations and other international actors, must be
shaped in a way that is conducive to early assessments
of challenges and to better-tailored responses. As we
know, those are more likely to succeed by ensuring
sustainable solutions to conflicts and properly
addressing their root causes. At this point, I would once
again like to stress that establishing mechanisms aimed
at ensuring the involvement and active participation of
women in preventing conflicts and supporting peace
and in post-conflict processes in Africa is very critical.
In our view, the women and peace and security agenda
should always be at the centre of United Nations-
African Union cooperation in the maintenance ofpeace
and security.

We believe that the promotion of re gional integration
in Africa can also greatly contribute to sustaining peace.
Further advances in that regard, with good coordination
between regional economic communities and the AU
Peace and Security Council, are welcome and should be
encouraged. One area of particular importance when it
comes to African conflict-afflicted countries is security
sector reform. It deserves our consistent attention and
requires joint efforts to consolidate and disseminate the
lessons learned and the best practices for promoting
and sustaining the rule of law and respect for human
rights, as well as development, which must play a
central role. We recognize that the African Peace and
Security Architecture provides the African continent
with a valid structure and suitable mechanisms to
support peace. However, we are aware of the persistent
challenges, notably in ensuring true national ownership
of the peacebuilding framework and strengthening the
capabilities of African countries.

We are all aware that these processes require strong
political will and leadership, alongside the consistent
support of the international community. When it comes
to international support to sustain peace, there is
clearly room for improvement, including by stepping up
efforts and providing training and adequate equipment.
If we want peace to be sustainable, we must be ready
to grant consistent attention and the required means as
long as necessary. The sustainability and predictability
of resources are deeply interlinked as preconditions
for effectiveness. In that regard, deepening the
partnerships between the United Nations, the AU,
regional economic communities, international financial
institutions and regional development banks to ensure
the diversification of funding sources for peacebuilding
activities is, in our opinion, the way to go.

We also welcome and encourage the further
development of the synergies of the African Peace
and Security Architecture, closely linking action
on peace and security initiatives with democracy,
good governance and human rights, in line with the
principles expressed in the Constitutive Act of the
African Union. The United Nations and the AU should
therefore combine their respective efforts and further
optimize the use of the instruments at their disposal.

I would simply recall the Joint Africa-European
Union Strategy, launched in 2007 in Lisbon, based on
comprehensive joint interests and values, including
respect for human rights, freedoms, equality, solidarity,
justice and democracy, which remains a very unique
kind of partnership. The dialogue and institutional
cooperation in the context of the Joint Africa-European
Union Strategy have so far led to concrete, positive
results not only in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts, but also in sustaining peace and in post-
conflict reconstruction. They have also proven to be
relevant in the operationalization of the African Peace
and Security Architecture. The trilateral cooperation,
based on the broad common ground shared by the
United Nations, the AU and the European Union has
also proven to be quite valuable and should continue to
be promoted and further strengthened.

In conclusion, Portugal, bilaterally and as a member
of the European Union and of the Community of
Portuguese-speaking Countries, has been a consistent
supporter of those efforts and will definitely continue
to be.

