Mr. Ja'afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in Arabic): Mr. President, allow me at the outset to
congratulate your friendly country on presiding over
the work of the Security Council for this month, and to
express our gratitude for the efforts of the Permanent
Representative of Mexico and the members of his
delegation in that role last month.

Syria has suffered for many decades and to this
day from the scourge of terrorism. We recall that my
country was one of the earliest States to draw attention
to the need to promote efforts to eliminate international
terrorism. Accordingly, Syria has called since the
mid-1980s for an international conference under
United Nations sponsorship in order to agree upon a
specific definition of terrorism, formulate an effective
international strategy to combat terrorism and
distinguish it from the legitimate struggle of people
under occupation to achieve their freedom, which by
right is guaranteed by international norms and laws.

Syria reaffirms its condemnation of terrorism as
aggressive and unjust criminal activity that targets the
lives and property of innocent civilians, and we call for
action at all levels to combat international terrorism in
accordance with the principles and purposes of the
Charter of the United Nations and the provisions of
international law.

Terrorism does not distinguish among its victims
and inflicts suffering on everyone. Therefore,
2

terrorism, by definition, cannot be linked to any
religion, race, nationality or civilization. We reaffirm
once again that any measure taken to prevent terrorism
and to combat it must conform to obligations under
international law and international humanitarian law,
including the Charter of the United Nations.

The crimes committed by Israel against the
Palestinian people in the occupied territories and
against Syrian citizens in the occupied Syrian Golan
are war crimes and constitute true terrorism. Here, I
must point out Israel's most recent innovations and
contributions in the field of State terrorism. Israel has
laid siege to the entire Palestinian population of Gaza,
including women, children and the elderly. It has
deprived that population of water, food, medicine and
the freedom of movement and travel. Not satisfied with
that, Israel followed up by killing the besieged
population of Gaza through a barbaric and cruel
aggression using the most modern weapons and
internationally banned munitions.

If such outlaw practices are not terrorism, then
what exactly is terrorism? Israeli terrorism has touched
everyone without exception. The murder and
destruction pay no heed to the humanity of the
Palestinian citizen residing in his own home, the
employees of the United Nations, or those seeking
refuge in United Nations buildings and facilities.

As members of the Council know, the State
terrorism carried out by Israel has destroyed facilities
belonging to the United Nations in Gaza and killed
those inside, Palestinians and international employees
alike. The international consensus at the United Nations,
both in New York and Geneva, which called for the
creation of a fact-finding committee of the Human Rights
Council and an investigative commission by decision of
the Secretary-General, reflected the international moral
and political consensus regarding Israel's responsibility
for the terrorist crimes carried out against the population
of Gaza.

The logical question here is whether Israeli
actions today - including the confiscation of property,
the bulldozing of land, the uprooting of trees, the
destruction of homes, the expulsion of residents, the
creation and building of new settlements and the
expansion of existing settlement - are actions that
constitute real terrorism.

Syria joined the consensus when the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy was adopted, on the basis
09-34980
of its sincere support for any international effort to
combat terrorism and of its firm recognition of the
Strategy as an important tool for facilitating
international cooperation against terrorism, provided
that the definition of terrorism and State terrorism and
the distinction between terrorism and legitimate
resistance are given careful consideration.

At the same time, as it did during the
deliberations leading to the adoption of the Global
Strategy and at subsequent review meetings, my
country reaffirms the importance of adopting
comprehensive and consistent national, regional and
international approaches to countering and combating
terrorism. Syria calls for an analysis of terrorism in all
its forms and manifestations and for a debate on the
conditions that contribute to the spread of that scourge
in order to reach a common international understanding
of the best way to fight it.

Syria reaffirms that terrorism is an ongoing threat
to international peace and security and reiterates its
commitment to relevant international counter-terrorism
resolutions. Syria is convinced that the United Nations
has a central role to play in countering terrorism at the
international level and in achieving international
consensus in that regard. My country believes that the
Security Council's counter-terrorism Committees
contribute to coordinating the international effort
against terrorism, despite the observations and
reservations regarding some of their decisions that we
have voiced on numerous occasions. Accordingly,
Syria cooperates with the United Nations and the
Security Council's sanctions Committees, and calls on
the Organization and the international community to
strengthen national counter-terrorism capacities by
supporting national efforts and promoting cooperation
among States. We recall and reiterate that we have
undertaken all measures necessary to combat terrorism
at all levels.

Syria has made significant efforts to counter
money-laundering and the financing of terrorism. The
Syrian commission to counter money-laundering and
the financing of terrorism has joined the Egmont
Group, which unites financial intelligence units from
108 States and is responsible for receiving and
handling reports on financial operations suspected of
laundering money or financing terrorism. Those efforts
are internationally recognized in the report of a joint
assessment group, which notes that Syria has
implemented significant measures and legislation in
09-34980
recent years, in accordance with relevant international
recommendations.

In conclusion, Syria is closely following the
Committee's efforts to follow-up the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004), which my country sees as a
positive step towards preventing the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and for maintaining
international peace and security. Syria does not possess
such weapons and does not intend to possess them, as
it has reiterated in numerous public statements
delivered at the United Nations, including in the First
Committee of the General Assembly, at the meetings of
the third session of the Preparatory Committee for the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, and before
the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva.

