Mr. Pratomo (Indonesia): At the outset, allow
me to express my appreciation to the delegation of
Belgium for organizing this timely meeting on the
issue of natural resources and conflict. My delegation
is certain that, under the able stewardship of
Minister Karel Gucht, the Council will arrive at a
successful outcome.

Natural resources serve to support the world
economy. They provide the foundations for economic
development and can lead to great wealth. Stability and
security arise simultaneously. Natural resources enable
countries to build a solid foundation for future
generations to reap the benefits of today's wise
decisions. Natural resources are a gift and a source of
blessings for any given country. They also play an
important role in fuelling the global economy. In
today's world, a nation may be in possession of vast
quantities of a certain natural resource. However, it
requires human ingenuity to turn such a resource into a
valuable commodity. Human ingenuity can produce
marvels, but it has also caused many calamities in the
past and will undoubtedly do so in the future. The fact
that this issue is being discussed in this body is
acknowledgment of the potential of natural resources
for both progress and problems.

As has been explained by others, the failure to
implement principles and policies of good governance
can be a factor in fuelling armed conflicts. Proper
management of natural resources is certainly one way
to address this issue, as is investment in the design and
application of sustainable economic development
policy. Domestic and foreign companies in the
extraction industry can be encouraged to implement the
principles of corporate social responsibility.

My delegation fully subscribes to the view that
countries facing difficulty in the management of their
natural resources should invest more effort in
strengthening the rule of law. For our part, Indonesia is
continuously trying to improve its legal system and law
enforcement institutions. We can list a number of
policies and strategies to increase our capacity to
withstand internal shocks. However, that alone would
be insufficient. To secure stability, a country equally
has to have the capacity to withstand external shocks.
External shocks are beyond the capacity of many
United Nations Member States to address individually.

In our View, it is imperative that external factors
be taken into account when we discuss the link
between armed conflicts and natural resources. The
extraction of natural resources can be realized only if it
meets several criteria, which include the possession of
high technology and extensive capital and the existence
of a reliable and functioning market. The latter is
sometimes overlooked.

For my delegation, one of the key issues in
discussing this topic is the role of the international
market and its participants. A particular type of natural
resource would neither attract attention nor incite
fierce competition if it did not have considerable value
or carry with it the expectation that it could become
valuable. It can be in terms of strategic value or
financial value.

In a world marked by interdependence and inter-
connectivity at the regional and global levels, one
action in one part of the globe would have a direct
impact on another part of the world. The extraction of a
particular natural resource would have an impact
elsewhere. A surge of demand in one part of the world
would increase pressure to find it at any cost.

As well as acknowledging the responsibility of
the source country, we believe that destination or
transit countries also have a major role to play. They
could be a source of armed conflict. All of us have a
shared responsibility to prevent and act against acts
that fuel armed conflicts. To emphasize heavily the
responsibility of the source country without
highlighting the responsibility of transit and
destination countries would prevent us from having a
profound discussion. It is this trinity that we must bear
in mind.

Let me underline that natural resources would fail
to bring benefit to anyone, if such commodities could

not reach the market. Sellers, buyers and users thus
have equal responsibility in preventing natural
resources from being used to fuel armed conflicts.

Past practices of violent and blatant competition
to possess natural resources may have ceased to exist.
Many went to extremes in order to satisfy their
insatiable appetites for valuable natural resources, thus
leaving countries and nations destitute. No one can
guarantee that these practices will not be repeated in
another place or time. History does not exactly repeat
itself, but it does rhyme. What differentiates one era
from another is that there are different players and
different contacts.

Nevertheless, the aim is still similar and shaped
by different market factors. Gold and black gold are
some of the most valuable commodities of our lifetime.
In years to come, other energy-sensitive commodities
will have taken their place and will drive competition,
leading to armed conflicts.

From our perspective, it is clear that fierce
competition for possession of valuable natural
resources fuels armed conflict. It is not and cannot be
the natural resource as such that is responsible. Thus,
in order to address this issue effectively, the Council
must acknowledge that its vast power has limitations. It
can impose sanctions and more. It can authorize
military actions, but this would not solve the
underlying problems. The Council might be tempted to
become involved in the area of prevention.

The Charter has purposely designed several
institutions to tackle successive phases of conflict. I
can cite several organizations within the United
Nations family that are well armed in the area of
conflict prevention. The United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime have been tirelessly working to promote
good governance in many developing countries. They
can contribute enormously to the maintenance of peace
and security. They can also work in raising the
awareness of relevant stakeholders in the developed
countries about the impact of their actions and policies
in fuelling violent conflict. Moreover, the
Peacebuilding Commission can also address issues
related to post-conflict situations. Hence, the United
Nations is not lacking in the area of proper tools to
address the many faces and stages of armed conflict.

In conclusion, my delegation would suggest that
the Security Council and the General Assembly discuss
ways and means of jointly organizing an international
conference on this important issue. Such a conference
organized by these two vital bodies would send a clear
and unambiguous signal of the commitment of the two
bodies to address this issue in a coordinated and
comprehensive manner.

