Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his briefing. I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Jeremic', Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, to this debate and thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mrs. Citaku for her statement.

Uganda commends the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
continued efforts in promoting security and stability in
Kosovo and the region, particularly with regard to
continued coordination activities with relevant actors
and developing common approaches to the maintenance
of peace and stability on the ground. We are encouraged
that the overall security situation in Kosovo during the
reporting period remained relatively calm.

We are concerned, however, by the recurrent
clashes in northern Kosovo between Kosovo Serbs and
Kosovo Albanians, which increase instability and
division between the communities. We urge all sides to
exercise restraint in order to avoid further escalation of
tensions.

We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors in furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that UNMIK's work in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation,
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is critical.

My delegation welcomes the cooperation and
coordination between UNMIK and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on issues of
mutual concern. This cooperation is vital, and we
encourage that it be strengthened within the framework
of resolution 1244 (1999). The Kosovo Force (KFOR)
plays an important complementary role in maintaining
an overall safe environment. In this regard, we salute
the efforts of UNMIK, in coordination with EULEX
and KF OR, in encouraging both sides to find a
sustainable and peaceful solution.

We commend UNMIK for facilitating the
activities of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), including inter-
communal meetings, technical assessments of cultural
heritage sites and the implementation of projects
engaging Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs. These
activities are important because they build confidence
and create a better understanding among communities.
We therefore encourage UNMIK to continue, in
coordination and cooperation with local and relevant
international actors, its efforts to address critical social
services needs.

UNMIK is also playing an important role in
facilitating the work of the Reconstruction
Implementation Commission. It is important that the
Commission be availed the necessary financial and
logistical support to complete its work.

We welcome the progress made so far regarding
the return of displaced persons and the complementary
role place by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). It is essential
in the spirit of reconciliation for recipient communities
to desist in any actions which may hinder inter-
communal integration. It is also important for both
sides to devote more resources towards the location of
missing persons.
Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuit of this goal. We call on the international
community to continue supporting UNMIK's important
work, consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).

Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, and the staff of
UNMIK for their good work.

