Mr. Taha (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
read to you the statement of the permanent
representative of Sudan, who was unable to attend this
meeting.

It gives me pleasure to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for this month. We are fully confident that thanks to
your wide experience, you will lead the deliberations
of this important organ to the just and desired results
on all the burning international issues, foremost among
which is the situation in the occupied Arab territories,
which are daily moving swiftly and irreversibly
towards the brink.

Here we are again, meeting in this hall for the
third time in less than a month to rehash the same
repetitive statements. We all look forward to a just and
decisive decision that will at least return credibility to
this international organ, let alone return an iota of
security to the Palestinian people.

We repeat our calls in this hall to no avail. There
is no point in describing the situation in the occupied
territories, since it is well known by all. Also well-
known is the huge number of Council resolutions that
remain ineffective, not a single provision of which has
been implemented, because of Israel's flagrant defiance
of international legality and its contempt for the
resolutions of this Council. The Council stands without
action in the face of all this, so much so that this organ
has been accused by the majority of the peoples and
countries of the world of acting unjustly towards the
rightful owners of the land instead of discharging its
responsibility to compel the usurping conqueror to
abide by the resolutions.

The world saw in the road map a glimmer of hope
that could lead to peace and put an end to the plight of
a people who have been facing State terrorism for
decades. But now that glimmer of hope has turned into
a hail of bullets, thus aborting the efforts of the
international community and the Quartet. The series of
invasions of cities in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
and the assassinations of the symbols of the resistance
have continued, and the Palestinian territories have
turned into Bantustans that are isolated from each
other.

Israel, not satisfied with this, went further,
proceeding to the construction of an expansionist wall
that devours a significant amount of Arab land, without
paying any heed to the repeated calls by the
international community to not commit such a crime.
At the same time, Israel continues its threats to deport
the democratically elected President, Yasser Arafat,
and continues its act of aggression against sisterly
Syria.

The construction of this expansionist wall
constitutes a terrible slap in face to international
legality in general and to the Security Council in
particular. The Council continues to be a bystander, a
spectator watching Israel forcibly devour the
Palestinian territories by the construction of this wall,
driving the last wedge between it and the legitimate
owners of the land. Israel puts the last nail in the coffin
of any political settlement by means of the road map,
in choosing the military option in this sensitive and
volatile part of the world. This Council, today more
than ever before, is called upon to adopt a decisive and
just stand that will restore the authority of the Council
before returning the road map to its proper track.

