Mr. Jomaa (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Rugunda. I would also like to congratulate
his country, which is presiding over the Security
Council this month, and him for the excellent way in
which he has conducted the work and deliberations of
the Council.
My delegation subscribes to the statements made
by the representatives of Egypt on behalf of the
Non-Aligned Movement, and of Tajikistan on behalf of
the Organization of the Islamic Conference.

The international community has placed a good
deal of hope on the resumption of direct negotiations
between the Israelis and Palestinians, which were
launched in September under United States auspices.
Many countries, including my own, and various
international and regional organizations have expressed
their support for these negotiations, aimed at reviving
the peace process in the Middle East and at achieving a
solution to the issue of Palestine on the basis of the
well-known international terms of reference and the
Arab Peace Initiative.

We had hoped that we would meet today at a time
when negotiations were still ongoing. We encourage
the parties involved to continue to make all necessary
efforts to achieve the goals of resolving all pending
critical issues and ending a long-standing conflict.
Regrettably, these negotiations have been interrupted
by Israel's refusal to extend the moratorium on
settlements and its decision to resume settlement
activity. Worse yet, the Israeli authorities have renewed
their colonial activities at a time when the region needs
dialogue and negotiations more than ever in order to
achieve a global, lasting and just peace, which is in
everyone's interest.

Arab leaders met at an extraordinary Arab
summit conference in Sirte, Libya, on 9 October. The
Palestinian question was at the top of the Arab leaders'
concerns, especially in light of recent events. President
Ben Ali of Tunisia made a statement at the summit in
which he reiterated the steadfast support of Tunisia to
the brotherly Palestinian people with a view to
ensuring that they recover their legitimate rights over
their historic homeland, especially the right to establish
their own State on their national soil.

President Ben Ali called on the international
stakeholders, the parties to the conflict and the Quartet
to exert more pressure on Israel to end its policy of
settlement-building, the Judaization of Jerusalem and
its rejection of international legitimacy. The President
also called on the international community to pursue its
efforts to renew direct negotiations between the
Palestinian Authority and the Israeli Government in
order to achieve a comprehensive, just and lasting
peace in the region.

The situation on the ground in the occupied
Palestinian territories has given rise to concern. The

settlement policy pursued by Israel tends to undermine
the Arab and Islamic character and identity of the city
of Al-Quds Al-Sharif. It also causes additional
suffering to the brotherly Palestinian people, who have
been deprived of their basic legitimate rights, including
their right to create their independent State on their
own national soil.

The situation requires all parties to take a firm
stand and commit themselves to the principle of peace.
Tunisia is strongly committed to the principles of
international law, supports peace, and calls for a
renewal of dialogue and negotiations to that end.
However, Tunisia appeals to the parties to avoid
deadlock and tensions that would only increase the
threats to security and stability in the region and could
undermine the prospects for peace to which our nations
aspire.

As we discuss the situation in the Middle East
today, I would like to reiterate my country's call for an
end to the Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan and
the remaining occupied Lebanese territories, in
accordance with international law, so that all nations
can enjoy peace and security and devote themselves to
reconstruction and development and work for a better
future.

