Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I should like first to thank all the briefers. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic (MINUSCA) has Germany's full support and, as my Indonesian colleague said in his intervention, it is more important than ever, and we look forward to the renewal of its mandate. We very much regret, among other things, what the Ambassador of the Dominican Republic just mentioned - that is, the disinformation campaign against MINUSCA. We must fight that. The elections are the most important date, as the three African States members of the Security Council, namely, the Niger, Tunisia and South Africa, as well as Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, have said. I should like to reiterate one point that was made by several other speakers, including the Special Representative of the Secretary-General: the right of the refugee communities abroad to participate in the elections. Their rights must be respected. I also welcome the fact that half of registered voters are women. We hope that women are also elected to serve on legislative bodies. The Central African Republic has had a woman president before. We would welcome another female president, as well as female and youth representatives elected to leadership positions in the Central African Republic. After the election, we need to return to the implementation of the Political Agreement for Peace and Reconciliation in the Central African Republic. That issue needs to remain at the top of the agenda, as Mr. Vervaeke said today. We need to relaunch, revitalize and give new impetus to the peace agreement. At the same time, we must ensure that those who have violated the peace agreement are held responsible. On financial support, the European Union, as we learned, provides half of the funds for the electoral budget. The humanitarian response plan is very important. Germany is the second-largest donor of humanitarian aid, and we also participate in the United Nations Development Programme basket fund mentioned by Special Representative Ndiaye. We call on everyone to contribute to those funds, including actors that provide the Central African Republic with a great deal of arms. In addition, we believe that it is very important to strengthen the Special Criminal Court in order to combat impunity for human rights and other violations, including sexual violence. As in all countries, there can be no reconciliation in the Central African Republic if we do not fight impunity. Finally, we join our French colleague and others in condemning the attacks on the Blue Helmets and other humanitarian workers. As the Special Representative confirmed, if we are to create a favourable environment for humanitarian relief, MINUSCA needs to protect humanitarian workers.
