The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as the representative
of Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.

With regard to the political situation in Somalia and
the work of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolutions 751 (1992) and 1907 (2009)
in support of the country's stability, it seems clear to
us that the priority is to strengthen all of the national
capacities of the Federal Government of Somalia. In
that regard, we hope that the process of strengthening
institutions will allow the Government effectively to
control its territory and all of its economic and social
activities.

However, my country expresses its deep concern
about the continued presence of A1-Shabaab. Although
there have been major achievements in combating this
terrorist group, its asymmetric attacks against troops
of the African Union Mission in Somalia, the country's
national forces and Somali civilians continue to be a
destabilizing element.

We are also concerned about the potential of the
conflict in Yemen to impact Somalia, especially when
it comes to the growth ofAl-Qaida and the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant. If an alliance between the two
were to coalesce, it could pose a serious threat to peace
and security in Somalia. We call on the international
community to provide all the necessary support to
the State of Somalia so that it can exercise control,
ensure the rule of law, extend its administration and
provide services in areas liberated from Al-Shabaab,
failing which those areas could fall back into the hands
of terrorist groups. Although the sanctions - and the
Sanctions Committee - must achieve their goal, they
must be reviewed so that they can contribute to the
Federal Government of Somalia effectively controlling
areas being liberated from terrorists.

We are concerned that Somalia, which possesses
enormous natural resources in the areas of oil, gas,
fisheries and charcoal, can neither exercise nor profit
from the rational exploitation of those resources, as is
its right. In that regard, we should cooperate to put an
end to the illegal trade in charcoal so that it is no longer
a source of financing for terrorism and instead serve
as a way of expanding and strengthening Somalia's
capacity to effectively exploit its natural resources for
the benefit of its people, who so desperately need it.

With regard to Eritrea, we emphasize that all the
reports of the Monitoring Group, including its most
recent report (see S/2015/801), show that no link
exists between Eritrea and Al-Shabaab. Similarly, the
territorial differences between Eritrea and Djibouti are
under mediation through the Government of Qatar, and
there are Qatari peacekeepers stationed at the border
between the two countries. If we assume that the two
reasons, which I mentioned previously, that gave rise to
the imposition of secondary sanctions on Eritrea are no
longer applicable, we believe it is time to re-examine the
validity and scope of the sanctions regime on Eritrea.

We recently held a debate on the working methods
of the sanctions committees (see S/PV.7620) and
the role of the monitoring groups. In the case of the
Somalia and Eritrea Committee, we have a robust
Monitoring Group, and some of its members have
been reappointed. However, my country believes that
the Monitoring Group has overreached its mandate
by offering unsupported information on some issues.
The first of those is the dispute between Eritrea and
Ethiopia. While the historic dispute and conflict that
exists between the two countries should be resolved, in
our opinion it is outside the purview of the Sanctions
Committee, and an appropriate forum should be found
to deal with the situation. We will have to carve out
a separate space if we are to make progress with the
issue of sanctions in compliance with the mandate of
the Sanctions Committee on Eritrea. However, that
should not be affected by the dispute between Eritrea
and Ethiopia, which should be treated in another forum.

Furthermore, with regard to the question of the
representative of Senegal, the presence of Eritrean
troops in Yemen has not been confirmed. This is an
issue related to the transparency of the reports. The
Monitoring Group of the Somalia and Eritrea Sanctions
Committee stated that it had received "unconfirmed
reports" of the presence of Eritrean soldiers in Yemen.
That is an aspect that we wanted to bring up at this open
meeting, because there are elements introduced by the
Monitoring Group that have tended to complicate the
work of the Sanctions Committee and to perpetuate the
sanctions regimes on these countries.

I would also like to report that, as Chair of the
Somalia and Eritrea Sanctions Committee, I have
received an invitation from the President of Eritrea to
visit his country. We will organize a visit in the next few
months - certainly after February - with the aim of
gaining a greater understanding and arriving at specific
goals for facilitating the work being done between the
Monitoring Group and Eritrea. I will also be able to
hear at first hand the President's views on the issue,
which I will then convey to the Sanctions Committee
and to the Council.

Lastly, the security situation in the Horn of Africa
has been greatly complicated both by the conflict in
Yemen and the huge flows of small arms and light
weapons into the area. We believe that the Sanctions
Committee should undertake a political assessment
of its scope and work. As the representative of Egypt
mentioned, it is one of the oldest of the Council's
Sanctions Committees. We should try to re-evaluate the
situation and see how we can adapt in order to maintain
and preserve peace and security in the Horn of Africa.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.
