Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): We
are meeting on the most difficult issue at the most
difficult time. And although there are distinct
differences among members of the Council, I warmly
appreciate the effort that all - particularly members of
the Non-Aligned Movement caucus - have made to
try to find a common way forward.

The level of violence in the region is gravely
disturbing, and the resulting number of civilian deaths
and injuries, overwhelmingly in the Palestinian
community, is unacceptable. The United Kingdom

believes that an observer mission in the West Bank and
Gaza could be of benefit to both parties. The presence
of objective witnesses could serve to calm the violence
and help both sides take the necessary steps back from
confrontation. We have worked with other delegations
around this table and with the Secretary-General to try
to reach agreement on the steps that would allow such
a mission to be established, and we are glad to have
worked particularly closely with the delegation of
France.

It is too early to give up on this aim. We firmly
believe that trying to impose observers against the
wishes of one party would in practice be fruitless. We
therefore abstained on the draft resolution under
consideration, because we believe that it cannot be
implemented without further work to build confidence
and because we feel that bringing it to a decision today
makes the establishment of a mission less rather than
more likely.

We remain ready to engage on a proposal that can
find consensus. What is important now is to
concentrate our efforts on supporting the direct
dialogue which has resumed between the parties and
which offers the best hope for a just and lasting peace
in the region based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973).

The resumption of talks in Washington this week
demonstrates the importance both sides place on
finding a lasting solution, and we hope the parties will
not allow the result this evening to detract from their
ongoing efforts to find peace. The prospects for these
remain our primary criterion and have guided our
approach on the proposal which we have considered
today.

