Mr. Chowdhury (Bangladesh): Let me begin by
thanking His Excellency the Vice-Minister of External
Relations of Angola for the comprehensive and forward-
looking statement he made this morning. We also
appreciate the report presented by Under-Secretary-
General Prendergast at the outset of today's debate.

Bangladesh welcomes the appointment of
Ambassador Ibrahim Gambari as the Secretary-General's
Special Adviser on Africa, with special focus on Angola
among other issues. We wish him all success in his new
responsibilities.

In Angola, our concerns are multiple, relating to the
political situation, peace and security, disarmament and
national reconciliation, humanitarian issues and human
rights, and development. I shall limit my statement to
three of those aspects.

First, with regard to the political situation, we have
noted with satisfaction, as reported by the
Secretary-General, the continued commitment of President
Dos Santos to the Lusaka Protocol. In that context, we
reiterate our conviction that lasting peace in Angola can
be achieved through political settlement and national
reconciliation. The success in the recent military
campaigns launched against UNITA and the moves
towards UNITA's political and strategic isolation should
therefore be aimed at returning to the Lusaka process.

Here, I would mention that the United Nations has
imposed sanctions against UNITA progressively since
1993. The measures were aimed at denying UNITA the
means of war and obliging it to respect its own
commitments and to come back to the negotiating table.
Yet, according to reports, UNITA has earned up to
$4 billion over the past eight years by selling diamonds
and through clever investments. Had the nexus involving
the diamonds-for-arms trade not been allowed to function,
the people of Angola would most certainly have found
peace and prosperity years ago.

The reports coming from the inspection of the
Andulo arms cache are revealing. We cannot blame
people for feeling consternation and outrage. The supply
of arms to UNITA, direct or indirect, from all sources

 

and all origins, must stop. An effective mechanism should
not be beyond our powers.

Our colleague Ambassador Robert Fowler deserves
our very high appreciation for making a difference and for
helping the sanctions regime cut into the gems-for-guns
trade. We pay tribute to his determined efforts as evidenced
in his presentation, in both oral and video forms, at today's
meeting. Ambassador Fowler should have our full and well-
intentioned support, going beyond rhetoric.

The sanctions Committee should receive sincere
cooperation from all Member States, so that supply routes
and mechanisms for UNITA diamonds are effectively cut
off, so that UNITA's money is refused laundering, so that
the treasuries open their doors to the sanctions Committee,
and so that guns do not manage to reach the hands of
UNITA gunmen to be used to kill their own people. The
momentum created now should be sustained and supported
by all concerned.

On the second aspect, humanitarian issues and human
rights, we welcome the progress towards allowing the
United Nations Office in Angola (UNOA) to assume its
functions. We hope that, with early approval by the
Angolan Parliament of the Status-of-Mission Agreement,
the United Nations mission will soon be functional. We
would urge the Angolan Government to accept the mandate
of the United Nations Office in Angola, as defined in
resolution 1268 (1999), in full.

The humanitarian and human rights situation in
Angola, where some 3.7 million people are affected by the
long drawn-out war, needs a commensurate response from
the international community. The overwhelming number of
refugees, internally displaced persons and victims of mines
demands massive rehabilitation programmes. A
comprehensive political settlement is essential for such vast
humanitarian operations and for social rehabilitation and
economic reconstruction. The Angolan Government needs
to facilitate the full involvement of the United Nations and
of the international community in that country.

Turning to the third aspect, development, it is a cruel
irony that such a courageous people, endowed with so
much wealth, should be reduced to poverty and misery.
According to reports, some 200 people die of starvation in
Angola every day. The human development index for
Angola fell to 160 last year; about 82 per cent of the people
live in abject poverty; infant mortality is higher than 320
per thousand. Yet diamonds and petroleum worth billions
of dollars are exported from that country. Obviously, in the
first place, the Government of Angola needs to allocate
more resources to the basic humanitarian needs of the
people.

The Secretary-General has reported that the United
Nations Development Programme and other agencies have
had to scale down their operational activities. We would
like to know his recommendations about possible
resumption of those activities. It would also be useful to
know the recommendations of the Secretary-General on
other additional measures to be taken by the Council and
by other organs and agencies of the United Nations.

The mine clearance programme has had to be
curtailed while in the past year 409 civilians, most of
them women, fell victim. The extension of Government
control over a significant part of rebel-held areas should
now permit resumption of the mine clearance programme.

Finally, the role of regional countries in helping to
put an end to the war of attrition is, needless to say,
critically important. The people of Angola are among
those who suffer most from a war in which history bears
an undeniable responsibility. They deserve the most
sympathetic and generous solidarity of the international
community.

