Mr. Schulz (Germany): Let me also start by
expressing our sincere condolences with respect to
the 13 French soldiers who tragically lost their lives in
Mali. Our thoughts and prayers are with their families
and the people of France.

Turning to today's theme and this morning's
Security Council briefing, I would like to begin by
sincerely thanking Mr. Kachi for his powerful and stark
reminder of the horrific crimes and atrocities committed
by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL). I also
thank Special Adviser Khan for his briefing and offer a
more general thanks to him and his team for their hard
work in supporting Iraq's justice system so as to hold
perpetrators accountable and deliver justice.

The importance of accountability for reconciliation
in a society in a post-conflict situation cannot be
overestimated and is absolutely crucial. The protection
of human rights and the strengthening of the rule of
law, which go along with the work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (UNITAD) are equally key to achieving
this objective.

We commend Mr. Khan and his team for the
substantial expansion of their work over the past six
months, which has focused on the three instances of
particularly horrific crimes committed by ISIL: first,
the attacks committed against the Yazidi community in
Sinjar in August 2014; secondly, the crimes committed
in Mosul between 2014 and 2016, including the execution
of members of religious minorities, crimes involving
sexual and gender-based violence and crimes against
children; and thirdly, the mass killings ofunarmed Iraqi
Air Force cadets from Tikrit in June 2014. We highly
welcome the fact that the investigative activities have
also been expanded to include crimes against Christian,
Kaka'i, Shabak, Sunni and Turkmen communities.

Germany is encouraged by the fact that the exchange
of information and support for the prosecution of ISIL
crimes in other national jurisdictions is growing and
bearing fruit. I would like to thank in particular the
Investigative Team for entering into a fruitful exchange
with German authorities with regard to ongoing
investigations. Germany actively supports the work of
UNITAD and has dispatched experienced personnel
to the Investigative Team, in addition to the financial
support that we provide for the Investigative Team. On
a more general note, I would like to recall that building
collective support for investigative mechanisms, such
as UNITAD, is therefore one of the aims of the alliance
against impunity that Foreign Minister Maas initiated
during the high-level week of the General Assembly in
September (see A/74/PV.6).

Before concluding, let me also welcome the
commitment of the Iraqi Government to pursuing
justice and accountability. Justice is indispensable for
national reconciliation and a peaceful and stable future.
We are pleased that cooperation between the Iraqi
Government and UNITAD is going very well and that
it is receiving support from the highest political level.

