Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I congratulate the
friendly country of Argentina on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council this month,
and express our appreciation, Madam, for your able
leadership of the Council's efforts to address the many
critical issues on its agenda at this time.

I also express our appreciation to Secretary-
General Ban Ki-moon for his important briefing and
deep gratitude for his dedicated peace efforts. We
are grateful for his leadership of the United Nations
delegation to the Cairo International Conference on
Palestine, "Reconstructing Gaza", and for his recent
visit to the State of Palestine, including to the Gaza
Strip, where he witnessed first-hand the massive
destruction and devastation wrought by the Israeli
military aggression in July and August and the
suffering that continues in the absence of real recovery,
reconstruction and sustainable solutions to core issues
of this conflict.

We have long appealed for the Security Council
members to visit Palestine to see, unfiltered, these
realities and the grave injustice being endured by the
Palestinian people under Israeli occupation. We are
certain that this would better inform the Council's
deliberations and compel greater resolve to contribute
to a viable solution through the implementation of the
Council's resolutions and in line with its Charter duty
to ensure international peace and security. As noted
by the Secretary-General during his visit to Gaza,
"No amount of Security Council sessions, reports or
briefings could have prepared me for what I witnessed
today". At this critical time, we again appeal for such
a visit by the Council, stressing the imperative of
salvaging the prospects for Palestinian-Israeli peace.

The centrality of the United Nations in pursuit
of a peaceful solution is indisputable. The Secretary-
General's expressions of solidarity and support
resonated deeply with our people, who recognize the
historic role of the United Nations in advocating for
justice and for the rights of the Palestinian people,
including the Palestine refugees, and who continue to
look to the United Nations to ease their hardships and
lead the way to ajust, lasting and comprehensive peace.
We join the Secretary-General today in commending
the extraordinary work of the United Nations agencies
on the ground, which exerted valiant efforts during
the recent crisis in Gaza, including, inter alia, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, UNICEF, the
United Nations Development Programme, the World
Health Organization, the World Food Programme and
the United Nations Mine Action Service, as well as
the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator,
led by Special Coordinator Robert Serry, to whom we
express appreciation for his role in facilitating the recent
agreement regarding access to and reconstruction in
the Gaza Strip.

Today, we also pay tribute to the eleven Palestinian
national staff of UNRWA who lost their lives during
the Israeli onslaught on Gaza. We honour their
selfless humanitarian service to their people and
convey our sincerest condolences to their families
and colleagues. We also memorialize the many others
of our humanitarian and medical personnel, as well
as journalists, who were killed while aiding others or
trying to give voice to the anguish of our people during
this criminal war.

Nearly two months ago, since the Israeli aggression
against Gaza ended, following the ceasefire reached on
26 August under the auspices of Egypt, the magnitude
of the carnage, terror and destruction inflicted continue
to weigh heavily, impacting every aspect of life and
fuelling despair and hopelessness. The Secretary-
General has described the toll as "beyond words",
a sentiment repeatedly conveyed in the universal
expressions of disbelief and shame that such devastation
and trauma could again be inflicted on the Palestinian
people, and so cruelly, deliberately and systematically.
While all may know by now the figures, they merit
repeating in the Council, to be put in the official
record but also to impel a greater sense of urgency
for expediting recovery, including by the complete
lifting of the illegal Israeli blockade, which continues
to suffocate Gaza and impede efforts to alleviate the
humanitarian disaster and to expedite the long-overdue
solution to the conflict.

As of 26 August 2014, among the breaches of
international law amounting to war crimes committed
by Israel, the occupying Power, in its 50-day aggression
against Gaza are the following.

There were 2,180 Palestinians killed, the majority
civilians, among them 516 children and 283 women.
Among families, 142 lost three or more members
in the same incident, with a total of 739 people from
those families perishing, including in Israeli bombings
that flattened homes atop entire families. That fact
confirms in stark terms the excessive, indiscriminate
nature of Israel's offensive and the abject failure to
protect civilians. The numbers also belie Israel's claims
to the contrary, including false claims about human
shields. In that regard, I recall a statement by Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs Kyung-
Wha Kang at the height ofthe conflict, addressed to the
Human Rights Council special session on Gaza in July:

"Families are taking the heart-wrenching decision
to split to different locations - mother and son
to one, father and daughter to another - hoping
to maximize the chance one part of the family
survives".

Our people were trying desperately to save themselves
from the Israeli war machine.

So far, 1,500 girls and boys have been orphaned.
More than 373,000 traumatized children require
psych-osocial support. More than 11,000 Palestinians
were injured, including 3,000 children, of them 1,000
disabled for life. Even now, victims of Israeli assaults
are dying due to the severity of their wounds or the lack
of life-saving medical treatment in Gaza. More than
half a million people were displaced at the height of
the aggression, the largest displacement of Palestinian
civilians since 1967. More than 80,000 homes were
damaged by the occupying forces, with 20,000 homes
either entirely destroyed or damaged beyond habitation.
To date, 108,000 people have been rendered homeless,
with more than 40,000 people continuing to shelter at
18 UNRWA schools.

More than 100 United Nations facilities were
damaged, including UNRWA schools, where civilians
believed they were safe under the United Nations flag,
yet where many lost their lives in abhorrent Israeli
attacks. In addition, 75 hospitals and clinics were
damaged and 23 health personnel were killed and
83 injured. More than 33,000 metres of water and waste
networks were damaged. The attack on the Gaza power
plant caused up to 22 hours a day ofpower outages, with
18-hour outages continuing due to lack of fuel, with
the many consequences for civilian life. At least 500
economic and industrial facilities, constituting 60 per
cent of Gaza's production capacity, were destroyed,
directly and indirectly impacting more than 35,000 jobs.
Approximately 8,000 unexploded ordnance, 10 per cent
of the munitions launched by Israel at Gaza, remains
scattered in civilian areas, obstructing rubble removal
and reconstruction and endangering lives.

The same period witnessed the killing of at least
32 Palestinian civilians in violent and destructive raids
throughout the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and the arrest and detention of more than 800 civilians,
including children.

This list is not exhaustive and these facts alone
cannot convey the depth of our people's misery
following this horrific war and our collective grief at the
immense loss oflife and tragedy endured. As we seek to
move forward, we cannot ignore the pain of the families

who have lost and buried their loved ones and must do
all we can to heal the injured bodies, wounded souls
and broken spirits of those who remain. Serious efforts
are required to allay their suffering, but also to ensure
accountability for these crimes and give them hope for
the future. In that regard, I must clarify - tending to
the wounds of our people and seeking justice is neither
incitement nor provocation; rather, it is responsible,
moral behaviour and an absolute imperative to promote
genuine healing, without which peace and reconciliation
between the two peoples can ever be realized.

Therefore, while we are grateful for the outpouring
of support and the generosity and the principled
commitments by donor countries in Cairo, and while
we reaffirm our gratitude to the Governments of Egypt
and Norway for their sponsorship of the Conference,
we reiterate whas was stressed by the UNRWA
Commissioner-General: "Nowhere in the world does
humanitarian assistance alone make up for the denial of
dignity and rights". Palestine is not the exception. Hence,
while we seek to immediately address, in coordination
with the United Nations, urgent humanitarian and
reconstruction needs to restore dignity to the lives of
our people in Gaza, including by lifting the blockade
and consolidating the ceasefire, we will also act
resolutely, with the support of all concerned and
friendly countries, to ensure a broader political horizon
and mobilize the global will for political action to
justly, finally and peacefully resolve the conflict's core
issues and to realize the legitimate national aspirations
and rights of the Palestinian people, including to self-
determination and freedom.

The time is past due to acknowledge that Israel,
the occupying Power, rejects peace and is deliberately
destroying the two-State solution and undermining
every effort to realize it. That is not the Palestinian
narrative; it is the reality confirmed over and over by
the actions of the Israeli Government and the words
of its representatives at the highest levels. On the
ground, Israel's illegitimate and destructive colonial
project continues apace. As it did throughout the
nine months of United States Secretary of State John
Kerry's sponsored negotiations, Israel persists with its
settlement construction, the construction of its apartheid
annexation wall, land confiscation, home demolitions
and forced displacement of civilians, including threats
to displace more than 12,000 Bedouins.

Occupied East Jerusalem and its Palestinian
inhabitants remain a primary target of those illegal
practices as the occupying Power continues its
attempts to illegally alter the demography, character,
identity and spirit of the Holy City with repeated
provocations at Al-Aqsa Mosque, threatening to deepen
polarizations and instigate a religious conflict, with
grave consequences, and paying no heed to the clear
sensitivities and volatility of the region. Armed settlers
persist with their terror rampages against Palestinian
civilians, just days ago killing a 5-year old Palestinian
girl, Inas Khalil, in addition to incessant attacks on our
land, mosques and churches.

While the international community appeals for
calm and restraint, Israeli officials are outbidding each
other with provocative declarations and incitement
against the Palestinian people and their Government.
I am sure we will hear such crude incitement in this
Chamber again today by the Israeli representative.

Just weeks ago, Prime Minister Netanyahu stood
before the General Assembly (see A/69/PV.17) extolling
the status quo and denying that there is an occupation;
and Israeli war minister Ya'alon has declared openly
that they will never allow the two-State solution and
blatantly exposed their intentions to force the Palestinian
people into isolated, disconnected Bantustans without
sovereignty and under Israel's perpetual subjugation.
Those declarations and actions are predicated on the
erroneous notion that such an immoral, unjust outcome
would ever be accepted. We reiterate in response that
the Palestinian people will never forgo their inalienable
human rights, including to freedom, independence and
sovereignty, and they will never forgo justice and the
goal of peace.

We believe that the international community, too,
will never accept such an injustice. Our conviction
is firm that the international community will more
precisely continue to demand respect for international
law and for the consensus solution rooted in United
Nations resolutions, and will continue to advocate for
the realization of the rights of the Palestinian people
to defend the vulnerable and to seek peace andjustice.

Here, we also reaffirm before the Council that
the Palestinian people and the Palestinian national
consensus Government, under the leadership of
President Mahmoud Abbas, remain fully committed
to peace and will continue to exert every effort, in
partnership and with the support of all concerned
countries, to achieve as soon as possible a just,
comprehensive and viable solution that will bring a
complete end to the Israeli occupation begun in 1967,
and achieve the independence of the State of Palestine,
with East Jerusalem as its capital, living side by side with
Israel in peace and security within recognized borders,
and ajust solution for the Palestine refugee question, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 194 (III).
In that regard we reiterate the importance of the Arab
Peace Initiative and recognize the role of our Arab
brethren in supporting peace efforts.

If we are ever to attain those urgent objectives, we
cannot return to the same cycle of failed negotiations,
which are used by Israel only as a means to alleviate
international pressure and as a cover for its illegal
schemes to entrench, rather than end, its occupation.
How many times have our protestations against Israel's
settlement activities and collective punishment of our
people, including the cruel blockade of Gaza, been
met with demands that we restrain ourselves to avoid
undermining the peace process?

The credibility of that process has been nullified
by Israel and it is high time to move beyond speaking
of the two-State solution in theory and time to act
forthwith to actualize it, before the small opportunity
that remains vanishes - an impending reality that is
widely acknowledged. We have therefore approached
the Security Council with the initiative of a draft
resolution reaffirming the parameters of the two-State
solution and delineating a time frame for an end to the
47-year Israeli military occupation of Palestinian land,
including East Jerusalem, and for the attainment of
the independence and rights of the Palestinian people.
As affirmed by President Abbas before the General
Assembly, we are committed to that peaceful, political,
non-violent, legal path to achieve our rights and
establish peace and security.

The elements of the draft resolution are based
fully on the provisions of relevant Security Council
and General Assembly resolutions comprising the
foundation of a lasting peace settlement. Moreover,
the draft calls for a cessation of Israel's illegal policies
and practices; its compliance with international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law; and
the protection of the Palestinian people, which are
imperative for reducing tensions, promoting calm
and creating the appropriate environment and level of
trust required for the conduct of genuine, accelerated
negotiations to end the occupation and resolve the core
issues.

We reiterate our call on the members of the
Security Council and the international community
to support the initiative and the approach to reaffirm
the fundamental parameters for a just solution, and
to inject new momentum into the efforts to achieve
lasting peace and security between the Palestinian
and Israeli peoples. We urge all States to uphold their

responsibilities - collectively here at the United
Nations and as high contracting parties to the Geneva
Conventions, as well as individually - to back the

efforts towards making peace a reality.

In that regard, we express gratitude to Sweden for its
principled announcement regarding recognition of the
State of Palestine as well as the motions on recognition
put forward by the Parliaments of the United Kingdom
and Spain, and we encourage those who have not yet
recognized the existence of our State to do so as a
legitimate and necessary contribution to peace.

In closing, to our people in occupied Palestine, in
the refugee camps of Jordan, Lebanon and Syria, and
the Diaspora, we reiterate our resolve to end their plight
and to ensure their rights, national aspirations and well-
being. We recall the question posed by President Abbas
at the Cairo Conference:

"Has the time not come for righteousness and
justice to prevail in Palestine? Has the time not
come for the historic injustice against our people
to end?"

We believe that the time has come, and we appeal
to the international community for all possible support
to our efforts to realize those noble, long-overdue
objectives.

