Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to thank Mr. Annabi for his update on the situation in
East Timor. I would also like to focus my statement on a
few issues. First, I would like to express our serious
concern, and our agreement with what Mr. Annabi has
said regarding the lack of resources and the slow progress
in making them available for field activities relating to
reconstruction and other aspects of the programme of the
United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET).

My delegation considers that the highest priority is
the need to provide viable economic opportunities for the
people of East Timor in order to assure them all that they
can indeed work and live together in a reconstructed
country.
 

With regard to the security situation, I would like to
emphasize the need to accelerate the setting up of a civilian
police force to deal with the increase in crime. In that
context, we would appreciate further comments from Mr.
Annabi on that subject.

With regard to the issue of refugees, we are gratified
that they have been returning, and the momentum would be
furthered if the development and reconstruction projects
financed by the World Bank's special trust fund start to
function and have a tangible effect.

In the same context, we consider it a high priority to
ensure the financing by the United Nations and special trust
funds for humanitarian needs, of rapid start-up projects to
provide employment and to enable returnees as well as
those who remained behind to actively start to rebuild their
own country.

We also commend the remarkable progress made in
the implementation of consultative machinery to ensure the
full participation of the East Timorese in the decision-
making process, particularly at the central level.

Finally, I would like to conclude by paying tribute to
Mr. Sergio Vieira de Mello and his entire team for their
work, and I wish to express the hope that the presence of
the United Nations will lead, in an assured and appropriate
manner, to independence.

