Ms. Jahan (Bangladesh): May I also join
preceding speakers in thanking you, Mr. President, for
convening this important debate on post-conflict
peacebuilding, an issue that deserves greater
international attention, particularly in the context of the
complex and varied challenges faced by countries
emerging from conflict.

In the same vein, my delegation would like to
commend the report (S/2009/304) of the Secretary-
General before us on the issue of peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of conflict. Our appreciation also
goes out to the Chairman of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme and the World Bank
for the important presentations they made earlier today.

We would like to emphasize that the
Peacebuilding Commission should have the central role
in post-conflict peacebuilding. The Commission, in
institutional harmony with the Peacebuilding Fund and
the Peacebuilding Support Office, should act as the
primary body responsible for the coordination of
coherent and integrated peacebuilding activities, as
envisaged by the foundational resolutions 60/180 of the
General Assembly and 1645 (2005) of the Security
Council.

At the same time, we would like to underline the
importance of a more cohesive relationship among the
Peacebuilding Commission, the Security Council, the
General Assembly and the Economic and Social
Council. In the context of the 2010 review of the
mandate of the Peacebuilding Commission, we look
forward to working closely with all concerned on how
to enhance and strengthen that mandate to make it
more effective.

My delegation fully supports the emphasis placed
in the Secretary-General's report on the principle that
post-conflict societies must take charge of their own
destiny. With a view to the achievement of that goal,
we call upon international partners to align their
financial, technical and political support around a
commonly agreed national strategy that essentially
takes into account national ownership and priorities.
We also emphasize the need for all post-conflict
strategies and interventions to address the needs of
women; young people, particularly ex-combatants; and
children, including child soldiers, as the case may be.
We strongly emphasize the need for national
capacity-building from the very outset in order to
establish sustainable peace so that countries are
prevented from relapsing into conflict. In that regard,
existing national capacities must be taken into account.

Bangladesh also encourages the involvement of
civil society and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) in development activities at the local level. We
believe that that could, in effect, significantly
contribute to the process of achieving sustainable
economic growth, leading to sustainable peace and
development in countries emerging from conflict.

In that context, I should like to mention that a
leading NGO of Bangladesh, with wide-ranging
operations and interventions in terms of health,
education, agriculture and microfinance development
projects, has recently begun to work in the
reconstruction processes of post-conflict countries such
as the southern Sudan, Liberia and Sierra Leone. The
same organization has been making invaluable
contributions to the reconstruction of Afghanistan since
2002, amid formidable challenges. That could be
considered an ideal example of a successful South-
South cooperation and development initiative.

The Secretary-General's recommendation
concerning rapidly deployable and skilled civilian
capacity deserves detailed examination. Any initiative
towards building such capacity should be thoroughly
discussed in more inclusive forums, such as the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations and the
Peacebuilding Commission.

We reaffirm the importance of a more rapid and
flexible funding mechanism, as well as predictable
funds. These are of the utmost importance to
supporting national and local authorities in delivering a
peace dividend at an early stage.

We welcome the Secretary-General's initiatives to
streamline coordination among Headquarters, special
representatives of the Secretary-General, United
Nations country teams, national Governments and the
Peacebuilding Commission. While we recognize the
need for an extended role for United Nations leadership
on the ground in the immediate aftermath of conflict,
we would like to emphasize that such efforts should
not undermine national ownership of the peacebuilding
process. Rather, efforts must be taken to facilitate,
promote and complement the country specific capacity
building mechanism and ownership of the process.
In that regard, given the evolving scenario of the
peacebuilding process, we would stress the need for the
further harmonization and consolidation of United
Nations-led initiatives, regarding which lessons learned
from the Security Council-mandated integrated
peacekeeping missions could be taken into account.

Finally, we strongly emphasize the need for
greater synergy between peacekeeping operations and
peacebuilding activities, as many of the important
elements of peacebuilding process - such as
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration, security
sector reform and the rule of law - emanate directly
from Council-mandated peacekeeping operations.

We believe that, if peacebuilding in the
immediate aftermath of a conflict is to succeed, focus
should be on identifying context-sensitive approaches
that will provide for sustainable national political
dialogue aimed at reconciliation among the parties to
the conflict, with the participation of all stakeholders.
The involvement of all stakeholders in identifying key
national priorities is essential, and the involvement of
women in that process is a key element. Unity of vision
should be maintained when designing a clear and
coordinated mandate to define the leadership role of
the United Nations agencies on the ground. Adequate
attention should be provided at an early stage to avoid
duplication of efforts and ensure the efficient use of
scarce resources.

