Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): The
situation that has given rise to this meeting offers us an
opportunity to refer, if only briefly, to the deterioration
of the humanitarian situation of the Palestinian people
in Gaza. As continually noted by the Secretary-General
and his team, that progressive deterioration deserves to
be considered at greater length by the Council.

The desperate action under discussion today was
undertaken, as it were, in response to an equally
desperate situation. The situation is frustrating. The
channels established for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance have proven to be insufficient to protect the
civilians in Gaza and to alleviate their precarious living
conditions. Only yesterday, the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for the Middle East
informed us that all border crossings between Gaza and
Israel remained closed, obstructing the passage of fuel
and basic humanitarian deliveries to the Palestinian
people. The Kerem Shalom crossing has been closed
since 27 November. The Nahal Oz pipeline and the
Karni conveyor belt stopped working on 26 November.
As described by programmes and agencies of the
United Nations and by the Office of the Special
Coordinator for the Middle East, the restricted
conditions in which they work and the deterioration of
the humanitarian situation in Gaza are unprecedented
and ongoing.
As I stated in this morning's consultations, my
delegation believes that Israeli practices affect the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the population of
Gaza and contribute to the deterioration of the
situation. In that context, no one should be surprised
that the actions undertaken by some friends of the
Palestinians to provide humanitarian assistance come,
perhaps, in response to the disproportionate
punishment inflicted on the people of Gaza for the
actions of a few. They may also respond to the inaction
of this Council in the face of the desperate
humanitarian situation in Gaza.

None of these facts exempts anyone delivering
humanitarian assistance to the people of Gaza from the
need to use appropriate channels or the good offices of
third countries that can contribute to the truly
important goal of delivering humanitarian assistance to
the population in need.

In conclusion, Costa Rica fully understands
Israel's concerns for its own security, but is equally
concerned by the fact that the restrictions imposed by
the Israeli authorities affect not only the individual
actions of countries like Libya, but also the entirety of
the humanitarian work of international agencies and
humanitarian organizations. We have called forcefully
in the past for an end to rocket and mortar attacks on
southern Israel, and today we call on Hamas to place
the true needs of the Palestinian people above all other
considerations. We also respectfully urge the
Government of Israel to facilitate the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the people of the Gaza Strip
and to take measures to normalize their living
conditions.

