Ms. Rice (United States of America): The United
States has been deeply committed to pursuing a
comprehensive and lasting peace between Israel and
the Palestinians. In that context, we have been focused
on taking steps that advance the goal of two States
living side by side in peace and security, rather than
complicating that goal. That includes a commitment to
work in good faith with all parties to underscore our
opposition to continued settlements.

Our opposition to the resolution before this
Council today should therefore not be misunderstood
to mean we support settlement activity. On the
contrary, we reject in the strongest terms the legitimacy
of continued Israeli settlement activity. For more than
four decades Israeli settlement activity in territories
occupied in 1967 has undermined Israel's security and
corroded hopes for peace and stability in the region.
Continued settlement activity violates Israel's
international commitments, devastates trust between
the parties and threatens the prospects for peace.

The United States and our fellow Council
members are also in full agreement about the urgent
need to resolve the conflict between the Israel and the
Palestinians on the basis of the two-State solution and
an agreement that establishes a viable, independent and
contiguous State of Palestine once and for all. We have
invested a tremendous amount of effort and resources
in pursuit of that shared goal, and we will continue to
do so. But the only way to reach that common goal is
through direct negotiations between the parties, with
the active and sustained support of the United States
and the international community. It is the Israelis' and
Palestinians' conflict, and even the best-intentioned
outsiders cannot resolve it for them.

Therefore, every potential action must be
measured against one overriding standard: whether it
will move the parties closer to negotiations and an
agreement. Unfortunately, this draft resolution risks
hardening the positions of both sides. It could
encourage the parties to stay out of negotiations and, if
and when they did resume, to return to the Security
Council whenever they reached an impasse.

In recent years, no outside country has invested
more than the United States of America in the effort to
achieve Israeli-Palestinian peace. In recent days we
offered a constructive alternative course forward that
we believe would have allowed the Council to act
unanimously to support the pursuit of peace. We regret
that this effort was not successful and thus is no longer
viable.

The great impetus for democracy and reform in
the region makes it even more urgent to settle this
bitter and tragic conflict in the context of a region
moving towards greater peace and respect for human
rights. But there simply are no shortcuts. We hope that
those who share our hopes for peace between a secure
and sovereign Israel and Palestine will join us in
redoubling our common efforts to encourage and
support the resumption of direct negotiations.

While we agree with our fellow Council
members - and indeed with the wider world - about
the folly and illegitimacy of continued Israeli
settlement activity, we think it unwise for this Council
to attempt to resolve the core issues that divide Israelis
and Palestinians. Therefore, regrettably, we have
opposed this draft resolution.

