The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Indonesia.

Mr. Djani (Indonesia) Following my Dutch
colleague, let me also honour you, Mr. President, by
saying in Spanish,

(spoke in Spanish)

"many thanks for your presidency and for convening
today's important debate."

(spoke in English)

We also thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs and the other briefers for their statements.

Indonesia associates itself with the statement made
by the representative of Venezuela on behalf of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries.

As a party to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, the Chemical Weapons Convention,
the Biological Weapons Convention and the South-East
Asia nuclear-weapon-free zone, and having ratified the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the Convention
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and the
International Convention for the Suppression of Acts of
Nuclear Terrorism, Indonesia welcomes today's focus
on the threat of the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) to non-State actors.

Although Indonesia fully supports resolutions
1540 (2004) and 2325 (2016), I will not list all the
steps that my country has taken to safeguard against
the WMD proliferation threat. Suffice it to say, we
have instituted comprehensive measures to counter the
development, acquisition, manufacture, possession,
transportation, transfer or use of nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons and their delivery systems.
Regionally, too, Indonesia participates actively in the
various Association of Southeast Asian Nations forums
on export controls and non-proliferation.

All States must fulfil their responsibilities to ensure
that the WMD threat from non-State actors is dealt
with effectively. It is therefore encouraging that the
latest five-year comprehensive report (see S/2016/1038)
by the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004), presented last December observed that
most States had undertaken enhanced measures on
the prohibition of non-State-actor activities relating
to nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and
their means of delivery. It also acknowledged greater
reporting by States. While the report also pointed
out gaps, it rightly noted that the implementation of
resolution 1540 (2004) is a long-term task that requires
continuous efforts at national, regional and international
levels with intensified support.

International cooperation and assistance are critical
when it comes to resolution 1540 (2004), especially
when taking into account countries' varied economic
and industrial abilities. Indonesia underlines the 1540
Committee's role in facilitating matchmaking and
extending extra support, in particular to those countries
that lack capacities in furnishing technical-assistance
proposals. There needs to be a proper response to
the decrease in the number of requests for assistance
submitted to the 1540 Committee during the five-year
period ending in 2016 as compared to the five-year
period ending in 2011. Greater support from the
Committee and its Group of Experts, including close
cooperation with national 1540 points of contact,
along with adequate support from other relevant parts
of the United Nations system and the international
community, will be extremely important.

It also goes without saying that the presence of
peace and stability will foster increased focus by
conflict-affected countries on thwarting any WMD
activity by non-State actors in their countries and
regions, thereby not only making the success of the
sustaining peace agenda even more imperative, but
also that of the deeply interconnected 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development. Thirteen out of the 17
Sustainable Development Goals have direct relevance
to nuclear science and technology, and it is crucial that
the discourse on WMD proliferation by non-State actors
does not impinge on the inalienable right of States to
the peaceful use of nuclear energy. My delegation also
stresses that the issue ofWMD acquisition by non-State
groups should be considered by all United Nations
States Members in an inclusive manner, and our actions
should flow from multilaterally negotiated instruments.

As the Security Council tackles threats to global
peace, it must be principled and clear. The risk that
non-State actors might acquire nuclear and other
WMDs is only one among a list of serious global
security problems. A key challenge that remains is the
insistence by some States to possess nuclear, chemical
and biological weapons. There is no such thing as
right and moral hands for holding such wrong and
immoral weapons. Furthermore, my delegation remains
concerned about the fact that the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty has yet to enter into force.

The international community can be proud of
having adopted legally binding instruments and banned
biological and chemical weapons through its clear
moral imperative and dedicated multilateral efforts.

Yet, confronted with the horrors that Hiroshima and
Nagasaki endured and the abundant research confirming
the absolute destruction that nuclear weapons, by design
or accident, can wreak, it is deeply disturbing that some
States have hindered the same approach on nuclear
weapons, as is also mandated by article VI ofthe Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

However, with the ongoing multilateral endeavour
in the United Nations conference to negotiate a legally
binding instrument to prohibit nuclear weapons, leading
towards their total elimination, the recent meetings
of the Open-ended Working Group for the Fourth
Special Session of the General Assembly Devoted to
Disarmament, and the disarmament activism by global
civil society, Indonesia sees some signs of hope. We
therefore have joined the overwhelmingly large number
of countries in urging reluctant States to heed the
calls for banning nuclear weapons and achieving their
total elimination.

Let us be on the right side of history when it comes
to the survival of humankind from the menacing threat
of nuclear explosions, either by design or accident. It is
our earnest hope that the Council, just as it is rightly
seized by the WMD proliferation concern, will display
the same vigour with regard to nuclear disarmament
from which the legitimacy for non-proliferation is born.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Paraguay.


