Mr. Cohen (United States): We, too, would like to
thank Special Representative Salame for his important
and detailed briefing, and I would like to thank
Ambassador Skoog for sharing his impressions from
his recent trip to Libya.
The stakes for achieving stability and progress in
Libya have never been higher. In recent months, heavily
armed militias have continued to fight each other, street
by street, to control property and resources, without
consideration for their fellow Libyans. Thousands of
desperate people from across the continent, wishing
for a better life, continue to die after setting sail from
Libya's shores, despite the decline in migrant smuggling
and trafficking this year. The Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham and other violent extremist groups continue to
look for safe havens in areas beyond the Government's
authority. Too often, the international community has
failed to speak with one voice in support of United
Nations mediation, creating excuses for recalcitrant
Libyan leaders to pull their country back towards chaos.

The Libyan people are suffering and simply want
what we all deserve: security, dignity and a chance for
prosperity. For far too many Libyans, the promise of
a new life - following the decades-long tyranny of
a brutal dictatorship - has begun to fade, as a small
number of Libyan leaders and armed groups prey upon
Libya's wealth and pursue their narrow self-interests
at the expense of the country. It does not have to be
this way.

Amid all the setbacks, we continue to look to
the leadership of Special Representative Salame to
break the impasse that has regrettably persisted in
Libya over the past several years. We commend his
leadership in de-escalating the violence in Tripoli
and in helping Libyans to begin putting more durable
security arrangements for the capital in place. We also
note the important steps that Prime Minister Serraj and
other Libyan leaders have taken to establish national
security forces that can finally break the stranglehold
of violence and instability caused by armed groups,
especially in Tripoli. The United States fully supports
this vital work to strengthen security arrangements.
While the ceasefire remains fragile, a political process
cannot proceed under the threat of violence.

The United States remained strongly committed to
efforts to facilitate a Libyan-led, Libyan-owned political
process. We strongly support Special Representative
Salame's vision to lay the groundwork for an inclusive
constitutional process and credible, peaceful and well-
prepared elections, building on the momentum of
the United Nations-facilitated National Conference.
Next week's international conference on Libya in
Palermo, hosted by our Italian partners, will build on
the momentum generated by the Paris conference last
May and offer a crucial opportunity for Libyan and
international leaders to hear about the United Nations
road map for breaking out of the political paralysis
in Libya.

We stand ready to support. It is vital that key
Libyan constituencies, including Sebha and the south,
be an active part of the political process. We share
the assessment that achieving political progress will
require greater attention to the economic dimensions of
the conflict, and we call on the Government ofNational
Accord to redouble its efforts to move forward with
comprehensive monetary and subsidy reforms, which
Libya urgently needs to stabilize its economy.

Equally critical are the United Nations efforts to
accelerate an audit of the Central Bank of Libya, an
important step towards greater transparency in Libya's
economic institutions. Those reforms will reinforce
some much-needed conversation among Libyan
leaders about fiscal transparency and a more equitable
distribution of the country's oil resources. The United
States stands ready to support the Libyans in discussions
on economic challenges, at Libya's request and in close
partnership with the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya.

The Council should use all of its collective
influence to support Libyans on their path. While we
recognize that any mediation process will inevitably
face setbacks, as we have seen time and again, we
are confident that these obstacles can be overcome
because of one critical element: the spirit of the Libyan
people. The Libyan people have suffered for far too
long. Libyans have made clear that they are fatigued by
insecurity, lack of opportunity and the many spoilers
who continue to obstruct a political transition to a
better future. We call on all parties in Libya to seize
this critical opportunity to set the course towards a
better future for their citizens. All who threaten Libya's
peace, security and stability must be held to account.

Special Representative Salame's task undoubtedly
remains a daunting one, but he can count on the full
backing of the Council as we advance towards our
shared goal of a long-lasting political solution for the
benefit of all Libyans.

