Mr. Tuju (Kenya): I am happy to participate in
this debate on peace, security and development in the
Great Lakes region. Permit me to take this opportunity
to congratulate you, Madam Foreign Minister, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
and on your personal efforts in convening this debate. I
assure you of my delegation's support.

Kenya applauds Tanzania's initiative aimed at
strengthening collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union. That initiative has
several antecedents both here at the United Nations and
in Africa, all aimed at preventing armed conflict and
securing thriving democratic peace in Africa. Indeed,
the African Union's motivation in establishing its own
Peace and Security Council was informed by the need
to address the chronic cycle of conflict and instability
that plagues our continent.

There has been tangible progress in focusing the
attention of the international community on the
problems of the Great Lakes region. Kenya and
countries of the region have been involved in solid
collaborative efforts to stabilize the region. The lessons
learned from previous experience in the region and
elsewhere motivated the international community to
convene the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, which eventually, in November 2004,
led to the adoption of the historic Dar es-Salaam
Declaration on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region.

I consider the second Summit of the International
Conference on Peace, Security, Democracy and
Development in the Great Lakes Region, which will
take place in the middle of this year in Nairobi, to be
very important. But I hasten to add that it will be as
important as we choose to make it; otherwise, it will be
just another of those conferences that come up with the
right resolution language and nothing more. But we
cannot afford that, given the crisis we have in the
region.

I should like to draw the Council's attention to
one of the most important root causes of conflict in our
region: ethnic tensions. Many of the countries in the
region are actually only geographical phenomena with
ruler-drawn borders and therefore not nation-States.
For example, in my country, Kenya, we have some 42
different nationalities, which are often referred to as
tribes. Our greatest challenge as a country is how to
forge lasting nationhood out of that diversity. Our
diversity is a blessing in many ways, but it is also a
curse of which we are quite aware. The curse elements
include those moments when ethnic tensions require
only a small trigger, and riots in the streets may ensue.

In North America, Europe and Asia, when
tensions such as those along racial divides culminate in
riots in the streets, there are enough resources and
mechanisms to manage and contain the stress. In our
region, where the coping institutional frameworks are
mostly in their embryonic stages, ethnic tensions that
spill into the streets have, sadly, degenerated into full-
scale civil war and, in many instances of which we are
all too aware, genocide. We have seen this even in
those countries that were previously perceived to be
stable: Rwanda and, at the moment, C6te d'Ivoire. We
are all surprised, yet we should not be, because we
know that those tensions are actually there, albeit
below the surface. I submit that because we know that
these ethnic tensions exist - usually below the
surface - we must, as a region, confront the challenge
boldly and decisively within the context of conflict
prevention, rather than relying only on the fire-brigade
and ambulance approach to conflict management.

I would like to congratulate the Tanzanian
Government through you, Madam President, because in
our region it was probably only Tanzania that, quite
early in its history, managed to build a stable
nationhood and to reduce the inter-ethnic tensions that
mark most of the countries in the region. That is a
legacy of the vision of Mwalimu Julius Nyerere, which
all of us, together with Tanzanians, should forever
cherish.

As we work towards the second Summit of the
International Conference on Peace, Security,
Democracy and Development in the Great Lakes
Region, and even as we welcome the establishment of
the Peacebuilding Commission, we must not forget the
fact that, historically, as many as 50 per cent of
resolved conflicts recur within a period of five years.
That is a very high failure rate: odds of 50-50 are for
gambling, not for finding solutions. The high rate of
relapse should awaken us to the fact that a peaceful
settlement that does not address the root causes of a
conflict in the short term or make the necessary
investment in long-term solutions and prevention
programmes is actually very shallow. What is the merit
of continuing with an approach that we know will
result mostly in relapse? Permanent solutions are
within our grasp if we choose to take the right steps.
As we go to Nairobi, let us be bold enough to confront
the challenge and develop visions, strategies and
programmes that can address the root causes.

We are ready to work together, to summon the
courage to look in the mirror, to identify the roots of
the problem and to work together with Ambassador
Ibrahima Fall, Special Representative of the Secretary-
General, to address them. We welcome the renewal of
the mandate of his Office. However, we feel that its
mandate and role should be oriented towards the long
term, not just towards conflict resolution and post-
conflict management; it should also prioritize conflict
prevention.

I take this opportunity to express my gratitude to
our partners, the Group of Friends, for their invaluable
support for our region. I pay a special tribute to
Denmark, Canada and the Netherlands, not only for
their engagement in our region, but also for helping to
sustain the interest of others.

We all agree that peacebuilding is important
work, although it is a lengthy process. Rather than
describing the obstacles, of which we are all aware, I
would like to add that the next concrete steps should be
on the humanitarian and social fronts. I propose the
following.

First, we should create an environment that
ensures better protection and welfare for refugees,
internally displaced persons and stateless persons.
States have to comply with international instruments
on human rights and also identify and disarm
combatants and separate them from civilians.

Secondly, we must set up a regional legal
framework for the protection and assistance of
internally displaced persons.

Thirdly, we must implement the legal framework
on the property rights of returning internally displaced
persons and refugees. Article 69 of the 2004 Dar es-
Salaam Declaration commits us to that objective. We
should finalize the relevant protocol quickly.

Fourthly, we must work within the region to
ensure the safety and security of humanitarian workers
and associated personnel during the conduct of their
duties, as well as to ensure free and unhindered
humanitarian access to persons in need of assistance.

Kenya welcomes the establishment of the
Peacebuilding Commission. This forum affords us a
historic opportunity to test-run the Peacebuilding
Commission in the Great Lakes region, the Horn of
Africa and other areas of conflict. After our
discussions today, the ideas embodied in the draft
resolution should be adopted and speedily implemented
in the Great Lakes region and in the Horn of Africa,
and the benefits should accrue to the many people who
have longed for peace and tranquillity, which have
proved so elusive.

In concluding, I would once again urge that,
while we convene important forums such as today's,
we must remember that it is pertinent always to address
the root causes of conflict and to always seek the
direction and the views and input of the victims and
urgently address their grievances to the extent possible.

I take this opportunity to extend a very warm
welcome to those who will be participating in the
second Great Lakes Conference in Nairobi.

