Mr. Briens (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Secretary-General for his reports
(S/2012/365 and S/2012/421) and for developing the
regional strategy on the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA)
as requested by the Security Council in its presidential
statement of 14 November 2011 (S/PRST/2011/21).

I would also like to thank Mr. Abou Moussa, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General and Head of
the United Nations Regional Office for Central Africa,
and Ambassador Francisco Caetano Jose' Madeira,
Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on Lord's Resistance Army Issues, for
their briefings.

The initiatives implemented up to now by the United
Nations Regional Office for Central Africa (UNOCA)
show the vigor of that recently created Office. A
number of political and security challenges remain in
Central Africa and require a pooling of efforts by all
stakeholders. We welcome the efforts made by UNOCA
to that end.

The fight against piracy in the Gulf of Guinea
is also a source of concern for the Security Council.
We welcome the upcoming summit of heads of State
on piracy and armed robbery in the Gulf of Guinea,
which is made possible by support from UNOCA. The
holding of that summit, as requested by the Council
in resolution 2039 (2012), will allow participants to
develop a regional anti-piracy strategy.

Efforts to combat all forms of transnational
organized crime must also be pursued and, in that
regard, we welcome the signing between UNOCA
and the Economic Community of West African States
of a cooperation framework defining priority themes
for partnerships, such as political governance and
combating weapons proliferation.

With regard to supporting democracy in the
region, we reiterate the need for the holding of free
and transparent elections to establish lasting peace in
Africa. We encourage UNOCA to continue to support
national efforts on that issue.

Among the challenges of peace and security in
Central Africa, the Lord's Resistance Army remains
a subject of major concern. We would like to thank
UNOCA for developing the United Nations regional
strategy, which complements the existing mechanisms
through specific objectives and measures and will
allow us to strengthen the coherence and coordination
of United Nations activities and of other stakeholders.

Given the ongoing threats alluded to by a number
of speakers, efforts made up to now must be pursued
and consolidated in a coordinated fashion. In terms of
security, our priority must be to ensure the protection
of civilians. We support the numerous initiatives of
partners on the ground to establish early warning
mechanisms.

Once again, we reiterate our full support for the
work done by the troops of our partners in Central
Africa. We also encourage the defection of rebels. In
that regard, the existing programmes of disarmament,
demobilization, reintegration and resettlement or
repatriation (DDRRR) must be extended to all affected
areas. Particular focus should be put on reintegration
with the establishment of appropriate welcoming
structures. We support the strategy proposal whereby
the offices and missions of the United Nations must
develop a common approach for the DDRRR process
and establish standard procedures for welcoming
children who were previously enlisted.

At the same time, ongoing efforts to arrest and
bring to justice the top leaders of the Lord's Resistance
Army (LRA), including Joseph Kony, must be pursued.
We encourage States concerned to strengthen their
cooperation with the International Criminal Court in
that regard.

France supports all of those efforts through its
contribution to the Peace Facility for Africa of the
European Union, which approved granting €1.2 million
to the African Union at the end of 2011. France also
bilaterally supports the States affected by the LRA by,
for example, contributing significantly on an ongoing
basis with the Central African Republic on military
matters. We support in particular the capacity-building
of the Central African armed forces. We also provide
humanitarian assistance to the populations affected by
the attacks and conduct socio-economic reintegration
programmes for child soldiers in the four countries
concerned.

In conclusion, we encourage States affected by
the LRA that have a lead role to play to maintain their
efforts with determination. We are at their side. We must
not let up in our efforts to sustainably put an end to the
threat of the LRA and comfort the civilian populations.

