Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the initiative of holding this open debate, which
gives us an opportunity to consider the current United
Nations architecture review process for peacebuilding
in post-conflict situations. We are particularly grateful
to Ambassador Rosenthal, who is here today, for the
valuable report (see s/2015/490) he presented, as well
as to the briefers for their presentations made this
morning.

Since the foundation of the Organization, the
international community has understood that peace
is not merely the absence of conflict. That is why
the Charter of the United Nations sets out three
fundamental and interdependent pillars that are
mutually reinforcing: ensuring international peace and
security, achieving development and promoting and
protecting human rights. In the same vein, last year we
adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(General Assembly resolution 70/ 1), which indicates that
sustainable development cannot be achieved without
peace and security and that these are at risk without
sustainable development. In that context, we believe it
is important to mention the direct relationship between
sustainable development Goal 16 of the 2030 Agenda
with peacebuilding, given that building of stable,
fair and peaceful societies in which human rights are
respected and promoted, thus enabling participation in
the political, social and cultural life of a country, would
be the best guarantee for lasting peace.

With that interdependence in mind, over 10 years
ago we decided to build a peacebuilding architecture for
the United Nations with a view to permanently breaking
the cycle of conflict by attacking its root cuases.
Unfortunately, in this review process we have noted the
limited impact of the structure when developing its work
of supporting States that have suffered the consequences
of conflict during the process of peacebuilding. We
agree with the report of the Advisory Group of Experts
on the Review of the Peacebuilding Architecture on the
need to adopt a series of measures to improve actions
in the field and give direction to peacebuilding, leaving
behind the problem of fragmented responsibilities
across the agencies of the United Nations system. My
delegation believes that the Peacebuilding Commission
must play a role of coordination, promoting synergies
and connections between the main bodies of the
Organization and agencies ofthe system responsible for
supporting States that have suffered from the results of
conflict. That should be complemented with its main
function of supporting States in post-conflict situations
by applying policies drawn up by national Governments
in accordance with their priorities, bearing in mind
the interdependence among security, development and
human rights.

Peru has always expressed its strict adherence to
the principle of national ownership of the execution
of national development plans in the process of
peacebuilding in post-conflict situations. For we
believe that peacebuilding is inherently an internal
political process, where the Government of a country
that has suffered from a conflict must work with the
political forces, former combatants and civil society
organizations in order to achieve national reconciliation
and set national priorities for development. The work of
the United Nations should be to facilitate that process
by providing assistance, political support and the
necessary financing to establish the basis for lasting
peace.

Peru believes that the scope of the challenge
of maintaing lasting peace requires that the United
Nations establish broader strategic and operational
links with regional and subregional organizations, as
well as with international financial institutions. The
latter is fundamental to ensuring appropriate financing
for the work of peacebuilding on the ground. Peru also
believes that the General Assembly should review
the appropriateness of providing greater resources
to develop peacebuilding activities, as well as to
strengthen the Peacebuilding Support Office.

In conclusion, I believe that that the United Nations
should adopt a holistic focus that includes preventive
diplomacy actions in support of the processes of
peaceful conflict resolution, preventing the relapse of
conflict and making peacebuilding possible. In that
regard, early warning systems should be adopted to
prevent conflicts in strategies and the actions of all
United Nations agencies, particularly those directly
involved in development work. The adoption of such
a holistic focus will make it possible for us to resolve
the fragmentation of the system when it comes to
peacebuilding processes and include the objective of
attaining lasting peace as the realization of the mission
of the Organization to save succeeding generations
from the scourge of war.

