Mr. Lacroix (France) (spoke in French): I wish at
the outset to congratulate you, Sir, and the United
Kingdom delegation on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council. My thanks go to
Ambassador Kumalo and the South African delegation
for their very effective work last month.

I thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting to hear briefings by the Chairmen of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee, the Al-Qaida Sanctions
Committee and the Committee on the non-proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction to non-State actors.
The Council should continue to follow the work of
these Committees attentively and to encourage good
interaction and exchanges of experience among them,
in conformity with their respective mandates, as it has
recently done through resolutions 1805 (2008) and
1810 (2008). We welcome the progress on this point
and the issuance of a statement to the press on the
initiative of Ambassadors Jurica, Urbina and
Verbeke - whom I thank for their briefings this
morning.

The Permanent Representative of Slovenia will
soon make a comprehensive statement on behalf of the
European Union, to which, clearly, my country fully
subscribes. I wish now to emphasize a number of
elements that my delegation views as particularly
important.

The Committee established pursuant to resolution
1540 (2004) is a very important part of our counter-
terrorism and non-proliferation machinery. France
hopes that it will successfully attain all of the
objectives set in its programme of work. The biennial
experts' report - to whose finalization by the
Committee my delegation is looking forward - should
show significant progress in the implementation of the
resolution.

But a great deal remains to be done. Some 40
States have yet to report. National reports still show
weaknesses in several key areas: the biological
segment is almost entirely in progress; gaps remain in
the fight against the financing of proliferation and the
control of transport and of sensitive exports.

That is why France has been actively engaged in
updating the Committee's mandate. With resolution
1810 (2008), a qualitative leap forward should be
possible on assistance to States requiring it; that is one
of the most promising areas for the future. The
extension of the mandate will make it possible to better
plan and finance assistance activities. The Committee
has received very clear instructions to play an active
role in coordinating offers of and requests for
assistance. Many practical provisions were included in
the resolution to facilitate this.

The Committee is also mandated to promote the
sharing of experience that would be useful for the
implementation of the resolution. This is of great
importance, because many States have requested
specific examples.

Finally, resolution 1810 (2008) provides
explicitly for the possibility of visits by the Committee
to countries in order to heighten awareness and offer
assistance.

Neither these provisions nor the extension of the
mandate constitute a blank cheque. The resolution
provides for regular meetings with the Security
Council and increased dialogue with interested States,
which will further bolster the legitimacy of the
resolution. The provisions sketch a road map for the
future. Three years will not be excessive: it is essential
for the Committee to get under way as quickly as
possible in order to fully implement the mandate
entrusted to it. In the short term, it should adopt its
biennial report without delay. It should then ensure that
its mandate is faithfully and fully reflected in its
programme of work, and it should spare no effort in
helping States to implement the resolution.

As our colleague, the Permanent Representative
of Croatia, has just recalled, the Council adopted
resolution 1805 (2008) of 20 March, renewing the
mandate of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate (CTED) and endorsing the
revised organizational plan of the Directorate, which
plays an essential role in supporting the Counter-
Terrorism Committee. We spoke of this in March (see 
19
S/PV.5855), and I shall not revisit the issue. I wish
merely to highlight three fundamental aspects of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee on which there has been
progress in recent months.

My first point relates to the need to ensure
coherence. The Committee must use identical criteria
during its assessments of the data made available by
States. This does not however mean automating a
system which must take careful account of the distinct
features of each country.

My second point relates to the importance of
dialogue. The Committee carries out visits, adopts
Preliminary Implementation Assessments and
participates, through the Executive Directorate, in
numerous international meetings regarding various
aspects of the fight against terrorism. There is a need to
make use of these channels for dialogue to meet the
simple but far-reaching objective of raising the level of
counter-terrorist means available to States and to
achieve the fullest and broadest possible
implementation of resolution 1373 (2001). We must
work together to build a bastion against terrorism.

My last point relates to the multiplying effect of
other agencies or organizations active in combating
terrorism. This is particularly true regarding the
participation of the Executive Directorate in the
Secretary-General's Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, and the numerous meetings held with
specialized bodies such as the Financial Action Task
Force, the International Civil Aviation Organization
and the Counter-Terrorism Action Group. The Counter-
Terrorism Committee should be at the core of a
network of partner entities. Here, the European Union
has already responded to this appeal.

I would not wish to conclude without saying a
word on the 1267 Committee and, above all, without
paying a tribute to the work of Ambassador Verbeke,
who has done a great deal to strengthen the
effectiveness of the sanctions regime in all its aspects.

The first aspect is the adaptation of the list to the
nature of the threat. This effort is reflected in the
de-listing of certain entries which no longer met the
criteria of association with Osama bin Laden, Al-Qaida
or the Taliban. New names have also been added. This
flexibility of the list is critical and we need to preserve
it. The Committee has begun the essential task of
updating the entries on the list in order to identify
wrong, incomplete or outdated entries. A particular
effort should be made regarding deceased individuals.

The second aspect relates to monitoring the
implementation of the regime. It is up to the
Committee and its Chairman to identify cases of
non-compliance with the sanctions and to deal with
them appropriately. At the same time, the work of
explaining the parameters of these obligations, as is
being carried out in particular through the Committee's
Internet site, is also pivotal. This necessary vigilance
regarding the implementation of sanctions goes hand in
hand with the related task of ensuring the quality and
reliability of the information on the list.

The third and final aspect relates to the
improvement of procedures to make them clearer and
more transparent. Thus, the Committee has adopted a
standard form for requests for de-listing; it has updated
its procedures regarding exemptions to assets freezing;
and it is doing similar work regarding exemptions to
the travel ban. These efforts benefit from the robust
and credible nature of the sanctions regime and must
be encouraged.

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that,
taken together, these three Committees form the core of
the Security Council's response to the grave threat to
international peace and security posed by terrorism,
proliferation and the convergence of those threats. We
have reaffirmed on numerous occasions in this
Chamber, and together with the Security Council, that
terrorism is criminal and unjustifiable. This is
particularly true of Al-Qaida and of its associates, who
have targeted not only States on all continents, but also
the United Nations itself, as in Algiers last
11 December. Allow me once again to pay tribute to
the memory of the victims and to their families, and to
reaffirm France's unswerving determination to thwart
the designs of terrorists wherever they may be active.

