Ms. Soder (Sweden): First, let me express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, and to the United
States presidency of the Security Council for convening
this timely and important meeting. I also thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.

The situation on the Korean peninsula, particularly
the pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles by
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, is of great
concern for the region and for our world more broadly.
Tensions have risen in recent months and the potential
for mistakes, misunderstandings and miscalculations is
high. For this reason, it is important that the Security
Council seize this opportunity to reflect on how tensions
can be reduced and how the Council can facilitate a
comprehensive solution to the situation.

Despite repeated unanimous condemnations by
the Security Council and the adoption of a number of
Security Council resolutions - which have lead to
the most rigorous sanctions regime under the United
Nations system - the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea persists in accelerating its nuclear weapons
and ballistic missile programme. In doing so, the
Democratic People's Republic of Korea continues to
show blatant disregard for its international obligations
and to threaten international peace and security.
Its actions are also incompatible with the existing
global norm against nuclear testing embodied in the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, and they go
against non-proliferation efforts. Therefore, we call
on the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to take
immediate steps towards a complete, verifiable and
irreversible dismantlement of its nuclear weapons and
missile programme. This will help pave the way for
peaceful and prosperous development on the Korean
peninsula. In addition, it is clear that there is a need for
a regional security arrangement in the medium term to
be able to realize this goal in full.

Meanwhile sanctions must be duly implemented
to have the desired effect. This is also a matter of
credibility for the entire United Nations system. Yet the
implementation of the sanctions against the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea remains insufficient
and highly inconsistent, as highlighted in the latest
report of the Panel of Experts to the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006). The recommendations provided by the Panel
must be followed up, and there is a need for a stronger
political commitment by all United Nations Members
in that regard. We need additional capacity at all levels
to ensure better compliance with the letter and spirit of
the resolutions adopted by the Council.

However, sanctions alone will not solve the
situation on the Korean peninsula. Now diplomacy is
crucial. Intensified and creative diplomatic efforts are
urgently needed to prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic
and comprehensive solution. The press statement in
response to the latest ballistic missile launch (SC/12801)
confirms the continued commitment of the Council
to dialogue.
The situation must be approached without prejudice
and we must be prepared to consider both new and
previous proposals and agreements. Sweden is ready to
do its part to fulfil that goal.

Sweden, with its Embassy in Pyongyang, is the
Power protecting the interests of the United States,
Canada and Australia in the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea. We are also a member of the Neutral
Nations Supervisory Commission, and in that context we
strongly encourage the Democratic People's Republic
of Korea to resume contact and cooperation with the
Commission at the border station in Panmunjom, which
would also help to reduce tensions and increase trust
and transparency.

Like other speakers, I would also like to take this
opportunity to draw attention to the extremely worrying
human rights situation and precarious humanitarian
conditions in the Democratic People's Republic of
Korea. It is the duty of all of us to continue to highlight
the atrocities being committed by the regime against
its own people, and the international community
should continue to pursue accountability for those
crimes, but we should also take into consideration the
humanitarian situation of the people of the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea so as to avoid increasing
their suffering as we implement the sanctions.

The pursuit of the development and use of weapons
of mass destruction represents one of the world's gravest
threats to international peace and security. Preventing
that is a crucial responsibility of the Security Council.
There can be no military solution to the situation on
the Korean peninsula, and we once again urge the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea to re-engage in a
credible and meaningful dialogue with the international
community. We also urge ourselves, the international
community, to be ready. In the meantime, Sweden
will stand united with the members of the Council in
condemning any action that jeopardizes international
peace and security.

