Mr. Gasso Matoses (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank you, Sir, for your work at the helm of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) on South Sudan at a particularly difficult time.
We wish to thank Ms. Lnj for her efforts; she has
Spain's full appreciation, gratitude and recognition
for her commitment to her work as Head of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS) in seeking
to promote peace in South Sudan.

We also thank Mr. Dieng for his timely visit to
South Sudan and for coming to the Council to present us
with his view of the events taking place in the country.
His participation in the Chamber today was particularly
relevant and necessary, given the real danger, as he has
reported, of mass atrocities occurring in the country.
What we have just heard from Mr. Dieng only reaffirms
the urgency of the need to act immediately and to
prepare ourselves for any possible occurrence.

As we are well aware, in 2005 world leaders endorsed
the principle and doctrine of the responsibility to
protect, which is designed to enable the United Nations
to act and assist in situations such as the one Mr. Dieng
has just described. I would like to pick up on one of his
sentences that genocide is not an event, it is a process.
The main responsibility for stopping that process
is clearly one that rests with the authorities of South
Sudan and all of the political and military actors in the
country. However, when those actors are not capable
of assuming nor desire to assume their responsibility,
it is then up to the rest of the international community
to meet the needs of the people who find themselves
threatened. It is therefore up to the United Nations
system and more specifically the Council.

In that regard I would like to highlight two points.
First, there is a clear responsibility that must be
assumed by the United Nations system and the Mission
directed by Ms. Lnj - we are highly aware of the
limits that the Mission faces in its ability to meet that
responsibility. This is why we are particularly satisfied
to see the efforts undertaken by the United Nations
to explore, together with the African Union, possible
options aimed at finding a solution. Those options
certainly include mechanisms to ensure the deployment
of a regional protection force, or other options beyond
the so-called over-the-horizon force referenced in
the report (S/2016/951), which we consider to be an
interesting initiative. Nevertheless, taking into account
the fact that the protection of civilians should be our
absolute priority, we hope that the interactions with
the African Union will lead to clear, specific plans and
proposals containing viable, realistic options.

One of the key elements in ensuring that
Ms. Lnj can fulfil her functions is the need to ensure
the freedom of movement of UNMISS, as mentioned
on many occasions in the Chamber. Without freedom
of movement, it is impossible for her to provide follow-
up or fulfil her mandate. The restrictions imposed
on the Mission by the South Sudanese authorities are
completely unacceptable. The security guarantees
offered by the South Sudanese authorities should,
as Ms. Lnj has indicated, lead to genuine action in
practice. Restoring confidence between the Mission
and the South Sudanese authorities is essential. To that
end, it is critical that the South Sudanese authorities
act in good faith in their relationship with the United
Nations and the Security Council, as we hope they will.

Moreover, it is true that the Mission's efforts do
not depend only on third parties. Part of issue is the
responsibility that the Mission must shoulder on its
own. That is why it is important to implement the
lessons learned from the incidents in Malakal and the
Violent incidents in July and to ensure that they do
not recur. We therefore reiterate our support for any
measure geared towards preventing any repetition
of those errors and towards ensuring the necessary
accountability, when appropriate.

Additionally, a part of the responsibility to protect
the people of South Sudan falls on the Council. We
must make that commitment as of now. In December
we must review the UNMISS mandate. We welcome
the proposals put forth in the report and the ambitious
goals set forth for the Mission, including bolstering
the protection of civilians, ensuring humanitarian
access, enhancing child protection, and fighting sexual
abuse and violence. We are fully aware, as we have
stated before, of the difficulties facing the Mission
in guaranteeing the protection of civilians located
outside of the camps.Nevertheless, we would be very
interested in some of the elements put forth in the
report, some of the innovative ideas on guaranteeing
and improving that protection, for example, foot patrols
to prevent sexual Violence in areas surrounding the
UNMISS camps, as well as the idea of exploring highly
innovative measures, such as the protection of unarmed
civilians on the part of civil society, which is already
taking place somewhat successfully in some parts of
the country.

Secondly, I wish to refer to another responsibility
of the Council, namely, the need for capacity-building
by the Mission and the Special Representative in order
to better support the political process. As we have
reiterated, it is certain that we require a collective
effort to restart the dialogue and promote inclusivity in
the political process. In that regard, the Council could
consider other kinds of tools that might be available,
for example, individual sanctions like those that it has
available. People who are threatened with sanctions
might think twice before choosing hatred or division.

Other instruments available to the Council include
the possibility of finally imposing an arms embargo on
South Sudan. We find it interesting that the United States
delegation has announced its intention to propose that
the Council establish an arms embargo. Spain has been
saying for more than a year - nearly two years - that
there is a need to adopt such a measure.

We believe, as the representative of the United
Kingdom has just mentioned, that imposing an arms
embargo is not, nor has it ever been, a political burden.
Rather, it is a genuine instrument aimed at reducing
violence on the ground. It would limit the deployment of
heavy weaponry and reduce the possibility ofescalating
bellicose actions. Above all, we are convinced that
having fewer weapons in the country would facilitate
an environment more conducive to promoting inclusive
political dialogue, which is the only way for the country
to find its way out of the current situation.

