Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): I should like to thank the delegation of France
for its initiative in convening today's meeting. We also
thank the Secretary-General and the invited briefers
for their dedication to preventing and addressing the
violation of children's right in armed conflict and for
the valuable information they have presented today.
We especially thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict
for her dedication and active work in assisting children
throughout the world.

We share the concern that has been expressed over
the difficult situation of millions of children affected
by armed conflict. A year ago, Ms. Zerrougui, together
with Anthony Lake, Executive Director of UNICEF,
launched the "Children, Not Soldiers" campaign to end
the recruitment and use of children in national security
forces by 2016. We can now note with satisfaction that
the initiative has been successful. With respect to the
activities of non-State armed groups, however, the
severity of the problem has not abated. According to the
most recent report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339), out of the 59 parties
listed 51 are non-State actors.

Today, the danger posed by the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) and other terrorist groups has
become a priority. Information is being spread on the
Internet and social networks to hypnotize children and
adolscents under religious pretexts and to recruit them
for participation in military action or as terrorist suicide
bombers. Not so long ago, media worldwide broadcast
barbaric images from an ISIS video in which a 12-year
old boy shot a prisoner. We continue to receive shocking
information on the abduction of children in Nigeria by
Boko Haram. These are just the most grievous of recent
crimes committed against children.

Fighting crimes against children is an important
component of the range of measures adopted for the
settlement of conflicts and post-conflict reconstruction.
It is clear that thorough and consistent efforts are needed
to reintegrate children formerly associated with armed
groups and to treat the psychological, socioeconomic
and other impacts on child victims of violence. Most
States affected by armed conflict are striving to improve
the situation of children, but they often require the
assistance of the international community. The United
Nations main task in that regard is to complement and
support national efforts. The Security Council and its
mechanisms can work most effectively in cooperation
with the States where armed groups are active. The role
of Governments, alongside United Nations structures,
in cooperating on child protection with non-State armed
groups is clearly articulated in resolution 1612 (2005).

We believe that, in carrying out the complex
mission assigned to her under her mandate, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General can find the
best way to help children in each specific case. The
ways of exerting pressure on violators can vary given
the differences in the nature, goals and strategies of
armed groups. We believe that the Council, including
its thematic working group, has the necessary tools
under the Council's resolutions in order to find the most
effective ways to solve problems pertaining to grave
violations against children in armed conflict. Moreover,
those mechanisms must deal first and foremost with
the largest and most acute situations of armed conflict
on the Council's agenda that lead to serious violations
against children.

We decisively condemn violations of the norms of
international law, international humanitarian law and
international law relating to human rights and the rights
of refugees with regard to children, regardless of who
commits them. Following the requisite investigations,
parties guilty of committing such crimes must be
brought to justice. Both premeditated attacks and the
indiscriminate or excessive use of force, which have
comparable effects, are unacceptable.

This year we commemorate the tenth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1612 (2005), which
established the Working Group on Children and
Armed Conflict. We wish success to the Permanent
Representative of Malaysia, the group's new Chair, in
particular on the Council meeting on this issue to be
held in June. Today's meeting can make a contribution
to the preparations for the upcoming meeting, as well
as to future meetings of the Working Group. In that
regard, we note the intention of the French delegation
to prepare a relevant non-paper in its national capacity.
In accordance with the Council's past practice, we do
not view that document as expressing the views of
the members of the Council or as an outcome of the
meeting.

