Mr. Konuzin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We would like to welcome our distinguished
guest, Mr. Jose Ramos-Horta, Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Cooperation of Timor-Leste. We are
grateful to Under-Secretary-General Guehenno for
having introduced the special report of the Secretary-
General on Timor-Leste and for the detailed
information he provided on developments in the
situation in that country.

We note the ongoing stabilization of the situation
in Timor-Leste and the successes of the Timorese
authorities, with the active and vital support of the
United Nations Mission of Support in East Timor
(UNMISET), in ensuring the establishment and
development of State institutions in the country. Of
particular importance for achieving the genuine self-
sufficiency and viability of the young State is progress
towards the creation and further strengthening of the
security sector in the country.

We note the conclusion, in December 2003, of the
process of transferring responsibility for law and order
throughout the country's territory from UNMISET to
the National Police of Timor-Leste. We also note that
the Timor-Leste authorities and the Border Patrol Unit
have undertaken control functions along the Tactical
Coordination Line between Timor-Leste and Indonesia.
We have a positive view of UNMISET's efforts to
prepare and train the Timorese military and police
forces.

We welcome the continued development of
Timorese-Indonesian relations, particularly with regard
to such a key issue as the demarcation and settlement
of their common border. The wish expressed by both
parties to establish genuinely good-neighbourly and
mutually advantageous relations allows us to hope for a
speedy solution to the outstanding questions, including
the problem of the 28,000 Timorese refugees now on
Indonesian territory. From the point of View of the
economic development of Timor-Leste, the positive
steps in bilateral negotiations with Australia on the
demarcation of those underwater areas containing oil
resources are significant.

At the same time, despite the unquestionable
achievements, Timor-Leste continues to experience
serious problems, particularly in such vital areas as the
establishment of State administration and the
strengthening of the potential for internal and external
security, where the State agencies now being formed
are still rather fragile. Timor-Leste is yet another
example of the fact that the process of establishing
Statehood is extremely complex and labour-intensive
and cannot be artificially squeezed into rigid existing
patterns and frameworks.

In those conditions the international community,
which has made great efforts and has expended
considerable resources to achieve this final success in
Timor-Leste, must not endanger this project, which has
provided independence to the people of Timor-Leste
and enabled them to be integrated into the family of
nations on a equal footing. Russia supports the
proposal to extend for one year the activity of all three
components of UNMISET, with reduced staffing, and
believes that this measure is most fully in keeping with
the interests of a settlement in Timor-Leste. Moreover,
this is precisely what the leadership of Timor-Leste has
asked the United Nations to do.

