Mr. Khair (Jordan): I wish to extend the sincere
appreciation of my delegation, Mr. President, for your
initiative to hold this very useful and timely open
debate on the implementation of the note contained in
document S/2006/507. We are also very grateful for the
very important concept paper that you have circulated.

Jordan associates itself with the statements made
by the Permanent Representative of Liechtenstein on
behalf of the group of five small countries and by the
representative of Egypt on behalf of the Non-Aligned
Movement. Since Jordan is a major troop- and police-
contributing country, I shall focus my comments on the
working methods of the Security Council in the area of
United Nations peacekeeping.

Progress was achieved last year in enhancing the
working methods of the Security Council when dealing
with peacekeeping-related issues. The Council has
made noteworthy commitments and begun to put them
into action. This can be seen in the holding of various
open and inclusive thematic debates on peacekeeping
issues, and also in the valuable work of the Working
Group on Peacekeeping Operations, chaired by Japan,
which offers a forum for in-depth and interactive
discussions.
Another significant positive development was the
evolution of the French and British initiative on
managing peacekeeping operations, which emphasized
the importance of engaging with troop- and police-
contributing countries. Another was the high-level
meeting on peacekeeping held by the President of the
United States, which reaffirmed the importance of
renewing and strengthening cooperation among all the
stakeholders, including the members of the Security
Council and troop-contributing countries, as the only
way to respond to the ever-growing challenges of
United Nations peacekeeping.

By all accounts, these positive developments
have allowed for a high-quality interactive dialogue
among the relevant actors, and resulted in a great deal
of goodwill and tangible change in the working
methods. Yet, if this positive momentum is to be
maintained and further fostered, the Council should
ensure the full and effective implementation of
resolution 1353 (2001) and presidential statement
S/PRST/2009/24, which provide a framework for
cooperation between the Security Council, the troop-
and police-contributing countries, and the Secretariat.
The consultation mechanisms and the detailed
procedures laid out in these important reference
documents should be optimally utilized so as to forge a
stronger relationship between the Security Council and
the troop- and police-contributing countries.

The sorely needed commitment of the wider
membership to United Nations peacekeeping can be
further strengthened by holding open, public meetings.
In this regard, we encourage the Security Council to
continue, deepen and expand the practice of holding
thematic debates and open meetings related to
peacekeeping, which allows the wider membership to
contribute with their perspectives and ideas. These
meetings should include input from the field, for
example by the special representatives of the
Secretary-General.

This practice has proven to be greatly beneficial,
as we witnessed in the Council's debate on transition
and exit strategies, held under the French presidency
(see S/PV.6270). These meetings should also result in
concrete advice or guidance by the Council based on
the proposals of the participants and without prejudice
to the role of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations (C-34).

We also encourage the President of the Security
Council to brief the members of the C-34 during its
sessions and, when appropriate, on the major
developments and initiatives regarding peacekeeping in
the Council. This will help to achieve more
coordinated joint action. In the same vein, the
President of the Security Council can arrange regular
meetings with regional groups such as the Non-Aligned
Movement, the European Union and any other
interested groups that contribute to peacekeeping, as
well as regional organizations.

Strengthening consultation with troop-
contributing countries should remain a priority for the
Council's members. The experience and expertise of
the troop- and police-contributing countries can
substantially assist the Council in making appropriate,
effective and timely decisions on United Nations
peacekeeping operations.

Therefore, meaningful and substantial
consultation should continue to be held between the
Security Council, the Secretariat and troop-
contributing countries, including at the request of
troop-contributing countries and during the entire life
cycle of the peacekeeping missions. I need not reiterate
the importance of these consultations to the troop- and
police-contributing countries, in particular when it
comes to the safety and security of their troops.

United Nations peacekeeping remains one of the
international community's most effective tools for
maintaining international peace and security. The
demand for personnel, equipment and enabling assets
for United Nations peacekeeping is thus likely to
continue, and even grow. One should note that
enhancing the working methods of the Security
Council and its efficiency, transparency, openness,
consistency and inclusiveness in the decision-making
process is essential to sustaining the confidence and
contribution of the current troop- and police-
contributing countries in the Council. Furthermore, it
can also contribute to broadening the base of
contributors to United Nations peacekeeping in order
to enhance the collective burden-sharing and to meet
the future requirements of United Nations
peacekeeping. Therefore, we encourage Council
members to induce real and systematic change in its
working methods. This change is absolutely necessary
and certainly achievable.

