On behalf of the Government of Iraq, I extend my congratulations to the Republic of South Africa on its assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of December and express appreciation to Mr. Karim Khan, Special Adviser and Head of the Investigation Team for his valuable briefing. We also applaud resolution 2544 (2020), which includes the approval of the Iraqi Government's request to extend the mandate of the Investigation Team to enhance accountability for the crimes committed by the terrorist organization Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) for a period of one year. We look forward to exerting more effort and the attention necessary to prosecute those involved with the terrorist organization financially and logistically and through cyber-related means - its supporters and financiers - as well as the crimes of smuggling oil and antiquities perpetrated by ISIS during its hold on Iraqi territories. Expediting the detection of criminals will bring justice to the Iraqi victims of the terrorist organization, ensure that those terrorist organizations do not return again and thwart any terrorist plans aimed at undermining international peace and security. We also call for the implementation of the United Nations resolutions concerned with combating terrorism aimed at monitoring airports and drying up financial sources to finance, monitor and exchange information about terrorist movements and determine their nationalities and control borders to ensure the cessation of the flow of foreign terrorist elements, monitor the methods, means and networks used by terrorist groups and work to dismantle them, through more coordination among States and international organizations in an effective manner. My Government affirms its commitment to cooperating with the Investigation Team and providing assistance to the Team through the competent national coordinating committee to support and implement the mandate of the Investigation Team's work, with full respect for Iraqi sovereignty and its jurisdiction over crimes committed on its territory and the right of its people. We believe that any use of forensic evidence outside the scope of Iraqi jurisdiction should be with the coordination and approval of the Iraqi Government and the Iraqi judicial authority, in accordance with paragraph 5 of resolution 2379 (2017). We also point out the need to expedite the completion of the investigation and provide investigative evidence to the competent Iraqi authorities, and we look forward to completing the appointment of Iraqi experts to the Investigation Team, as any delay in completing that task leads to the suspension of the relevant provisions of resolution 2379 (2017). In conclusion, we cannot but extend our sincere thanks and gratitude to all countries that support Iraq in its war against terrorism. We also call on the international community to provide support and assistance to the Investigation Team to complete its mission to the fullest, with an emphasis on the need for full respect for the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Iraq.
