Mr. Mashabane (South Africa): At the outset, we
wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Mr. Fernandez Amunategui on his appointment as the
new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Haiti, and to thank him for his statement. We assure
him of our support for the United Nations efforts in
Haiti.

South Africa would like to take this opportunity
to congratulate the people and Government of Haiti on
the successful conclusion of the presidential and
parliamentary election process in May this year. Even
though there were some difficulties initially, Haiti

successfully managed the peaceful transition from one
democratically elected President to another. However,
this positive momentum, created by the transition, may
be lost due to the political differences that have
delayed the appointment of a Prime Minster and
Cabinet. My delegation agrees with the observation of
the Secretary-General in his report that

"antagonisms between opposing political forces
are casting a shadow on the country's recent
democratic success and threatening its progress
towards lasting stability" (S/2011/540, para. 55).

We are concerned that the success of the
presidential elections runs the risk of being eroded by
the lack of progress in establishing Government. It is
therefore imperative that all stakeholders within the
legislative and executive branches of Government
make the necessary concessions to ensure that
agreement is reached to establish a Government. The
formation of a Government is essential if Haitians are
to lead the efforts to rebuild their country.

In April, the Council adopted a presidential
statement (S/PRST/2011/7) in which we recognized the
interconnected nature of the challenges facing Haiti.
We reaffirmed that security, good governance, the rule
of law, the consolidation of national Government
structures and development are mutually reinforcing.

While the security situation is relatively calm,
South African shares the concerns that the situation
could deteriorate if the political disagreement persists.
We further remain concerned at the continued high rate
of crimes such as murder, rape and kidnapping. This
can also erode the stability of Haiti. In this regard, the
efforts of the Haitian National Police, the United
Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)
and the United Nations country team should be
expanded to all areas experiencing high rates of
criminal activity.

Cooperation between the Haitian National Police
and MINUSTAH is vital to bringing about overall
security and stability in the country. We welcome the
fact that, in the areas where MINUSTAH and the
Haitian National Police have jointly carried out
anti-crime operations, criminality has decreased.
We remain deeply concerned at the tremendous
humanitarian challenges still facing Haitians, with

large numbers of the population - in particular
internally displaced persons - continuing to lack
10

access to housing and basic services. It is therefore
troubling that a number of non-governmental
organizations have had to leave Haiti due to reduced
donor funding. This is likely to have a negative effect
on the cholera prevention efforts and other daunting
challenges facing Haiti, such as the soaring prices of
food and fuel. It is therefore incumbent on the
international community to continue to support Haiti in
its recovery from the various humanitarian disasters
that affected it last year. Without such support, the
country will not be able to achieve stability and
development.

For its part, South Africa remains committed to
assisting the people of Haiti bilaterally, through United
Nations structures and projects, and through our
cooperation with India and Brazil in the IBSA Facility
for Poverty and Hunger Alleviation.

South Africa supports the proposed drawdown of
the military and police capabilities of MINUSTAH as
long as it is gradual and conducted with the
cooperation of the Haitian authorities, taking into
account their needs and institutional capacity. We also
support the recommendation by the Secretary-General
that the mandate of MINUSTAH be extended for an
additional year so that the Mission can continue with
its efforts in support of the political process and the
consolidation of State authority.

We are appalled by the allegation of sexual
assault by MINUSTAH military personnel. Allegations
such as these harm the credibility of MINUSTAH. The
United Nations zero-tolerance policy for such actions
must be emphasized, and there should be no impunity
for those found guilty of such offences. We note that
the Government concerned has acted immediately to
investigate these allegations.

In conclusion, Haiti has made significant strides
towards peace and stability. Challenges remain, and it
is imperative that the Haitians, with the sustained
support of the international community, work to
overcome these obstacles.

