Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Special
Representative Zahir Tanin for his briefing on the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2016/99) on the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK). We welcome the participation of Mr. Ivica
Daeie, First Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs ofthe Republic ofSerbia, at this briefing.
We equally welcome Ambassador Vlora Citaku.

The overall security situation in Kosovo remains
stable in general, despite outbreaks of violence during
political protests. We underline the fundamental role
played by the United Nations through UNMIK in
promoting security, stability and respect for human
rights, as well as its cooperation with the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), and
its engagement with Pristina and Belgrade. We will
focus our intervention on three main issues.

First, we will focus on key political developments.
We highlight Belgrade and Pristina's commitment
to continuing the high-level dialogue facilitated by
the European Union and the progress achieved in the
process of European integration with the signing of
the Stabilization and Association Agreement with
the European Union, which has been ratified by the
Assembly of Kosovo. We also welcome the progress
achieved in the integration into Kosovo of institutions
of former Serbian civil protection personnel. Another
positive note is the initiatives taken by business leaders
within the chambers of commerce in Belgrade and
Pristina, aimed at strengthening cooperation among
business communities.

However, despite those positive developments,
we acknowledge how disturbing the Special
Representative's briefing is with regard to the
polarization of Kosovo's political landscape, which
has reached unacceptable levels, while the extremes
of political antagonism have clearly transgressed basic
democratic norms. Moreover, also of great concern
are the rejection by the opposition of the integration
of the association of Serb-majority municipalities into
Kosovo, the opposition to the agreement on territorial
delineation signed with Montenegro, and the opposition's
continued use of violence and inflammatory rhetoric,
which is undermining the functioning of the Assembly
of Kosovo.

Secondly, with regard to human rights, we welcome
the appointment of a Joint Working Group by Belgrade
and Pristina on the persons unaccounted for in
connection with events in Kosovo, while stressing the
right of return for those Serbians, who were forced to
leave their ancestral lands. We appreciate the Sixteen
Days of Activism against Gender-Based Violence
campaign, held in Kosovo at the end of last year,
aimed at raising awareness of gender-based violence
and advocating for improved institutional responses.
UN Women further supported the implementation of
the the plan of action of the Kosovo Council on the
survivors of sexual violence, aimed at ensuring their
access to justice and providing joint training with
EULEX on sexual violence for investigators, judges
and prosecutors.

Thirdly, we commend UNMIK's maintaining
technical cooperation with rule of law-related
institutions. UNMIK's continued facilitation of
communication between the Kosovo authorities,
INTERPOL and its member States has also been
facilitating requests for mutual legal assistance from
States that do not recognize Kosovo. We value UNMIK's
role in facilitating dialogue between communities and
officials and monitoring relations among them, as well
as the maintenance of technical cooperation with the
relevant institutions and international organizations.

Finally, we want to reiterate our position that
resolution 1244 (1999) continues to be the applicable
legal framework for a comprehensive solution to the
Kosovo issue, through dialogue and negotiations,
based on the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and the framework of the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

