Mr. Brammertz: Mr. President, I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to present to the Council
the fourth report for 2006 of the International
Independent Investigation Commission (S/2006/962, annex). The report covers the activities of the
Commission between 25 September and 10 December.

As members of the Security Council are aware,
the political climate in Lebanon has been volatile
during this reporting period. Cabinet minister Pierre
Gemayel was assassinated in Beirut on 21 November;
large demonstrations have taken place; and the
complex discourse surrounding the establishment of a
special tribunal for Lebanon is still ongoing. This has
had an inevitable impact on the Commission's
investigation and security requirements.

The Commission has reached a critical stage in
its investigations. In this context, the Prosecutor
General of Lebanon and the Commission believe that
placing information concerning suspects and witnesses
in the public domain would make it difficult for
sensitive witnesses to step forward and engage with the
Commission and may be prejudicial to future trials
before a tribunal. The findings presented in this report
have to be understood with those limitations in mind.

The Commission's investigation in the Hariri case
has remained focused on developing crime scene
evidence and investigating potential perpetrators and
their linkage to one another.

Following the collection of forensic evidence at
the crime scene in June 2006, the Commission has
received a final report from external forensic experts.
The report confirms many of the Commission's own
hypotheses, for example that there was only one blast
and that the Mitsubishi van was the carrier of the
improvised explosive device. The expert report also
supports the hypothesis that an RDX-based high
explosive was used.

Recent forensic results also confirm that it is
likely that a person triggered the explosion from within
or immediately in front of the Mitsubishi van rather
than through the use of a remote-controlled device.

The Commission is also analysing the human
parts belonging to the unidentified male believed to be
the bomber that were recovered from the crime scene.
06-66630
Forensic results show that the individual did not spend
his youth in Lebanon, but was situated there in the last
two to three months before his death. The Commission
hopes that, after a second phase of analysis, the
specific geographic and ethnic origin of this person can
be determined.

Many other aspects of the investigation are
ongoing. For instance, the Commission continues to
focus on analysing information relating to Ahmed Abu
Adass, in order to establish how Abu Adass was
identified, where and when that occurred, who may
have been involved in organizing his appearance in the
video in which he claimed responsibility for the
assassination, and what happened to him after the
video was made and delivered.

The Commission has also undertaken
investigations with regard to individuals associated
with Ahmed Abu Adass in Lebanon and elsewhere. The
Commission has so far conducted 17 interviews in
Syria and Lebanon in connection with this line of
enquiry and has held a number of meetings with
relevant Syrian and Lebanese officials. It has collected
substantial quantities of computer and electronic
data - some of which is encrypted or in code - and
has visited a number of locations in Syria. This aspect
of the investigation will continue during the next
reporting period.

The Commission also continues to collect
information about the increasing threats against and
pressure on Rafik Hariri during the last 15 months of
his life. An analysis of this information reveals a
number of potential motives to kill Rafik Hariri, the
majority of which are in one way or another linked to
his political activities. At this stage of the
Commission's investigation, a smaller number of
motives have emerged as the most plausible.

During the reporting period the Commission has
continued to extend technical assistance to the
Lebanese authorities in the 14 cases. The Commission
has focused in particular on interviewing witnesses
associated with the victims of the six targeted attacks.
It has thus far conducted 19 interviews in connection
with this line of enquiry and has a number of further
interviews scheduled for the next reporting period. A
considerable number of links between the six cases,
and between these cases and the Rafik Hariri case,
have emerged from these interviews. These links,
which relate to the nature of the attacks, the nature of
06-66630

the victims and the modus operandi of the perpetrators,
support the analytical hypotheses discussed in the
Commission's report of June 2006 (S/2006/375, annex). The Commission also believes that the motive
to attack at least some of the victims was associated
with the victims' common objectives and interests, and
thus that these attacks may have been linked by a
common intent.

On 21 November 2006, Pierre Gemayel, the
Minister of Industry, was assassinated. Two days later,
following a request from the Lebanese Prime Minister
and a decision taken by the Council, the Commission
started providing technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigation of the Gemayel case.
The Commission is providing investigative support by
helping to identify the perpetrators and the vehicles
that were used in the attack. It is also working to
reconstruct the modus operandi of the assassins. After
seven days of investigation at the crime scene, a total
of 250 exhibits were sent to a laboratory for forensic
research and analysis. It is the preliminary assessment
of the Commission that Minister Gemayel was the
subject of surveillance as part of a planned
assassination operation against him.

The Commission has continued to cooperate
closely with the Lebanese authorities. The Commission
is very grateful for all the support it receives from
those authorities, especially at a time when the security
situation in Lebanon remains highly volatile. The
Commission regularly shares with the appropriate
Lebanese authorities the substance of all relevant
information that it obtains, where necessary in a
manner that does not compromise the interest of the
source of this information. This information-sharing
process is especially important when the information is
relevant to individuals who are detained.

The cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with
the Commission remains generally satisfactory. During
the reporting period the Commission submitted 12
formal requests for assistance to Syria and undertook a
number of investigation activities and interviews of
individuals in Syria. The Commission is satisfied with
the timeliness and efficiency of Syria's assistance to
the Commission and with the logistical and security
arrangements made for its investigation activities on
Syrian territory. The Commission will continue to rely
on Syria's full cooperation, as this remains crucial to
the swift and successful completion of its work.
3
Since 15 September 2006, 10 new formal
requests for assistance have been sent to five different
States, bringing the total number of requests sent to
States other than Lebanon and Syria since March this
year to approximately 60. Although most States have
responded positively to the Commission's requests and
have actively assisted its work, including by
facilitating witness interviews and providing other
support and information, some States have provided
late or incomplete responses. The lack of
responsiveness by certain States has impeded or slowed
down the work of the Commission on several fronts. In
View of the crucial nature of the information that it
seeks to obtain from States and the limited time frame
in which it aims to complete its investigative activities,
the Commission trusts that it will enjoy full and prompt
cooperation from all States during the next reporting
period.

The Commission has made progress in the two
main areas of its investigation in the Hariri case:
developing crime scene evidence and investigating
potential perpetrators. Fifty interviews and other types
of evidence collection are planned for the next
reporting period and, as always, the Commission's
objective is to collect evidence that will be admissible
before a future tribunal.

The Commission's work on the 14 cases
continues to elicit links between each case and to the
Rafik Hariri case. Further analysis will be done in the
next reporting period to develop these links.

Similarly, the Commission will continue to
provide support in the Gemayel case, focusing during
this initial period on assisting with identifying those
who physically perpetrated the crime and on examining
whether links to the other cases exist.

The Commission still faces many challenges. It
requires assistance from the United Nations Secretariat
in areas such as recruitment, procurement,
administration and finance, to facilitate and support the
necessary pace of its work. It also needs the continued
support of Member States to which it addresses
requests for assistance. A delayed response, or worse
still a lack of response, to its requests severely hampers
the progress of the Commission's work.

Finally, in the light of the proposed creation of a
special tribunal for Lebanon, the Commission will
realign its objectives and organize its work in a manner
that will facilitate the transition to such a tribunal.
The Commission hopes and trusts that it will be
able to continue to count on the Security Council's
support in carrying out its mandate.

