Mr. Covic (Serbia and Montenegro) (spoke in Serbian; English text provided by the delegation): It is
my special pleasure to greet the members of the
Security Council on behalf of the Council of Ministers
of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and on
behalf of the Government of the Republic of Serbia,
and to express my pleasure at having this opportunity
to participate in today's meeting on Kosovo and
Metohija. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report.

We have just heard yet another technical briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
regarding the situation in Kosovo and Metohija. Every
opportunity we have to inform the international
community about the extremely difficult position of the
Serbian and other non-Albanian communities in the
province is extremely important to us. Today's meeting,
however, is of special significance. That is because, if
talks on the future status are to begin on the basis of
the report and the recommendations of the Secretary-
General for launching a comprehensive review of the
standards implementation, we have to have concrete
and not imaginary progress in Kosovo and Metohija.

Let us go back, for a moment, to the Security
Council meeting in February and to the technical report
presented on that occasion. I would like to remind the
Security Council that the aforesaid report commented
critically on and indicated the absence of results in
achieving standards, particularly in the area of respect
for the rights of the non-Albanian communities.
However, the report before us today notes significant
progress and implies that the prescribed standards have
been met or are in the final phase of being met. Such
progress, had it really been made in such a short period
of time, would no doubt be an amazing feat. Alas, the
reality in Kosovo and Metohija is quite different.

Regrettably, the briefing we heard today links the
most important problems to the Kosovo and Metohija
Serbs and to the Government of the Republic of Serbia
and its authorities. In View of the fact that Serbs and
other non-Albanians live isolated in enclaves precisely
because their safety is jeopardized and there is no
freedom of movement, the statement that freedom of
movement exists in all municipalities in the province,
except in the northern part of Kosovska Mitrovica, is
inaccurate. Allow me to remind the Council that the
seat of the District Court is in the northern part of
Kosovska Mitrovica, and that the President of the
Court and all other employees are members of the
Albanian national community. They come to work
every day with no problem whatsoever, and we
sincerely hope that the same level of freedom of
movement will soon be achieved for minority
communities in all other parts of Kosovo and Metohija.

The report should not have omitted mention of
the fact that there are still 230,000 internally displaced
Serbs and other non-Albanians who cannot return to
their homes - not because they do not want to, but
because the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR cannot
guarantee their safety and freedom of movement.
According to the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in the past six
years around 12,000 internally displaced persons have
returned, 5,000 of whom are Serbs. However, despite
the officially proclaimed support for returns that was
expressed on several occasions, one more so-called
year of returns is passing, and there are no results.

Most of the activities of potential returnees more
or less boil down to visits to their demolished, burned-
down homes and desecrated graveyards. We sincerely
hope that this year we will witness a transformation
and that the representatives of UNMIK and of the
Provisional Institutions of Self-Government will agree
to sign, with us, a protocol on organized returns which
would break the deadlock, initiate the process and
make it more efficient. That would entail more
energetic measures regarding the eviction of those
who, threatening violence, are illegally using Serbian
property. Further, it should be kept in mind that, of the
27,000 court decisions that have been handed down in
the last six years on the restitution of usurped property
to its rightful owners, only 300 have actually been
carried out.
The report should also have included data on 150
demolished, burned-down Serbian churches and
monasteries, 60 of which, being sites of the highest
importance, enjoy a high level of protection. While
these holy sites await reconstruction, they are quietly
being taken apart, brick by brick, and any trace of their
existence is being destroyed.

The report does not mention the fact that the
Assembly and the Government of Kosovo and
Metohija are not truly multi-ethnic, since no protection
is provided for non-Albanian communities against
outvoting. Kosovo and Metohija Serbs participate in
those institutions in which they stand a chance of
achieving goals related to their vital interests,
particularly in those municipalities in which they won
the last local elections. Nor does the report make
mention of the illegal privatization of Serbian property,
which continues in the absence of any strategy for an
economic recovery or for finding solutions to the
problem of high unemployment. The report does not
reflect sufficiently on the problem of organized
crime - a problem that even Albanian parliamentary
parties point out as an evil that permeates all segments
of life in the province.

I believe that the Council will agree that reports
should not be written to satisfy only one side. But,
leaving aside embellished reports on the "virtual
reality" of Kosovo and Metohija, I would like to use
this opportunity to point out yet another worrisome
aspect of the activities of the United Nations
administration in the province, which has a mandate to
implement resolution 1244 (1999) impartially.
Unfortunately, the steps that were taken recently
considerably jeopardize the credibility not only of
UNMIK but of the United Nations as a whole and call
into question the impartiality of the role they should
play in future processes. By making a politically
sensitive request to obtain a special international
dialling code, a special international code for Pristina
airport, and through international visits by
representatives of the Provisional Institutions without
the presence of UNMIK officials and other similar
initiatives, creating the impression internationally that
Kosovo and Metohija is a completely separate entity,
the interests and requests of only one community living
in the province are being catered to, thus severely
violating resolution 1244 (1999) and prejudging the
future status of the province.

The most recent initiative regarding the
establishment of the Kosovo Forum, meant to
consolidate the Kosovo and Metohija Albanian
leadership and to provide a framework within which
they should prepare themselves for negotiations on
future status, speaks volumes in favour of my claim. I
would like to remind the Council that UNMIK is not
present in the province to cater to the objectives and
interests of one community only, regardless of the size
of that particular community and regardless of the
possible consequences of that community's
dissatisfaction if its one-sided requests are not met.

It is only human to want to show the success that
has been achieved, and I can understand that. Likewise,
I can understand the need of the international
community to direct its attention and resources to other
hotbeds of tension around the world. However, I will
reiterate once again that by writing embellished reports
that serve to satisfy those needs, a poor compromise is
made for the Albanian majority. This will not be

conducive to achieving a modern, democratic, multi-
ethnic society - something we defined at the very
beginning as our common objective.

We therefore welcome the balanced approach that
the Secretary-General has taken in his political
assessment and recommendations.

As always, the authorities in Belgrade are trying
to facilitate the process of achieving this common goal
of ours by adopting a constructive approach, and we
stand united in our view that working towards a truly
democratic and multi-ethnic society is the only path to
follow. At this point, however, I would like to stress
the cornerstone of the State policy of Belgrade: that
State borders cannot be changed, and that, in the
process of finding a solution to the future status of
Kosovo and Metohija, the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Serbia and the State Union
of Serbia and Montenegro cannot be questioned.

We are ready to seek, in cooperation with all
international actors and through direct dialogue with
Pristina, a peaceful, comprehensive and permanent
solution to the Kosovo and Metohija problem, which
includes the full implementation of resolution 1244
(1999). The President and the Prime Minister of the
Republic of Serbia have extended invitations to both
the President and the Prime Minister of Kosovo and
Metohija for a direct dialogue.

Although there has been no positive reply from
Pristina, the invitation to a sincere dialogue, without
any conditions, stands. It should focus on the very
heart of the problem, because we believe that a direct
dialogue is the only option if solutions are to be found
to the problems faced by our citizens living in the
province. We hope that the leaders of the Kosovo and
Metohija Albanians will in this case, too, demonstrate
a growing political awareness and readiness for
dialogue. As we announced at the last meeting, we
have reactivated the Working Group on missing and
kidnapped persons, the Working Group on returns and
the Working Group on energy, as agreed during the
Vienna process, while the reactivation of the Working
Group for transportation and communications is
expected in the next few weeks.

We are currently defining modalities for
participation in the work of the working group on
decentralization - a working group we consider to be
the most important indicator of the multi-ethnic
character of the Provisional Institutions of Self-
Government. We have also proposed the establishment
of two more working groups for technical dialogue, a
working group for privatization and a working group
for environmental protection, but we have not yet
received a reply.

During all the discussions we have had recently
with representatives of the international community
regarding the pace of the process of finding a solution
to the Kosovo and Metohija problems, we have been
reassured that no automatism will be applied in this
process and that concrete results in achieving our
common objective have to precede every new step.
Should the report that was presented today be taken as
the objective state of affairs in the field, it would serve
as the basis for the very automatic action that has so far
been resolutely ruled out as a possibility. If a formal
evaluation based on this report commences - despite
the fact that, realistically speaking, standards have not
yet been adequately met - we hope that the new
Special Envoy in charge of evaluating the progress
achieved will demonstrate a high level of impartiality
and personal integrity and that he will summon enough
courage to present the situation in Kosovo and
Metohija as it really is.

It would be counterproductive to open the status
discussions before the standards - the basic
provisions of resolution 1244 (1999) - have been
substantively implemented. According to the relevant
indicators, Kosovo and Metohija is a long way from
such implementation. However, should it be decided, in
spite of everything, to commence talks on future status.
those discussions would be burdened with the
extremism of the Albanian leaders, who will perceive
erroneously that the international community is
yielding to their policy of ethnic cleansing. The issue
of future status must be resolved through reaching
agreements and finding a compromise, but, above all,
in full respect of the basic international principle of
preserving the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
the Republic of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia
and Montenegro.

As a high-level official of a powerful country
recently put it, the road signs to the future are being
hurriedly put in place in Kosovo and Metohija.
Whether these road signs will lead the Serbian and
other non-Albanian communities to a modern,
democratic and multi-ethnic society and guide the
region towards stability and its future within the
European Union, without changing the internationally
recognized borders, depends on all of us.

