Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I want to join others in
congratulating Bolivia on assuming the presidency
of the Council and assure it of our fullest support.
Let me also express our appreciation to United States
Ambassador Nikki Haley and her entire staff for their
successful presidency last month.

We thank you, Mr. President, for having convened
this joint briefing, which we found very relevant and
useful in the light of the common objectives that the
three Committees share as important subsidiary organs
of the Security Council in countering terrorism. I
commend the Chairs of the three Committees and their
respective teams for their briefings, as well as for their
dedicated efforts.

On the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
(CTC), we recognize the indispensable role that it
plays in monitoring the implementation of resolution
1373 (2001) and other relevant resolutions on counter-
terrorism. Ethiopia also appreciates the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate (CTED) in
the implementation of the CTC's decisions and the
expert assessments it provides, as well as its assistance
to Member States in the implementation of Security
Council resolutions on terrorism.

We believe that the promotion of regional
cooperation should be strengthened and should also
focus on those countries and regions that are most
affected. We continue to stress that assessment visits
to Member States should be followed by the facilitation
of capacity-building and technical assistance where
there is a need to fill existing gaps. In this regard,
we would like to commend the role of the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and other bilateral partners and
their continued engagement with the CTC and CTED.

The work of the Security Council Committee
pursuant to resolutions 1267 (1999), 1989 (2011) and
2253 (2015) concerning the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL) (Da'esh), Al-Qaida and associated
individuals, groups, undertakings and entities is
critical in overseeing the sanctions measures imposed
by the Security Council on ISIL (Da'esh), Al-Qaida
and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities in accordance with the relevant resolutions. We
recognize the important work of the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team of the Al-Qaida
Sanctions Committee in assisting the Committee's
work and commend its expertise and professionalism.
We always welcome the continued engagement of the
Committee and the Monitoring Team.

We note with great concern the threat posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction,
their means of delivery and related materials and the
possibility of such weapons falling into the hands of
non-State actors, particularly terrorists. The threat of
the proliferation risk of such weapons is alarming in the
light of recent incidents related to the use of chemical
weapons by non-State actors in different parts of
the world.

The objectives of Security Council resolution 1540
(2004) could best be achieved through gradual control
and the reduction of nuclear, biological or chemical
weapons, leading towards the total elimination of and
a ban on weapons of mass destruction. In this regard,
it is imperative for all of us to support the Secretary-
General's Agenda for Disarmament. Equally important
is the need to ensure the ratification of, accession to
and full implementation of multilateral agreements
on the prevention and elimination of weapons of
mass destruction.

The threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters and
returnees, terrorism financing risks and the exploitation
by terrorists of information and communication
technologies - coupled with the risk of the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction in the hands of
non-State actors, including terrorists - remains an
enormous challenge.

As you underscored, Mr. President, in your remarks
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1540 (2004), cooperation among the three
Committees is of the utmost importance. Strengthening
collaboration between the 1540 Committee Group of
Experts and members of the Analytical Support and
Sanctions Monitoring Team, the ISIL (Da'esh) and
Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee and the CTC, without
prejudice to their respective mandates, requires
attention from the Council.

We recognize that resolution 2368 (2017) provides
a framework for the cooperation between the CTED
and the 1540 Committee and their respective Groups of
Experts aimed at providing support to Member States
as well as avoiding duplication, creating synergies
and facilitating coordination. In this regard, while
welcoming the recent joint outreach activities and visits
by the three Committees, I would like to highlight three
areas that could be considered in efforts to further
strengthen cooperation among the three Committees
within the framework of resolution 2368 (2017).

First, as a follow-up to today's joint briefing, the
Chairs ofthe Committees could envisage the convening
of a joint meeting among the three Committees at
the expert level to identify concrete measures or
mechanisms that could further enhance existing
cooperation, with a View to preventing the proliferation
of weapons of mass destruction and their falling into
the hands of terrorists.

Secondly, the three Committees could, in the
context of their outreach activities and technical
assistance and capacity-building provided to Member
States, consider the possibility of the joint planning and
implementation of their activities, as appropriate and
where feasible.

Thirdly, while welcoming the existing cooperation
with regional and subregional organizations, including
the African Union, the possibility of organizing joint
meetings and other activities in support of regional
efforts should be further explored. Such measures
will further strengthen regional efforts to prevent
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction by
non-State actors, as well as counter-terrorism measures.

