Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to welcome the presence of Foreign
Minister Rassoul in the Security Council this morning
and to thank him for his important statement. I also
wish to thank the Secretary-General for his report
(S/2011/590) and Special Representative De Mistura
for his briefing. We pay tribute to his leadership and
the work of his team in Afghanistan.

I would like to begin by expressing my sincere
condolences to the family of former President Rabbani.
The United Kingdom condemns those responsible for
his appalling and cowardly murder. They took
advantage of Mr. Rabbani's hospitality and good faith.

He was a negotiator and a peacemaker, and his efforts
should have been respected. Those responsible are
sending a signal that they do not want to play a role in
Afghanistan's future. In the light of this tragic event,
we will want to consider further listings under the
sanctions regime of resolution 1988 (2011), and we
will continue to review very closely any request for
de-listing.

President Karzai and other Afghan political
leaders have pledged to continue the peace process.
This is a sign of their commitment to the Afghan
people. They have made clear that this attack will not
derail their efforts. Instead, they are ready to engage
with those elements of the insurgency that are
genuinely willing to work towards a stable, secure and
prosperous Afghanistan. I commend their stance and
emphasize the United Kingdom's readiness to support
that work.

Despite this shocking event, progress is being
made in Afghanistan. The start of the transition process
in July saw seven areas begin the process of handing
over lead security to the Afghans. The latest reports of
the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)
confirm positive progress in these areas, with the
capability and capacity of the Afghan National Security
Forces continuing to improve. The Special
Representative reinforced that message this morning.

The recent attacks on the British Council, the
United States embassy and ISAF headquarters were
shocking, but demonstrated the increasing ability of the
Afghan National Security Forces to respond to such
events. We are on course for the next set of provinces
to begin transition towards the end of this year, and it
is encouraging that ISAF is keen to start the transition
process in the more challenging areas of Afghanistan.

The protection of the Afghan civilian population
remains at the core of our military strategy. ISAF
continues to work to reduce the level of civilian
casualties and has strict operating procedures both to
minimize the risk of casualties occurring and to
investigate thoroughly any incidents that do happen.
This is in sharp contrast to the insurgency, which
deliberately targets civilians and uses violent tactics to
intimidate the population. Around 80 per cent of
civilian casualties are caused by insurgents, and we
continue to strongly condemn all such attacks.

Transition will inevitably impact upon
Afghanistan's economy as income sources decline and
the costs of the Afghan National Security Forces come
under national control. Although revenue is growing, it
will not balance expenditure for several years. It is
therefore vital that the international community be able
to agree on a way to ensure continued funding for
Afghanistan's security and development needs beyond
2014. Good progress has been made on a new
International Monetary Fund programme for
Afghanistan, and essential reforms to improve the
banking sector are now being implemented. A final
agreement is possible before the Bonn Conference in
December and will be an important milestone for the
long-term health of the Afghan economy.

As Minister Rassoul and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General highlighted,
we have two major international events that will
consolidate progress already made and set the context
for next year. The Istanbul Conference on 2 November
will be a key opportunity to enhance and expand
regional cooperation. We hope that the region will use
the opportunity to agree on a coherent approach,
building on language of the London and Kabul
conference communiques on good-neighbourly
relations. We look forward to the Conference, and
thank the Turkish hosts and the Government of
Afghanistan for their tireless work in its preparation.

Following Istanbul, the December Bonn
Conference will send a clear signal of the Afghan
Government's growing ownership and leadership on its
path to self-sufficiency, and of the international
community's long-term commitment to Afghanistan
beyond the transition process.

On long-term engagement, we believe that the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) will have a vital role to play both during
and beyond transition, and we therefore look forward
to the forthcoming review of UNAMA's mandated
activities and United Nations support in Afghanistan.
We urge the review to focus on the post-2014
landscape and on how UNAMA and the United Nations
can support the Afghan Government in bringing about
the emergence of a strong, durable and self-sustaining
Afghan State.

The death of Mr. Rabbani will not deflect us from
our goals. Political aims cannot be achieved by
violence and extremism. The course of reconciliation
and greater political inclusion for all Afghan groups
will continue. The Bonn Conference will help drive

efforts forward. I want to take this occasion to make
clear our message to the Taliban that there is no
military solution. Our commitment to Afghanistan's
security and stability is enduring, and we will continue
to support the Afghan National Security Forces and a
strong Afghan State long after 2015. If the Taliban
believe that peace can be achieved through dialogue,
then now is the time to signal that belief, because the
window of opportunity will not remain open forever.

