Miss Hassan (Djibouti) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank the French presidency for having organized
this high-level open debate of the Security Council on
the protection of civilians in peacekeeping operations.

Djibouti endorses the statement made on behalf of
the Non-Aligned Movement.

At the outset, I express the gratitude of my
delegation to the Secretary-General and the President
of the International Committee of the Red Cross for
their contribution to this important open debate. We
also wish to thank you, Sir, for the concept note written
in anticipation of this meeting (S/2016/503, annex).

The SecurityCouncilhasalreadyhadthe opportunity
to discuss this issue in depth. The successive reports of
the Secretary-General and the many recommendations
therein have helped shed light not only on the progress
made but also on the major challenges remaining. Given
the importance of the issue, my delegation is convinced
of the need to increase the opportunities to identify
together a common analysis of the challenges and the
ever-more precise operational guidelines to assist the
forces of peace in their activities to protect civilians.

The Kigali Principles on the Protection of Civilians
are useful in that they draw lessons from past failures.
Djibouti adheres to the Principles because they
represent a significant step towards better protection for
civilians in peacekeeping operations. We also believe
that the lessons learned from the public discussion of
strengthening the cooperative relationship between the
United Nations and regional organizations could help to
better meet the challenges posed to the forces of peace
in the protection of civilians.

(spoke in English)

In 1999, the Security Council took the historic step
of adopting resolution 1265 (1999), which recognizes
the protection of civilians as the raison d'etre of the
Security Council. Significant progress has been made
since then with regard to the development of institutional
and operational tools by the General Assembly and the
Secretariat in order to strengthen United Nations action.
As States have the primary responsibility to protect
their citizens, the United Nations should support the
building of relevant national capacities and enhance
synergy among various national actors.

Last Friday, the United Nations Police Division,
organized a high-level meeting on United Nations
concepts of operations, aimed at raising various issues,
such as the mandate of peacekeepers in protecting
civilians. Most missions are already mandated to protect
civilians, but mandate implementation by peacekeepers
often fails. Threats on the ground must inform mission
mandates, strategies and structures. Training and early
warning capacity must be improved for that purpose.
Gender-sensitive training should be a central part of
security sector reform and concrete efforts must be
made to increase women's engagement in that sector.

(spoke in French)

Djibouti has participated in the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
since 2012. The proximity of our troops through civil
engineering projects, such as building roads, and
donations of medicine and medical supplies is aimed
at establishing a unique and special relationship that
helps to reassure the local population while promoting
mission sustainability.
Moreover, in December 2011 Djibouti joined the
African Union Mission in Somalia. The Mission is
mandated to support the process of reconciliation and
peace in that country and has allowed Djiboutian troops
to secure areas recovered from Al-Shabaab while
establishing parallel relationships of trust with the
local population. Indeed, we consider the link between
the protection of civilians and peacekeeping mandates
to be critical. The safety of civilians is crucial to the
legitimacy and credibility of peacekeeping missions.

Djibouti does not yet have structures dedicated to
international humanitarian law, but has begun to build
the relevant capacities of its troops deployed abroad.

Djibouti, as a State party to the Geneva Convention,
participated in the consultations initiated by the
Swiss Government and the International Committee
of the Red Cross (ICRC) between 2012 and 2015 to
identify ways to enhance respect for international and
humanitarian law. This is a crucial issue, and we share
the main motivation behind this initiative to prevent
the credibility of international humanitarian law from
gradually being eroded and impunity from being subtly
established as the norm.

We take this opportunity to express our profound
gratitude to Switzerland and the ICRC for the
various options and recommendations submitted
for consideration by members of the thirty-second
International Conference, which met in December
2015, and express the hope that the intergovernmental
process that has been launched to reach agreement on
the functions and modalities of a governmental forum
for international humanitarian law will produce the
desired results.

We will all benefit from contributing to creating a
world that respects the dignity of human beings, even
in wartime. Let us protect civilians and champion the
rights of the undocumented. This slogan drafted by
Hannah Arendt is somewhat contradictory, it is true,
but used deliberately to emphasize the difficulty of
exercising fundamental rights in the context of armed
conflicts that are often cruel and violent.

(spoke in English)

In conclusion, the challenges to peace operations
should be resolved by implementing effective strategies
on the ground. Impunity must end, and all violators must
be held accountable. Tools should be strengthened to
bring criminals to justice, and peacekeeping operations
should pay particular attention to the protection of
civilians. All relevant departments of the United
Nations should be coordinated in their efforts to protect
civilians in armed conflict. Follow-up and sharper and
more organized focus on resolutions are required.

