Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015), which
marks a historic moment both for international peace
and security and for the Security Council. Following
12 years of a nuclear crisis, after many months of
intensive months of negotiation, an agreement with
Iran was finally reached in Vienna on 14 July. First,
the agreement charts a demanding path towards
establishing trust in the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran's nuclear programme. It also serves to confirm
the relevance and robustness of the non-proliferation
regime. The agreement will also make a contribution
to regional and international stability, as an Iran with
nuclear weapons would further destabilize a region
already experiencing many crises. Conversely, with
this agreement we will together be able to write a new
chapter in the history of the region. Above all, the
authority of the Council and of our collective security
system has been strengthened thanks to this agreement.
If the commitments are upheld, one of the most serious
crises of the past 20 years will have been settled
peaceably through dialogue and negotiation.

This agreement is first and foremost a triumph
of method. As the Council is aware, from the outset
of the crisis, in 2003, along with Germany and the
United Kingdom, France gave priority to dialogue
through what came to be known as a dual approach,
namely, negotiations and sanctions. We believed that,
without firmness and pressure from the international
community, calls for dialogue would have been in
vain. Our American, Russian and Chinese partners,
and eventually the rest of the Security Council, rallied
around that approach. In that way, we were able to
establish the framework for dialogue that, 12 years
later, made it possible to arrive at an outcome.

This agreement is also the result of firmness.
Throughout the negotiations, France did not waver
from its position of being in favour of civilian nuclear
programme for Iran but against a nuclear weapon.
Against that backdrop, France resolutely joined in
the search for a negotiated solution. That course of
constructive resolve made it possible to arrive at a robust
and binding agreement that is also precise, complete
and credible and whose full implementation will
serve to address the expectations of the international
community and the concerns of Iran's neighbours.

It is now up to the Security Council to endorse
the Vienna agreement and act as guarantor of its
implementation. Although the time for negotiations has
come to an end, now is the time for action and vigilance.
The process that has been put in place includes clear
and exact limits on Iran's nuclear programme, a robust
oversight and verification system and the possibility for
automatically reinstating sanctions in the event of Iran's
violation of its commitments. It is Iran's responsibility,
in line with the timetable that has been established, to
implement the entirety of the measures agreed. The
International Atomic Energy Agency will play a key
role with regard to oversight and verification, as well
as in informing the Council as to Iran's adherence to
its commitments. Along with its partners, France will
rigorously and in good faith monitor compliance with
this agreement. We will judge Iran's by its actions in
making this agreement a success. The role and unity
of the Council will also be a determining factor. The
lifting of Security Council sanctions is preconditioned
on Iran's respect for its commitments. The Council must
continue to exercise vigilance throughout the period
covered by the agreement. Over the next 15 years, it
must be prepared to reinstate sanctions in the event of
shortcomings on the part of Iran.

Together, with eyes wide open, we are embarking
today upon a new chapter. But the most important part
is yet to be written, and the coming weeks will be
decisive.

