Mr. Hunningstad (Norway): My delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General. We also welcome the
initiative to convene this meeting of the Security Council to
discuss further measures towards finding a solution to the
conflict. Norway has long been involved in Afghanistan
through the different agencies of the United Nations, as
well as through a number of Norwegian and international
non-governmental organizations. Norway headed the second
meeting of the Afghanistan donor group in New York in
1997. Our support to the people of Afghanistan is based
on a strong commitment towards a negotiated solution to
the armed conflict.

The recent escalation of the military conflict in
Afghanistan and the suffering it has caused civilians gives
reason for grave concern. We fully support the efforts
made by the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan (UNSMA) and the Special Envoy to bring
about a ceasefire. We urge the warring parties, and in
particular the Taliban, to resume negotiations aimed at
establishing a broad-based, multi-ethnic and fully
representative Government in Kabul. No efforts should be
spared in persuading the parties that the conflict cannot be
resolved through warfare.

Regional cooperation is crucial in the process of
resolving the continuing military confrontation, which is
posing a serious threat to regional and international peace
and security. In this respect, the Tashkent declaration was
a step in the right direction. We appeal to the parties of
the "six plus two" group, in particular the Taliban, to
respect the fundamental principles for a peaceful
settlement of the conflict and to make good their stated
commitment to a political settlement. Likewise, we call
upon the countries in the region to uphold their common
agreement not to provide military support of any kind to
any of the parties to the conflict in Afghanistan.

Norway is gravely concerned by the violations of
human rights, including those inflicted on ethnic
minorities, women and girls, and by violations of
international humanitarian law in Afghanistan. We urge
all factions to respect the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, to which Afghanistan has subscribed. An end
must be put to the flow of arms which is subjecting men,
women and children to the arbitrary rule of warring
factions. Later this year, we will commemorate the tenth
anniversary of the adoption of the Convention on the
Rights of the Child. Norway strongly denounces the
recruitment of child soldiers and urges the warring
factions to respect this Convention. The parties should
also respect Security Council resolution 1261 (1999) on
children in situations of armed conflict, adopted by the
Council this very week.

We are equally alarmed by reports of forced
displacement of civilians and by the deteriorating
humanitarian conditions of internally displaced people.
The Secretary-General rightly emphasizes that the prime
responsibility for the welfare of the internally displaced

 

people lies with those who have displaced them from their
homes. Norway calls for a rapid return of the displaced
civilians and joins the appeal of the Secretary-General to
ensure the protection of civilians in armed conflict.

International aid to civilians is dependent on the
presence and the free movement of all United Nations
personnel. As the Tashkent declaration confirmed, the
United Nations must continue to play a central and
impartial role in international efforts to achieve a peaceful
solution to the conflict in Afghanistan. We urge the parties
to ensure secure access for humanitarian organizations and
to allow relief agencies to provide assistance in an effective
and efficient manner to all victims.

In our view, there cannot be a lasting peace so long as
the humanitarian situation continues to deteriorate. Norway
strongly supports the strategic framework under United
Nations auspices, by which humanitarian assistance is
placed in the context of the political process of peace and
reconciliation.

Finally, we appreciate the continued efforts of the
Special Envoy and the role of United Nations Special
Mission to Afghanistan in working towards a peaceful
settlement of the conflict.

