Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Sir, and your delegation on
your assumption of the presidency and thank you for
calling this meeting, which gives us the opportunity to
hear the voices of all the children affected by armed
conflicts. It is also my pleasure to welcome the Minister
for Foreign and European Affairs of Luxembourg,
Mr. Jean Asselborn. I would also like to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict, the Under-Secretary-
General for Peacekeeping Operations, the Deputy
Executive Director of UNICEF and the Special Envoy
for Peace and Reconciliation of the United Nations
Educational, Social and Cultural Orgabization for their
valuable statements this morning.

I would like to take the opportunity to underscore
the importance of the Children, Not Soldiers campaign
aimed at putting an end to the recruitment and use of
children by Government armed forces in conflicts. That
campaign comes at an opportune time, in view of the
notable increase in violations against children in many
conflict areas throughout the world and the severity
of the Violations committed against them. We express
our deep concern about the severity of the violations,
which constitute a humanitarian crisis, and about the
killing and recruitment of children and other violations,
including sexual abuse and kidnapping, such as the
action of Boko Haram, in which they kidnapped more
than 200 students, who are still missing. All of those
incidents are a source of grave concern.

The report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2014/339) paints a very painful
picture. Many children suffer gravely from the effects
of armed conflicts throughout the world. We are also
aware that the suffering of children in the Arab region
of the world is part of that painful picture. However, I
would like to address two particular cases.

Palestinian children are undoubtedly not immune
to injustice, given the continued Israeli violations. In
addition to the information contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the grave violations and
the killing of Palestinian children in the Palestinian
occupied territories, the recent Israeli aggression
against the Gaza Strip has led to the death of more than
2,000 civilians, mostly women and children.

As for Syria, the Secretary-General's report paints
an indescribable picture of grave violations against
children and the extreme danger they are in. More than
10,000 children have been killed since the beginning of
the conflict, and the number of children killed increased
significantly in 2013. Nevertheless, the Syrian Arab
Armed Forces continue to indiscriminately shell areas
inhabited by civilians, and the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Sham continues to commit horrible acts, including
kidnappings and other violations against children.

We are also gravely concerned by the violations
committed against educational establishments in armed
conflicts and strongly condemn the repeated attacks
against schools, such as the deliberate attack in Gaza
in August against the schools of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East. The targeting of those schools, their
transformation into part of the battlefield and their use
by parties to the conflict for military purposes, such as
for military barracks, operational bases and detention
centres, is not only a violation of the civilian nature of
those schools, but it also endangers children and denies
them the right to education.

The facts contained in the relevant reports,
including the most recent report of the Global Coalition
to Protect Education from Attack, shed light on the use
of schools and universities for military purposes in
more than 24 countries since the beginning of 2009. We
believe that the time has come to make further efforts
to protect schools and universities from military use.

We would also like to stress the importance of
taking further strict measures with regard to those
responsible for violations and aggression against
children and for the military use of schools. It is also
critical to adopt additional laws that criminalize such
violations, fight impunity and ensure accountability,
with a view to putting an end to the violations and
horrors committed against the children of the world.
Let us instead invest in the future of those children.
They need it the most, and perhaps we will be able to
reintegrate them into society and make them forget the
horrors they have witnessed.

