Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): Allow me to thank the Special Representative of the Secretary- General of the United Nations and Head of the United Nations Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH), Ms. Helen La Lime, and Ms. Marie Yolene Gilles, for their briefings. Over the past few months, we have followed with concern the evolution of the sociopolitical situation in Haiti. In addition to the disagreements over the formation of a Government since 13 January 2020, the parliament has remained non-functional, following the departure of the members of the Chamber as a result of the failure to hold the elections scheduled for 2019. That is regrettable, as it is precisely a peaceful and inclusive electoral process that could bring about the long-awaited stability in Haiti. At the same time, the socioeconomic situation remains difficult, with a food crisis that continues to give cause for concern. According to the World Food Programme, a third of Haiti's 11 million people are malnourished, and about | million of them are severely malnourished. Regrettably, United Nations specialized agencies are experiencing difficulties in mobilizing the funds needed to finance the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan. My delegation remains convinced that a solution to the current crisis in Haiti can be achieved only with the will of the Haitian people to find consensual solutions through dialogue. In this regard, the support of the international community and of the United Nations is invaluable in accompanying national efforts aimed at restoring and strengthening the population's confidence in public institutions and at creating acceptable conditions for the restoration of lasting peace and stability in the country, making it possible, inter alia, to attract foreign investment, which the country greatly needs in order to revive its economy. My delegation encourages the Haitian authorities to make efforts towards national reconciliation and appeals to all stakeholders to refrain from violence and resolve their differences by peaceful means. We urge the authorities to address the underlying causes of instability and poverty and ensure that justice is done for the violence, crimes and human rights violations and that those responsible are held accountable before the courts. In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the appeal to the members of the Security Council on the need to find an urgent solution to the political, economic and humanitarian situation being experienced by the Haitian people.
