Mr. Lewicki (Poland): Let me thank the briefers for
their valuable and informative contributions to today's
discussion. Our briefers' interventions have clearly
demonstrated to all of us the gravity of a humanitarian
situation that needs to be addressed in an urgent manner
to help the people of Venezuela.

There is no doubt that the people of Venezuela face
a dire humanitarian crisis, which is man-made and the
result of corruption and mismanagement. Furthermore,
the crisis and suffering of the people of Venezuela
continue to deteriorate due to the refusal of the de facto
regime of Nicolas Maduro to grant access to a country
that so desperately needs humanitarian aid. The reality
on the ground speaks for itself. The health sector is in
absolute collapse. The shortages offood and medicine are
regular, not sporadic. Widespread malnutrition among
children, increasing infant and maternal mortality and
the resurgence of infectious diseases long considered
eradicated should not happen in a country that has all
the necessary natural and human resources to flourish
and should lead statistically in every socioeconomic
category. What makes the case worse is that not only is
the Government unable to resolve those issues, but that
it also contributes to deepening the crisis by denying its
scale and casting aside offers of aid.
Let me also thank Kathleen Page for the John

Hopkins University report. We consider the findings
very troubling.

The current humanitarian crisis in Venezuela has
had a particularly alarming effect on women and girls,
the most vulnerable groups in the majority of conflicts
and crises. The trafficking of women for sex and forced
labour is increasing throughout the region. Moreover,
women in Venezuela are facing further challenges
and risks, including a rise in sexual and gender-based
Violence, shortages of feminine items and high levels of
maternal mortality.

Much remains to be done to address the extremely
urgent needs, and Venezuelan actors across the political
spectrum have the responsibility to put the interests of
the Venezuelan people at the centre of their actions at
this critical time. But it is up to the de facto regime
to acknowledge the problem first and allow large-scale
humanitarian assistance into Venezuela.

As we speak, more and more people - 5,000
every day - are crossing the borders, joining the more
than 3 million Venezuelans who have already fled the
country and leaving behind those unwilling or unable
to leave despite being forced to live in extremely
miserable conditions. The Council cannot remain idle
in the face of such a crisis, which is having an adverse
effect on the peace and security of the region.

We appreciate the efforts of the countries of Latin
America aimed at maintaining an open door and
providing assistance to refugees. A friend in need is
a friend indeed. We commend the Governments and
the peoples of Peru, Colombia - represented today
by its Foreign Minister - and Ecuador and other
neighbouring countries for the true hospitality they
have extended to the people of Venezuela.

While trying to focus on the humanitarian aspects
of this briefing, we cannot but refer to the political
background of the Venezuelan crisis. In this regard,
the two key issues to be addressed are the rule of law
and legitimacy. Given the multifaceted challenges
ahead and current absence of political dialogue, Poland
considers the National Assembly as the only power in
Venezuela that has a democratic mandate, obtained in
free, fair and credible elections. The National Assembly
and its President, Juan Guaido, should be heard and
respected. We call once again for the full respect of his
constitutionally mandated prerogatives and immunity
for all members of the National Assembly, including of
its President. We further call for respect for democracy,
the rule of law and fundamental freedoms and human
rights, including the freedom of assembly. We also call
for refraining from violence.

The main challenge for the political track in this
crisis is to guarantee, with all international support,
the peaceful character of the transition process. We
are convinced that the solution to the multidimensional
crisis affecting Venezuela can only be a political,
democratic and peaceful one and that the restoration
of democracy is possible through free, transparent and
credible presidential elections. We support the initiatives
of both the European Union and the Lima Group to
find a way out of this acute crisis, which is above all
political, but with severe economic and humanitarian
consequences for the people of Venezuela. We must
therefore do our utmost to alleviate the most urgent
humanitarian needs and reduce human suffering. We
have to support Venezuelans in their hopes for a decent
life in a democratic and prosperous country. Time is
short, and we cannot remain indifferent.

Finally, we urge the de facto regime in Venezuela
to respect and fully protect the freedom of media,
including the safety and security of journalists. We
strongly condemn cases of violent attacks and acts
of intimidation against both foreign and domestic
journalists. All such cases should be investigated in a
thorough and independent manner.

