Mr. Motanyane (Lesotho): I wish to congratulate
you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of
the Council for the month of October and on having
convened this very important debate. I thank you also,
Sir, for the concept note (S/2012/731, annex) that you
circulated in preparation for this meeting.

Allow me to also thank the Secretary-General, the
President of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
the Director of the ICC's Jurisdiction, Complementarity
and Cooperation Division for their briefings earlier
today.
The United Nations was created as a platform
from which all countries, big or small, rich or poor,
can collectively contribute to efforts to achieve the
objectives of the United Nations Charter. Justice, peace
and stability remain the main challenges of our time
and, indeed, a sine qua non for addressing all other
global problems. It is in that context that we welcome
the opportunity to participate in this open debate on
peace and justice, with a special focus on the role of
the International Criminal Court. This is an occasion
for us to reflect on how the International Criminal
Court and the Security Council can better solidify their
relationship and strengthen their cooperation in the
pursuance of our common objective of the maintenance
of international peace and security.

History has demonstrated that political solutions
on their own do not bring about lasting peace in
societies ravaged by conflict. But justice has proved to
be a necessary ingredient for the sustenance ofpeace. It
helps societies heal from the scars caused by conflict.
With the establishment of the ICC, the international
community confirmed its commitment to ending
impunity and ensuring individual accountability for
crimes committed under international law. We view the
ICC as an indispensable pillar of the United Nations in
advancing the rule of law and maintaining international
peace and security.

For a decade now, the ICC has been an effective
partner with the Security Council in the pursuit of a
peaceful and just world order. Indeed, this has brought
about heightened expectations on the part of the world's
population that the era of impunity is no more and that
the perpetrators of the most heinous crimes will be
punished. The faith that the international community has
in the ICC can be sustained only if the Court maintains
its independence and impartiality in delivering justice.
The ICC must not only be independent and impartial,
but it must be seen to be so.

The ICC cannot deliver without the support of all
of us, including the Security Council. We must not
politicize the work of the Court if its legitimacy and
integrity are to be protected. In exercising its powers
of referral under the Rome Statute, the Council must
not be persuaded by any political motives. Instead, it
must do so objectively, on the basis of concrete facts
that justify such a move.

Moreover, the Council must adopt a consistent
approach to referrals. There should be clear parameters
within which the Council works in crafting resolutions
referring cases to the Court. Such resolutions must be
clear and avoid double standards. Similar situations
must be treated in the same way. When acting under
Chapter VII of the Charter, the Council acts on behalf
of all States Members of the United Nations. As such,
the aspirations of the general membership of the United
Nations should override the individual national interests
of Council members and must therefore be embodied
clearly in the resolutions it adopts.

In our view, the referral of cases by the Council
is not an end in itself. It is critical that the support
of the Council, without infringing on the Court's
independence, be maintained from the commencement
of the case until the successful conclusion thereof. The
need for the Council to follow up on its referrals cannot
be overemphasized. Equally important is the need to
ensure that mandates are matched with resources. It
is difficult to fathom how the ICC could discharge its
obligations under article 13 (b) of the Rome Statute if it
is not provided with adequate funding.

The Rome Statute was signed by 120 States when
it was opened for signature in 1998. It was only after
almost a decade and a half that one more State Member
of the United Nations ratified the Treaty and thereby
brought the number of States parties to 121. We welcome
Guatemala as a new State party, but we must redouble
our efforts to promote more ratifications of the Statute.
Our commitment to the maintenance of international
peace and security must be manifested in our actions
in support of the international judicial architecture. We
could not agree more with the Secretary-General when
he said:

"There can be no sustainable peace without justice.
Peace and justice, accountability and reconciliation
are not mutually exclusive. To the contrary, they go
hand in hand".

Allow me to conclude by emphasizing that the
pursuit of a sustainable, peaceful world is an ideal that
our forebears cherished. The supremacy of the rule
of law over all individuals, ensuring accessibility to
justice and the independence of the judiciary, should
be our common goal. In the light of the ever-changing
global threats and challenges to the maintenance of
international peace and security, the Security Council
should continuously develop and expand a rule-of-law
approach in order to fulfil its quest to save humanity
from the scourge of war.

The value of international judicial institutions
such as the ICC must be recognized. With the full
support of the Security Council and the international
community, the ICC can fulfil its mandate of tackling
impunity, providing justice to the victims of the most
atrocious crimes, and contributing to the reconciliation
of societies ravaged by violence.

As a State party to the ICC, Lesotho stands ready
to support and cooperate with the Court in the quest to
achieve justice and peace.

