Mr. Hamidon (Malaysia): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement. My
statement should be read in conjunction with the
statements of the Movement that I have transmitted to
you, Mr. President, concerning the situation in the
occupied Palestinian territory and Lebanon dated 6
July 2006 (S/2006/491, annex) and 19 July 2006
(S/2006/548, annex), respectively.

Our positions on the situation in the region, as set
out in this Chamber on many occasions and as
contained in the two statements just mentioned, are
clear and consistent. The Movement reaffirms those
positions and calls on members of the Council to
consider them seriously during the ensuing
deliberations. I shall not repeat them here. I believe
that the members of the Council could better use the
time at their disposal to deliberate on practical
measures to end the crisis currently enveloping the
region, as well as to facilitate efforts to end the
occupation by Israel of the Palestinian territories,
thereby achieving a just, lasting and comprehensive
solution in the Middle East, which should be the
overarching framework in this regard.

The Non-Aligned Movement is gravely
concerned about the deteriorating situation and the

escalation of violence in the Middle East, particularly
in the occupied Palestinian territory and in Lebanon.
We condemn all acts of terror, violence and
destruction. We condemn attacks against civilians and
civilian property and infrastructure and deplore the
resulting death and destruction. We condemn the
abduction and detention of cabinet ministers,
government officials, soldiers and other individuals,
and we demand their immediate and unconditional
release.

Innocent human beings, including infants and
children, in the occupied Palestinian territory, Lebanon
and Israel are dying and suffering even as we speak in
this Chamber. The life of each human being is sacred
and must be protected. We realize that no matter how
much condemnation there is against anyone and no
matter how much we deplore death and destruction,
that will not in itself bring an end to the violence,
hostilities and casualties in the region. We recognize
that the solution could be achieved through the Council
and by the parties in the Middle East.

The Non-Aligned Movement appeals to the
Council to take decisive action without delay. The
barbaric and senseless killings and total madness in the
Middle East must be halted immediately. This Council
holds the key to peace, security and tranquility in the
region. Delay in taking action will result in more death
and destruction. Concrete proposals, old and new,
including those by Secretary-General Kofi Annan, that
would enable the Council to act are before each and
every one of you - representatives of States, members
of this august body - for consideration. We need not
remind you of your duties and responsibilities. You
know exactly what they are and what needs to be done,
and you must do that now in order to save the lives of
other human beings and, equally important, in order to
avoid catastrophic consequences in the region.

