Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I wish to join previous
speakers in welcoming High Representative Valentin
Inzko and in thanking him for his briefing.

We are concerned by recent developments that
could threaten the prospects of stability and peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Brazil reiterates its
commitment to the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
constitutional framework of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
All efforts should be made to strengthen the State at
the national level and, at the same time, to preserve the
rights and prerogatives of all communal entities.

Challenges to the Dayton Peace Agreement and
its institutional arrangements, as well as divisive
rhetoric, must be avoided. The future of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a stable, prosperous and united country
hinges on strict respect for the pertinent international
and domestic legal provisions regarding the division of
powers among the different levels of Government.

All actors must respect the authority of and
cooperate with the High Representative. We call on all
parties within Bosnia and Herzegovina to work
constructively together to put an end to internal
disagreements and build a country that reflects its
multi-ethnic richness. We remain confident that all
actors will continue to value the achievements of the
past 15 years and uphold the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Bosnia and Herzegovina can
prosper only if it remains united. All Bosnian parties
should acknowledge that principle and refrain from any
action that would undermine it.

We call upon the international community to
continue to support Bosnia and Herzegovina as it
strives to achieve sustainable political stability and
socio-economic development. As multiculturalism
increases all over the world, Bosnia and Herzegovina
can set an example of how ethnic and cultural diversity
can be managed and indeed become an asset. We are
sure that, with the support of this Council, Bosnia and
Herzegovina will overcome the present challenges and
move towards a lasting political settlement that ensures
durable peace.

