Ms. Cerdova Soria (Plurinational State of Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks your presidency,
Madam, for convening this important meeting. We
are also grateful for the briefings by Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and by the Force Commanders of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur, the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan, via video-
teleconference from Juba.

The international landscape is not static. It is
undergoing profound changes that in recent years have
been reflected in the constant threats posed by terrorist
groups and transnational crime. That complex reality
has shown how important it is to make structural
changes in peacekeeping missions in order to enable
them to adapt more effectively to their environments
and to repel such threats. In the Sahel, for example, both
the fighting capacity of armed and terrorist groups to
carry out asymmetric attacks, and their ability maintain
a strong ideological presence in order to win over
supporters, has increased. That has also led to growing
profitability from criminal activity, which has become
a modus vivendi for such groups. We would like the
Force Commander of MINUSMA to elaborate on that
issue and comment on the measures that he believes
should be adopted in the region.

Over the past almost 70 years, peacekeeping
missions have have helped to build peace in various
countries around the world by implementing their
mandates. Sadly, that has come at a very high human
as well as material cost, owing to the deaths of the
valuable military components, police officers and
civilian personnel who have fallen victim to attacks in
the discharge of their duties. Bolivia would like to pay
sincere tribute to each and every one of the members
of United Nations peacekeeping operations contingents
around the world, who stand firm in their efforts to do
their work despite some missions' material constraints
and insufficient resources, the difficult conditions
on the ground and the fragile and volatile security
environments that they function in. We are also grateful
to the countries that contribute troops, police officers,
observers and civilian personnel for their generosity,
solidarity and commitment to the United Nations
system and to countries afflicted by armed conflict
and instability.

The continuing attacks on peacekeepers, which
recurred only a few days ago in a number of places,
have shown once again the urgent need to strengthen
key areas of missions, mainly those relating to
situational awareness in the field, units' mobility and
reaction capacity and, above all, the strengthening
of defence and protection measures for camps and
the troops themselves. Peacekeeping missions also
need to see improvements in material and especially
technical areas if they are to implement their mandates
more effectively. It should be noted that the proper
equipping and training of troops is the responsibility
not only of the troop-contributing countries but of our
Organization in general. Furthermore, providing the
sustainable, effective and adequate economic, human
and material resources that missions need requires
analysis that is technical and logistical but above all
realistic. In that regard, we emphasize the priority of
improving institutional agility for the deployment
of troops, as well as selecting those who are the best
trained and most specialized to respond effectively to
the asymmetrical contexts we have discussed.

As we said in the last open debate on peacekeeping
operations in March (see S/PV.8218), important insights
and tools for information and recommendations for
advocating for change and improving the performance
of missions on the ground, as well as optimizing the
various levels of decision-making and planning in the
system, are reflected in the Brahimi report of the Panel
on United Nations Peace Operations (see S/2000/809)
and the recommendations in the 2015 report of the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations (see S/2015/446). Their overall content examines the various
options, mechanisms, tasks and challenges facing such
operations today.

We also welcome the report entitled Improving
security of United Nations peacekeepers by the former
United Nations Force Commander Lieutenant General
Carlos Alberto dos Santos Cruz, better known as the
Cruz report. It is a relevant tool that makes a significant
contribution to understanding peacekeeping missions'
security issues, as well as their structural aspects,
mainly with regard to the leadership, mentality,
equipment and training of troops. Bolivia believes
that it is essential to address those aspects in order to
achieve reasonable objectives.

In that regard, it would be helpful to hear first-
hand from the Force Commanders here today about
the degree to which the parameters in the report are
being implemented. And if they are not, how could
they be applied in the context of each of their missions?
With regard to operational behaviours, the Cruz report
also emphasizes that every mission is unique and that
different situations require different action, depending
on the threat in any given area. However, what never
changes is that the interpretation of the mandates should
support taking action and not be used tojustify inaction.
From that perspective, what other steps should the
Security Council take to prevent inaction from putting
the lives of contingent troops at risk? A preventive
approach, within the framework of an in-depth,
case-by-case study of the context, is key to the proper
design and understanding of mandates, whatever their
nature, while respecting the sovereignty, independence
and territorial integrity of States, promoting national
ownership and without using that approach as a tool
for intervention.

In conclusion, we underscore the Security Council's
efforts to achieve the objectives established in all its
current mandates. Unity among all actors is crucial to
strengthening the financial, tactical, operational and
strategic aspects on the ground in strict compliance
with the Charter of the United Nations. It goes without
saying that no peacekeeping mission can succeed
without the support of the host country. In that regard,
continued, smooth coordination, information exchange
and confidence-building mechanisms between missions
and local authorities are essential.

