Ms. Rice (United States of America): I thank
Under-Secretaries-General Le Roy and Amos for their
very useful briefings. I also thank our Haitian
colleague for his update.

We are meeting today a little more than a
year after Haiti was struck by a truly devastating
earthquake - a blow that lasted just 47 seconds but
killed more than 220,000 human beings and left
countless more wounded and desperate. The human
and economic cost, as we all know, has been
staggering, the worst of any natural disaster ever
recorded in the western hemisphere.

In this Chamber, let me also recall the terrible toll
that the quake took on the Organization, claiming the
lives of 102 United Nations agency staff and
peacekeepers, who had been working together with the
Haitian people to bring about a brighter future.

A year later, Haiti's road to recovery is still long
and difficult, but we must walk it together. We must
rededicate ourselves to an enduring partnership with
the Haitian people to help a suffering land rebuild and
renew itself, strengthening Haiti's institutions and
increasing its capacity so it can bind up the wounds of
the past and build a better, more secure and more
prosperous future for its people.

I would like to touch on four main topics today:
elections, security, the humanitarian situation and
reconstruction. First, with regard to elections, the
United States welcomes the report of the Organization
of American States (OAS) verification mission. Its
findings offer a way forward towards improving
credibility and public confidence in the presidential
electoral process in Haiti. We urge the Provisional
Electoral Council to implement the OAS report's
recommendations. Sustained support from the
international community, including the United States,
requires a credible process that represents the will of
the Haitian people, as expressed by their votes.

The United States strongly supports the Secretary-
General's statement of 8 December, which expressed
the United Nations commitment to free and fair
elections that reflect the will of the Haitian people. We
urge the Haitian authorities to outline a very clear way
forward that will lead promptly to the inauguration of a
legitimate and democratically elected Government. This
must include issuing a timely and public electoral
calendar. It must include announcing first-round results
and conducting second-round elections in a manner
consistent with the recommendations and findings of
the OAS technical review. And it must include enacting
measures that will increase public confidence in future
electoral processes.

Let me also say a few words about the return this
week of former President J can-Claude Duvalier. Given
the continuing turmoil surrounding the November 2010
election, the United States is concerned about the
unpredictable impact that Duvalier's return may have
on Haiti's political situation. My Government is clear
about Duvalier's notorious record of human rights
abuses and corruption. The situation on the ground is
obviously fluid, but the Government of Haiti seems to
be taking initial steps to hold Duvalier accountable for
his actions during his time ruling Haiti.

Secondly, let me turn to security. My Government
again thanks the dedicated men and women of the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) for their invaluable work in helping the
Haitian National Police uphold the rule of law and in
promoting overall security and stability in Haiti.

We ask that MINUSTAH continue to work to
provide a secure environment throughout this period of
uncertainty, even as it supports a credible elections
process. Haiti cannot have hope if it does not have
security. Without security, Haiti will be hamstrung in
its attempts to tackle many of its most critical
challenges, including rebuilding areas devastated by
the earthquake and saving lives at risk in the cholera
outbreak. During these challenging and uncertain days,
we call on all actors to proceed in a calm and peaceful
manner and to understand that violence and unrest can
only thwart the will of the Haitian people, not express
it.

Thirdly, let me say a few words about the
humanitarian situation. A credible, peaceful and timely
transfer of power is essential to Haiti's response to the
cholera crisis. Unfortunately, cholera will be present in
Haiti for years to come. Working with Haitian partners,
the international community must continue to address
short-term needs while working to lessen the disease's
long-term impact. The United States welcomes the
coordination and leadership role played throughout the
crisis by Haiti's Ministry of Public Health and
Population. The United States will continue to work
with the Ministry and with the United Nations,
non-governmental organization partners and other
donors in the multilateral relief effort to help fill
programmatic and funding gaps in the Government of
Haiti's anti-cholera strategy. We encourage other
donors and partners to do the same.
11-21162

We continue to see encouraging signs that
Haitians are heeding the Ministry of Public Health and
Population's messages about chlorinating water and
other hygiene procedures. But these gains in hygiene,
as we have just heard, could easily vanish without
sustained efforts. Through the United States Agency
for International Development and the United States
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we
support these efforts to get the word out to all Haitians.

Finally, let me turn to reconstruction and
recovery. Lasting security in Haiti will not be achieved
by police and troops alone. It will also take jobs and
economic opportunity. The prospects for rebuilding
Haiti depend upon maintaining a secure environment
and creating jobs for Haitians. Many of the countries
represented here today pledged assistance to Haiti
during the March 2010 donors' conference. We must all
remain committed to Haiti's recovery, deliver on those
pledges and work in a coordinated and strategic
fashion through the Interim Haiti Recovery
Commission.

Haiti's supporters have shown unprecedented
bilateral and multilateral cooperation, yet we must all
deepen our commitment to progress and sustainable
development in Haiti, led by its people. The United
States has so far spent $332 million of our $1.15 billion
recovery pledge over two years. These disbursements
of our pledged funds come in addition to the more than
$1 billion the United States has already provided in
post-earthquake humanitarian funds, the more than
$400 million we have reprogrammed to help support
the recovery, and the more than $40 million we have
spent on the cholera response. The collective
commitment that we have made to Haiti's recovery
must be sustained. For our part, United States spending
against our pledge will continue to ramp up, not scale
back.

Despite these enormous challenges, progress has
been made since the earthquake struck. The recovery
effort will take years. It will take partnership. It will
take commitment. But Haiti's Government and its
strong and resilient people had been making impressive
progress towards greater stability and greater
prosperity before calamity struck. We are determined
to work together with them and with the international
community over the long term to restore hope in the
years to come.
7

