I would like to express my appreciation to the Niger for organizing this meeting on the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation and peace and security. Environmental degradation, particularly when triggered by climate change, is posing widespread and cross-cutting challenges to the survival, livelihood and dignity of people around the world. Water scarcity, drought, desertification, land degradation and food insecurity are ravaging the people in the Sahel and other arid regions. Sea-level rise and the erosion of coastlines threaten those in small island developing States. While climate-related natural disasters and environmental degradation are jeopardizing human security in every corner of the globe, it is always the most vulnerable people affected by conflicts who face grave humanitarian challenges. In places where national and local institutions are too weak to protect civilian populations and communities lack resilience, environmental degradation could become a driver of instability and threaten peace and security. Hence the need for adequate risk assessments and risk-management strategies with regard to the factors of instability, including the adverse effects of climate change and ecological changes, as recognized by resolution 2349 (2017), on the Lake Chad basin region. In Japan's view, the key to tackling environmental degradation, minimizing its humanitarian effects and preventing a relapse into conflict is institution-building. Institutions are not limited to security and judicial systems, but also include economic and social systems that enable the public sector, at both national and local levels, to deliver basic services, such as health and education, to the people. Building inclusive, accountable and functional institutions would contribute to reducing vulnerability, ensuring human security and restoring people's trust in their Government. Japan has consistently emphasized those points within the Peacebuilding Commission. We recognize that the African continent is severely affected by climate change and is the least prepared to manage and respond to climate change risks. At the seventh Tokyo International Conference on African Development (TICAD), held in Yokohama last year, Japan reaffirmed its commitment to make efforts to mitigate the impacts of climate change. Japan supports African institution-building efforts under the New Approach for Peace and Stability in Africa initiative, launched at TICAD VIL. Japan also promotes dialogue with countries in other regions seriously affected by climate change and environmental degradation through the Pacific Islands Leaders Meeting and the Japan-Caribbean Community framework. Japan has committed to provide ¥1.3 trillion in 2020 to support developing countries affected by climate change. In conclusion, I wish to emphasize that the United Nations must play a leading role in furthering international cooperation for robust action in order to address the humanitarian effects of environmental degradation on peace and security, in all its aspects. Japan will be an active partner in such an endeavour, without any reservations.
