Mr. Wenaweser (Liechtenstein): We welcome
this opportunity to address in particular the work of the
Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) as well as the
overall United Nations response to terrorism in
general, also in the light of the recent publication of the
report of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges
and Change.

The year ahead offers a number of opportunities
for the United Nations to step up its efforts and
efficiency in the fight against terrorism. The High-level
Panel has identified terrorism as one of six categories
of threats with which the world must be concerned in
the years ahead. Liechtenstein has consistently joined
the international community in strongly condemning
all acts of terrorism, irrespective of their motivation
and wherever and by whomever committed. We concur
with the Panel's finding that it is imperative to develop
a global strategy for fighting terrorism that addresses
root causes and strengthens responsible States and the
rule of law as well as fundamental human rights.

The most important and complex aspect of such a
strategy concerns efforts to reverse the causes or
facilitators of terrorism. Pointing to causes or
facilitators is sometimes perceived as an attempt to
justify terrorist acts, contrary to the unjustifiable nature
of all forms and manifestations of terrorism, and is thus
neglected in the international community's overall
response. However, we must fight all aspects of
terrorism with resolve, including in particular its root
causes. These phenomena, ranging from major political
grievances to failed States and poverty, often constitute
threats to our common security in and of themselves.
We hope that the process leading to the United Nations
summit in 2005 will bring about strong new measures
aimed at combating those phenomena and thereby
contribute to the fight against terrorism.

Countering extremism and intolerance is another
important pillar of such a strategy, as is the
development of better instruments for State
cooperation in counter-terrorism. In the latter area,
much work lies ahead, going far beyond the processes
already in place, such as the negotiation of a
comprehensive international convention against
terrorism. Practical cooperation between States in the
areas of law enforcement and intelligence sharing and
relevant assistance and capacity-building need to be
improved. The CTC's Executive Directorate (CTED)
should continue to play - and further strengthen - its
leading role in the coordination of such assistance.

We have repeatedly stressed the importance of
respecting the rule of law, human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism.
We therefore commend the High-level Panel for
placing strong emphasis on that important aspect. The
work of the Security Council in this area leaves room
for improvement. Instituting a process for reviewing
cases of individuals and institutions claiming to have
been wrongly placed or retained on the list of the
Al Qaeda/Taliban Sanctions Committee would be one
important step in that direction. Furthermore, we are
confident that the experts of the CTC's Executive
Directorate will carry out their tasks with sensitivity
for human rights concerns, and we commend Executive
Director Ruperez for the envisaged inclusion of a
human rights expert on his team. The forthcoming CTC
visits to States, starting in March this year, will provide
a good opportunity to put into practice the principle of
an integrated approach of the rule of law and effective
counter-terrorism measures.

Major advances in the United Nations fight
against terrorism are expected not only in the context
of the follow-up to the report of the High-level Panel
and the work of the strengthened CTC and CTED, but
also in the context of the consultations of the working
group established pursuant to resolution 1566 (2004).
Although we previously expressed concern about the
mandate of the working group - in particular with
respect to due-process standards - we are confident
that it will work in an inclusive and transparent manner
and will respect all standards relevant to the rule of law
and human rights. That will effectively strengthen the
credibility and thus the efficiency of any new measures
to be adopted.

