Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): Malaysia is pleased to
have co-sponsored and voted in favour of resolution
2307 (2106), which was adopted unanimously today,
and endorses the recommendations of the Secretary-
General concerning the size, operational aspects and
mandate of the United Nations mission in Columbia, as
contained his report (S/2016/729).

We take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of Columbia and the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia - Ejercito del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) on reaching a final peace accord, which
will close a chapter on halfa century of armed conflict.
The success of the peace process is the culmination
of the political will, courage and leadership of both
sides in finding solutions aimed at a peaceful and
prosperous Colombia, bolstered by the unwavering
support of the international community. Those shared
aims must continue to guide the work of all parties in
the implementation of the peace accords, including
the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of
former combatants.

We wish to commend in particular the Government
of Colombia and FARC-EP for their commitment to
the protections and rights of children during the peace
process, exemplified by the Agreement signed on
15 May between the two sides to separate and reintegrate
children associated with FARC-EP. We are heartened
by the release of the first group of children associated
with FARC-EP on 10 September to the relevant child-
protection actors and look forward to further progress in
implementing the Agreement. In that regard, we stress
the importance of coordination between all relevant
United Nations presences and mechanisms in Colombia
in ensuring that children affected by the armed conflict
receive the attention, protection and assistance that
they need.

We reiterate our firm support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Jean Arnault,
and the United Nations mission in Colombia, as they
carry out their mandate within the monitoring and
verification mechanism. The good will and cooperation
of member States of the Community of Latin American
and Caribbean States in contributing observers to the
mission is fully recognized and deeply appreciated. We
also pay tribute to the guarantors, Cuba and Norway,
as well as the accompanying countries of the peace
process, Chile and Venezuela, for the positive role,
which they have played in the peace process.

In closing, we are hopeful that lasting peace and
stability are within reach. We must working towards
ensuring that the hopes and dreams of a Colombia free
from conflict become a reality. We wish the people of
Colombia well in this journey towards shared prosperity
for all Colombians.

