Ms. Schoulgin-Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
thank Mr. Feltman for his briefing.

Just a few days after we last met to discuss the
Democratic People's Republic ofKorea (see S/PV.8034),
we once again find ourselves called together to respond
to Pyongyang's provocative actions. Sweden condemns
yesterday's nuclear test in the strongest possible terms.
It clearly represents a threat to international peace and
security, an unacceptable provocation and a breach of
the international obligations of the Democratic People's
Republic of Korea, in defiance of numerous Security
Council resolutions. The Democratic People's Republic
of Korea's dangerous and destabilizing course of action
further exacerbates its precarious humanitarian situation
in another example of the regime's determination to
pursue its nuclear ambitions with utter disregard for the
well-being of its own people.

This latest action further raises the tensions in the
region, already heightened as a result ofthe Democratic
People's Republic of Korea's actions in recent months.
The potential for mistakes, misunderstandings and
miscalculations is high. There is a pressing need for
measures to reduce those tensions and to consider how
the Council can facilitate a comprehensive solution
to the situation. We renew our call to the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea to abandon the dangerous
path it is pursuing, comply with its international
obligations and take positive steps in line with the
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.

The Council must deliver a firm response and
remain united in the face of the threat to peace that the
actions of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea
represent, not only to its neighbours and the region but
to global non-proliferation generally. We are ready to
explore new sanctions, but to have the desired effect,
sanctions must be duly implemented. That is also a
matter of credibility for the United Nations system.
All countries have a duty to effectively implement the
relevant sanctions in line with the Security Council's
resolutions. Yet the sanctions on the Democratic
People's Republic of Korea continue to be implemented
inadequately and extremely inconsistently. All States
Members of the United Nations must do their utmost
in that regard. The Council should make full use
of the tools at its disposal, and in that context, we
look forward to the briefing on 11 September by the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1718
(2006) and to discussing further measures to strengthen
the implementation of the sanctions already in force.

Sanctions alone, however, will not solve the
situation on the Korean peninsula, and there can
be no military solution to this tense situation. In the
light of the continually growing tensions, we urgently
need to avoid escalation and take steps to prepare for
a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive solution to
the problem. Intensified, creative diplomatic efforts
are urgently needed. A medium-security mechanism
should be a medium-term goal. The pursuit of weapons
of mass destruction represents an extremely grave
threat to international peace and security. Preventing
the development and use of such weapons is one of
the Council's crucial responsibilities. Sweden stands
united with Council members in condemning actions
that jeopardize international peace and security.

