Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in Arabic): Since this is the first time that I am
speaking in an open debate under your leadership,
Mr. President, I am pleased to congratulate you on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council for this
month. I am fully confident that you will guide our
work towards the best possible results.

I would like to commend the excellent manner in
which Ambassador Ripert, Permanent Representative
of France, and the delegation of France conducted the
work of the Council during the month of January. I
should also like to extend my thanks to Mr. Michael
von der Schulenburg, Executive Representative of the
Secretary-General, for his comprehensive briefing on
the situation in Sierra Leone and the activities of
United Nations Integrated Peacebuilding Office in
Sierra Leone (UNIPSIL). I should also like to thank
Ambassador Frank Majoor, Permanent Representative
of the Netherlands and Chairman of the Sierra Leone
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission, and
Ambassador Shekou Touray, Permanent Representative
of Sierra Leone, for their valuable contributions.

The report of the Secretary-General under
consideration today (S/2009/59) and the briefing given
by Mr. von der Schulenburg have clearly shown that
Sierra Leone is on the verge of becoming the latest

success story from West Africa. Great achievements
have been made in all areas and the political and
security situation seems to be stable in general. This
progress encourages the ongoing joint efforts of the
United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone to
build and promote peace and establish stable and
democratic State institutions with a View to
overcoming the impact of civil strife and conflict and
to beginning the process of development and the
consolidation of a peaceful society throughout Sierra
Leone.

We are well aware that the Government still faces
many challenges despite the great achievements
accomplished to date. We also know that a climate of
mistrust and suspicion still prevails between the two
principal political parties in Sierra Leone. However,
the cordial interaction that is developing between those
parties, with the encouragement of UNIPSIL, is a
source of deep satisfaction and optimism for us.

Despite the encouraging economic performance
of Sierra Leone in 2008, certain issues are a cause for
concern, such declining export revenues and
remittances from abroad, as well as the possible
reduction of official development assistance to Sierra
Leone in 2009 and its potential adverse impact on
financing for the social sector. We therefore support the
proposal to hold a special session of the Peacebuilding
Commission to consider stepping up donations and
assistance through voluntary contributions to Sierra
Leone.

Libya considers the Agenda for Change of
President Koroma and the Joint Vision of the United
Nations Family for Sierra Leone to be two very
important instruments for accelerating the peacebuilding
process. President Koroma's Agenda focuses on
combining economic growth and human resource
development. It determines priorities and emphasizes
that the continued corruption, escalating illegal drug
trafficking and youth unemployment are the principal
threats to peace and stability in Sierra Leone. We agree
with President Koroma in this regard.

The Joint Vision of the United Nations Family in
Sierra Leone aims to assist the Government in
consolidating peace. It identifies four principal
programmatic priorities: the economic integration of
rural areas in Sierra Leone, the engagement of
unemployed youth, equitable access to health care, and
the enhancement of good governance. We hope that
United Nations bodies and donors will provide
generous support to implement both the Agenda for
Change and the Joint Vision.

The use and exploitation of Sierra Leone as a
transit area for illicit drug trafficking and the presence
of organized crime are problems of concern and must
be confronted as priority matters before they escalate
and create an even more dangerous situation. There is
no doubt that promoting security and cooperation with
the countries of the region will help us to better
address those two problems, but it will also require the
support of UNIPSIL and donors to achieve those goals.
In that connection, we commend the initiative of
UNIPSIL in developing an action plan to address illicit
drug trafficking and organized crime in Sierra Leone,
based on the Regional Action Plan adopted in Cape
Verde.

Libya agrees with the report of the Secretary-
General that one of the cornerstones of post-conflict
peacebuilding is dealing with the tragedies and
injustices of the civil war. My delegation therefore
believes that it is important to implement the priorities
and recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation
Commission and to implement a reparations
programme for victims of the civil war as soon as
possible. Libya calls upon donors to provide funding
for the proposed multi-donor trust fund for that
purpose. We also believe that the constitutional review
process must occur quickly and we welcome the
readiness of UNIPSIL to provide technical and
advisory assistance for that process.

Libya, within its capacities, has provided
assistance to the Government of Sierra Leone in the
form of grants and investment projects and has urged
the financial institutions of which it is a member also
to provide assistance to that end. My country intends to
continue its assistance.

In conclusion, we commend the efforts of
UNIPSIL, in particular in calling upon the Sierra
Leone parties to establish dialogue and enhance
national cohesion and unity, in promoting the
capacities of civil society, and in providing
parliamentary assistance through support for capacity-
building in addressing illicit drug trafficking and
human rights. We also commend the efforts of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund for their support to the Government of Sierra
Leone in the basic areas of peacebuilding.

