Mr. Rishchynski (Canada) (spoke in French): I
would like to commend Togo and the Council for this
open, focused and important debate. Canada also
thanks the President for the frank concept note
(S/2012/83, annex), with which we broadly agree.

Canada is concerned by the destabilizing effects
of the illegal drug trade, especially cocaine trafficking,
originating in the Americas. That is why we raised the
matter at the 2010 Group of Eight Summit in Muskoka,
and we commend France for the ministerial meeting of
last May bringing together many countries from West
Africa, the Americas and the Group of Eight. We
would like to see that work continue, with a greater
number of partners.
Transnational organized criminal groups and their
trafficking in drugs, persons and firearms attack
democracy and the rule of law, feeding corruption,
disturbing free markets, reducing national wealth and
slowing the development of stable societies. Latin
American transnational criminal organizations are
extending their networks to new territories, which risks
creating narco-States in West Africa and gravely
threatens public security on both sides of the Atlantic.

(spoke in English)

Beyond the impacts of the illicit drug trade itself,
we are also concerned about the potential for
partnerships between organized crime and terrorist
organizations. In a recent meeting of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum's Sahel Working Group,
which Canada was privileged to co-chair with Algeria,
considerable attention was paid to that threat. It was
recognized that measures to counter one part of the
problem would help against the other.

It is for those many reasons that Canada is
engaged, on both sides of the Atlantic, in
peacebuilding, institution-strengthening and capacity-
building to help partner Governments in countering
transnational organized crime and terrorism.
Transnational threats require us to work better together
multilaterally, regionally and bilaterally. Here in New
York, Canada stands ready to do its part as Chair of the
Sierra Leone configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, cooperating with other Commission
configurations, regional Governments and other
stakeholders to facilitate and encourage a more
coordinated approach.

Indeed, the Sierra Leone example illustrates the
imperative of regional and international cooperation.
Sierra Leone has made admirable progress in fighting
transnational crime. It is the most advanced member of
the West Africa Coast Initiative, having fully
established a transnational organized crime unit. Sierra
Leone has also made great strides in reforming its
justice sector and establishing an internationally
respected anti-corruption commission. Yet that
progress depends on developments across the region,
including improved intelligence-sharing and early
warning. Limited State capacity to monitor and patrol
borders provides criminals with a high degree of
freedom to seek the most favourable operating
environments. Critically, many national authorities lack
the necessary legal and technical tools to track
financial flows and prevent money-laundering.

Recently, we have seen human smuggling rings
take advantage of loose visa requirements to establish
operations in West Africa. Some members of the region

have responded by limiting transit visas and visas
granted on arrival, but the smuggling networks have
adjusted and entered their irregular migrants through
neighbouring countries. Canada congratulates Togo and
Benin for the counter-measures they have taken and is
working with the region to have that problem
addressed coherently.

The regional action plan of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the
West Africa Coast Initiative are useful steps towards
developing a truly regional response to transnational
organized crime. Canada has contributed substantially
to the implementation of the West Coast Africa
Initiative through the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime. However, in order for the goals to be
achieved, ECOWAS will need to redouble its
leadership, Governments need to build sustainable
national capacity with stronger financial and technical
support from donors, and the United Nations needs to
deliver a more integrated approach, as advocated by
the Secretary-General. The Security Council should
continue to identify this issue as an important part of
post-conflict mission mandates, just as the
Peacebuilding Commission should continue to develop
a more robust, concrete approach to supporting the
relevant countries on its agenda.

Finally, Canada is concerned about the
humanitarian impact of the impending food and
nutrition crisis in the Sahel. Recent statements from
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator Catherine Bragg
point to the severity of the situation. With up to
12 million people at risk owing to a combination of
drought and chronic food insecurity, the situation has
been exacerbated by the influx of returnees and recent
fighting in northern Mali, resulting in internal and
external displacement. In order to stop the cycle of
repeating food crises in the region in the future, the
underlying causes - an interplay of food insecurity,
underdevelopment, limited national capacity and
transnational threats - will all need to be addressed.

