The President: I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the representative of Germany.When we were planning forthe Yemen consultations this year, we chose, in our presidency, to have the Security Council take a look at the situation on the ground in the country. We wanted to have people from the ground brief the Council. Members may recall that last year, during the German presidency, we had another representative of civil society briefing the Council on the role of women in Yemen (see. S/PV. 8512). We were witness today to two briefings that gave us an impression of the dire situation on the ground and what the impact of the war has been on civil society. I would like to thank both Ms. Alsaidy and Ms. Almasabi for their briefings. I think we were all deeply moved by these very strong female voices. Since we usually hear about situations in more abstract ways, I think it is good to be confronted with the dire reality on the ground, to hear the concrete example of the choice that a family has to make either to buy medicine for a chronically ill member of the family or to buy food, or the decision that has to be made when, in a situation where a family has to flee, a family member with a disability might have to stay behind instead of going with the family and slowing them down or otherwise endanger them. There is also the concrete example we heard about the hundreds of thousands of suffering and traumatized children. But it is the image just presented of a child walking on the streets after a bombing and having to see the dead body of a classmate that is the essence of what we are discussing. I think I share with other members of the Council the view that it is deeply disappointing that an agreement among the parties on a ceasefire - the joint declaration - has not been reached. We heard from Martin Griffiths, who is an optimist. He always embraces the slightest opening. When there is a glimpse of hope, he jumps on it and tries to make something of it. However, I have never heard him sound so pessimistic as he did today. We would like to encourage him not to give up. He has to try and work hard to come to a resolution. I find it deeply shocking to hear that in recent days there was a stark increase in the number of Houthi attacks on Saudi Arabia and that there was an increase in coalition air strikes on Sana'a. In the past few weeks, when many children lost their lives, there have been also been more maimed and traumatized children. Let me remind Council members what the Secretary- General said in his most recent report on children and armed conflict (S/2020/525). The Secretary-General stated his intention to relist the coalition, should killings and mutilations of children not decrease this year. International humanitarian law is not negotiable. The briefers told us about the humanitarian situation on the ground. There is no food or medicine. Millions of people do not know how they survive every day. Of course, they all need support. We heard that the United Nations humanitarian response plan is highly underfunded. We call on all actors to contribute. Germany is contributing, as in all crises. But we appeal in particular to the countries in the region to provide funding. We call on them not only to pledge funds but also disburse them as soon as possible. I would like to conclude as others have done - as the Chinese representative did - in recalling the FSO SAFER oil tanker situation. I mean, how cynical can you be? When we were sitting and discussing the issue two weeks ago (see S/2020/721), the Houthis gave every confirmation that they would allow the United Nations inspection team to go see the vessel. Here we are two weeks later, and again the Houthis have not delivered. I now resume my functions as President of the Council. I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
