Mr. Legwaila (Botswana): My delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on the question of
Haiti (S/1995/46). The report is, as usual, both detailed
and informative. We are grateful that the situation in Haiti
is, on the whole, reported to be slowly returning to
normality and that the people of Haiti now enjoy some
basic, fundamental human rights.

We are, however, concerned about the reported
extra-judicial killings, extortions, intimidation of members
and officers of the popular organizations, and other
criminal activities which continue to pose a threat to
peace and stability in Haiti. We agree with the Secretary-
General that these acts of violence need to be brought
under control before they get out of hand. These criminal
activities are especially worrying against the backdrop of
the recent history of Haiti. Their connection to former
paramilitary networks, however remote, does not augur
well for the stabilization of the country and the
reconciliation of its people.

Anything that reminds Haitians of a possible return
to the recent past has to be eliminated, and in this regard
we are pleased with the determination of the
Multinational Force to search for arms caches and disarm
the criminal gangs which roam the countryside. The
people of Haiti need to be assured that there will be no
return to murderous rule.

We wish the judicial system in Haiti were different
from what it is reported to be, and we commend the good
work that the Multinational Force is doing in the field of
justice in Haiti. There is definitely a need to improve the
judicial system so that justice can be dispensed with ease
and the convicts punished for their crimes. We fully
understand the frustration of the people of Haiti regarding
the failure of the judicial system, but we wish to implore
them not to attempt to take the law into their own hands
while the administration of justice in the country is being
reorganized.

We acknowledge the illustrious work the United
Nations, its programmes, agencies, funds and offices, are

 

doing for the people of Haiti. Their presence in the country,
along with that of the Multinational Force and the
non-governmental organizations, is certainly a source of
hope where there was despair.

We are encouraged by and appreciate the operational
creativity displayed by the commanders of the Multinational
Force in establishing the Interim Public Security Force
because the situation on the ground so dictated. They did
not wait for the second phase of the United Nations
Mission in Haiti (UNMIH) to establish a police force as
envisaged in resolution 867 (1993) because the unexpected
collapse of the armed forces of Haiti left the country
without a security force. This supports the View that the
United Nations should always attempt to establish, directly
or indirectly, a presence in a conflict situation as early as
possible, because rare opportunities may be missed where
such a presence does not exist.

We fully support the provisions of the current draft
resolution relating to the progressive deployment of
UNMIH until it reaches full strength by 31 March 1995.
We trust the transition from the Multinational Force to
UNMIH will be smooth, given the administrative, logistical
and organizational planning which went into it. We are
especially happy that the Council has accepted the
recommendation of the Secretary-General that the civilian
police component of UNMIH should be increased from 567
to 900 persons. The increased UNMIH civilian police will
help with the rapid establishment of a Haitian national
police force.

We support the extension of the mandate of UNMIH
to 31 July 1995. We hope the United Nations will help in
post-conflict peace-building when the mandate of UNMIH
ultimately comes to an end, to ensure that the people of
Haiti consolidate their newly won democratic rights and
liberties, as well as helping to strengthen the
implementation of economic and social policies and
programmes which are the gateway to future peace and
stability in Haiti.

