Mr. Verbeke (Belgium) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General
Lynn Pascoe for his briefing.
The Security Council is holding a second debate
in a week on the situation in the Middle East. We spent
numerous hours last week discussing a response to the
latest developments in Gaza and southern Israel. We
regret that repeated efforts to that end have been
unsuccessful. However, the energy invested in
resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict should not
lead us to forget that the international community and
the actors on the ground have a joint responsibility.
Belgium believes that the role of the international
community is to establish, on a priority basis, the most
favourable environment to enable the parties to reach
the peace agreement we have awaited for 60 years.

Despite reoccurring crises, we refuse to give in to
pessimism, and the Annapolis Conference has given
rise to a process replete with hopes that continue to be
legitimate. In keeping with the joint statement adopted
by President Abbas and Prime Minister Olmert, those
hopes have resulted in regular meetings and meetings
between the lead negotiators and their teams of experts
responsible for finding the compromises needed to
reach a final status. Although the parameters for that
status are already known - to wit, resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), the Madrid principles and the
Road Map - only the parties can legitimately finalize
the terms.

Well aware that the success of those negotiations
will also depend upon the political context and the
socio-economic and humanitarian situation of the
Israeli and Palestinian peoples, the international
community has undertaken to strengthen the
negotiations. It has done so, first, through a robust
commitment on the political and security fronts by the
main protagonists. We therefore welcome the ongoing
efforts of the United States with the parties. In that
connection, we hope that the mission given to General
Fraser will usefully complement the institutional role
of the Quartet as regards monitoring the
implementation of the Road Map. The European Union
is also more involved than ever, in terms of diplomacy
and its field missions. We also welcome the
commitment of the League of Arab States in reiterating
its peace initiative, participating at Annapolis and
working with the Quartet.

The international community is also involved on
the economic and humanitarian fronts through the work
of Tony Blair as the Quartet's Representative, the €5
billion pledged at the Paris Conference in support of
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad's reform project and, just

this week, the establishment of the European
Commission's PEGASE mechanism for managing
European Union socio-economic aid to Palestine,
which is intended to channel international assistance to
the Palestinian Authority.

That commitment will be meaningless, however,
unless it is accompanied by accountability on the part
of all protagonists on the ground to ensure that they
meet the hopes of their peoples and dedicate
themselves to providing them with a better future. The
first duty of Israeli and Palestinian officials is to
refrain from any measure that weakens the peace
process. That duty is incumbent upon both the Israeli
Government and the Palestinian Authority, as well as
all other actors, in particular Hamas.

By refusing to clearly recognize Israel's right to
exist, resuming the firing of terrorist rockets against
civilians in Sderot and Ashkelom and rejecting the
relaunching of the peace process at Annapolis, Hamas
officials are continuing to fail to meet their
responsibilities. By forcibly taking control of the Gaza
Strip, they have weakened the institutions designed to
be the basis for the State to which all Palestinians
aspire. The necessary normalization of the situation on
the border of the Gaza Strip provides an opportunity to
demonstrate a sense of responsibility, which would
above all benefit Palestinians, especially those living in
Gaza. In that context, Belgium supports the efforts of
Egyptian authorities and President Abbas to reopen
border crossings under the monitoring of the
Palestinian Authority, as well as the resumption of the
flows of both commercial and humanitarian goods.

I would like to conclude by expressing my
delegation's deep concern about the situation in
Lebanon. Every announcement of a postponement of
presidential elections - of which there have now been
13 - seriously heightens tensions and the risk of
Violent incidents such as those that broke out this past
weekend. What is more disturbing is that, week after
week, a campaign of terrorist attacks is attempting to
destabilize the country by targeting the very
institutions, and thereby the authority, of a State that
we want to be sovereign, united and independent.

The history of Lebanon attests to the dangers of
such a destructive policy. Belgium joins the numerous
appeals of the Secretary-General calling for an
immediate end to the violence. It is imperative that
Lebanese officials meet the expectations placed upon
them. It is especially inconceivable that certain persons
in Lebanon and elsewhere are continuing to hinder the
election of a presidential candidate who has already
been agreed through a compromise between the
majority and the opposition and who would provide the
best guarantee for neutrality and impartiality. In that
connection, Belgium would like to express its
unreserved support for the mediation efforts of the
League of Arab States and Mr. Amr Moussa, its
Secretary-General. He should continue with his efforts.

