Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in Russian): We wish to welcome Mr. Carmel Agius and
Mr. Serge Brammertz, the President and Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.

Today, on 11 December, we can sum up the year's
results. Unfortunately, the international community is
still dragging around the useless remains of a pair of
tribunals established a quarter of a century ago, now in
the new incarnation of the Residual Mechanism. The
Security Council's attempts to shut it down in 2010 and
2014 were futile.

The systemic problem of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) was that
having been established in a specific political context,
it went on to embrace the worst features of politically
driven justice. The statistics and content of its judgments
are a stark testament to which side in the tangle of
disputes in the Balkans was deliberately pronounced
guilty. We should remember the cruel irony of those
years regarding the status of the standard principle of
the presumption of innocence in the ICTY, which was
that everyone is presumed innocent until proven to be
a Serb.

Alas, the Residual Mechanism has inherited a
flawed legacy. It is driven neither by justice nor by
fairness but rather by that same matrix, flawed from
the very beginning. During the reporting period, the
sentence of Radovan Karadzie, a Serb, was reviewed
and extended for the maximum period possible. A
40-year prison sentence for a 74-year-old man was
apparently too lenient, in the judges' view, so he was
sentenced to life. We would like to draw the attention of
the Tribunal's leadership to the importance of ensuring
that the accused, especially Ratko Mladie, receive
timely and appropriate medical care. We hope that
he receives high-quality care and adequate treatment
in the Mechanism's detention facilities. We are still
prepared to accommodate him for treatment in the
Russian Federation. We also call on the Mechanism to
adhere strictly to its functions in its work in the context
of Rwanda.

The leaders of the Residual Mechanism have
designated this a watershed year, and so it should be.
We await the completion of all cases according to
the established schedule. The same applies to the so-
called contempt-of-court cases, which appear to have
multiplied of late. In the light of the Security Council's
upcoming review of the Mechanism's activities, we
hope that 2020 will bring it significantly closer to its
end. For our part, we are ready to do whatever we can
to enable that to happen.

