Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to begin by thanking the Chairman of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Ambassador Takasu of
Japan, for his briefing and the information provided
therein.
As we consider the work of the Peacebuilding
Commission over the past year, I wish to express our
pleasure at the Commission's achievements. The
Commission's limited experience does not yet allow us
to claim that it has survived the test of the first five
years, as the Brahimi report puts it, but the actions
undertaken and their results to date are cause for
optimism.

My delegation takes this opportunity to address
three very specific points.

First is the importance of further strengthening
coordination and coherence among the organs and
bodies of the United Nations and of increasing
cooperation with international financial institutions,
regional development banks and regional and
subregional organizations. As I have noted previously,
after two years of work the Commission has made
progress towards achieving its objectives and taken an
important step towards achieving coordination and
coherence within the United Nations system in post-
conflict situations.

However, it is especially important to develop
even closer coordination mechanisms, particularly with
special representatives of the Secretary-General in the
countries on the Commission's agenda. This would
enable us to maximize existing resources and, in
particular, to provide the Organization's principal
representative in the field with the tools needed to
promote the implementation of the agreements that will
bring about progress towards resolution of the political
issues that underlie all conflicts.

Secondly, it is necessary to overcome the
arbitrary distinction between peacekeeping and
peacebuilding. My delegation has said that the Security
Council, when it decides to create or renew a
peacekeeping mission, should include in its mandate
all the elements necessary to ensure that the transition
from conflict to a post-conflict situation to
development takes place in as orderly a way as
possible. To that end, we consider that the concept of
integrated missions will enable us to appropriately
meet the challenges inherent in all conflict and post-
conflict situations, both in terms of the sound
management of resources and in terms of results-
oriented action.

I think it is particularly difficult to pinpoint the
moment when a peacekeeping operation becomes an
operation with a peacebuilding task. In our View,
elements of both are present from the beginning, with
one of them predominant depending on progress or
deterioration on the ground. We therefore do not think
that the concept of graduation is appropriate,
applicable or positive in a conflict or post-conflict
conflict in moving to the peacebuilding stage. In that

regard, we welcome the Council's practice of inviting
the Chair of the relevant country configuration to
advise the Council on the action that should be taken,
on the basis of action taken by the Peacebuilding
Commission. It is important that this relationship be
strengthened in operational terms to enable the Council
to adopt decisions based on analyses that take account
of all the elements that are in daily play on the ground.

Finally, my delegation stresses the need, for
operational reasons, to distinguish between
peacebuilding and development, but without creating
any artificial competition between the two. Just as we
think it neither practical nor helpful to attempt to
distinguish between peacekeeping and peacebuilding,
we believe that we should identify criteria by which to
define the point at which the efforts of the international
community and national efforts have borne sufficient
fruit that it is possible to move beyond the
exceptionality that gave rise to a given intervention. If
we cannot define the point at which a situation ceases
to be viewed as an emergency, then we will have
interventions that, rather than building peace, will
promote a culture of patronage and will weaken good
governance and responsibility, sowing the seeds of
future conflict.

This gives special responsibility to the donor
community. The criteria for allocating development
assistance cannot be the same as those for allocating
peacebuilding assistance. We understand that this is no
easy matter, but the additional effort will be rewarded
in the medium term by better allocation of resources
and clearly identifiable results. Nor can the same
operational rules be applied in every context. As we
indicated in speaking of the need to strengthen the role
of the Special Representatives of the Secretary-General
in terms of coordination and coherence, when it comes
to peacebuilding the donor community should permit
relatively flexible management in order to achieve the
goals that in the medium term will enable us to lay the
foundations of sustainable development.

The Peacebuilding Commission offers a creative
and flexible response, and that is where its great
strength lies. The Security Council should muster
similar creativity and flexibility so that, working in a
coordinated manner, it will be possible to maximize its
use of existing resources and facilitate the speedy
achievement of sustainable results in the places where
it has decided to intervene, in exercise of its mandate.

Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke 
in Arabic): I wish at the outset to thank His Excellency

Ambassador Yukio Takasu, Chairman of the

Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing on the

Commission's work and on his efforts at the helm of

the Commission. We also pay tribute to the

representatives of Belgium, Brazil, the Netherlands and

Norway for their efforts as Chairs of the country-
specific configurations.

The Peacebuilding Commission was established
to buttress the change in the nature of peacekeeping
operations, which in the past had been focused more on
military and security issues. But those two elements in
themselves are not enough to address all the challenges
arising from armed conflict, including political,
economic and humanitarian problems. The
establishment of the Commission was thus a significant
step towards sustainable post-conflict peace.

We want to say how much we appreciate the
Commission's efforts, both in the organization of its
work and in its interaction with other United Nations
bodies and with the African Union, thus ensuring
effective working relationships in the discharge of its
mandate. We wish also to voice our satisfaction about
the Commission's interest in identifying the ways and
means of meeting the challenges it faces in discharging
its mandate.

We pay tribute to the success of the Burundi
configuration. The Government of Burundi has been
able to achieve a lasting Strategic Framework for
Peacebuilding, through the establishment of a joint
monitoring and tracking mechanism. There was also
agreement with the Government of Burundi on an
annual work plan, focusing on Peacebuilding Fund
projects in the areas of security and good governance.

The situation is similar with respect to the
implementation of the Commission's programmes in
Sierra Leone. Indeed, the Commission and the
Government of Sierra Leone have jointly adopted the
Peacebuilding Cooperation Framework. Work in that
country has been focused on assistance in meeting the
commitments set out in the framework of the
expansion of the donor base and the launching of new
priority activities, with a focus on justice and security.
We are confident that the Commission will continue its
efforts in the same spirit and with the same
effectiveness in the Central African Republic and
Guinea-Bissau.
We thank donors for their contributions to the
Peacebuilding Support Office, which have enabled it to
exceed its targets. That also gives us reason to hope for
an increase in the number of donors.

We agree with the comments and
recommendations contained in the report with regard to
the development of an integrated peacebuilding
strategy. We continue to focus on assisting national
efforts in the areas of dialogue, national reconciliation,
capacity-building, institutional reform, economic
revitalization and human rights, including efforts to
mobilize resources and rationalize their use. Here, we
should stress the importance of international, regional
and subregional efforts, as well as joint efforts with
main United Nations bodies.

In that connection, we wish to make the
following points. First, it is quite clear that, while top
priority should be placed on security sector reform,
judicial reform and overall institutional reform, we
should also focus on improving living conditions,
creating jobs and providing medicine and food.

Secondly, all efforts and decisions of the
Peacebuilding Commission must be carried out not
only in coordination with local authorities, but also
with their consent. Thus, all projects should reaffirm
the concept of national ownership. The relevant
national and local authorities must be convinced that
what is being implemented is a result of their own
decisions and that international efforts are aimed solely
at supporting their decisions, not undermining them.

Thirdly, if the effectiveness of the Commission's
work is to be enhanced, its annual programmes should
be incorporated into a longer-term plan, such as a
three- or five-year plan. We know full well that that is
no easy task to accomplish. However, if we are
successful, it would strengthen stabilization, build trust
among donors and convince them that their assistance
is needed.

We are convinced that the Peacebuilding
Commission has recognized that it must carry out its
mandate of peacebuilding in post-conflict countries
within the framework of global sustainable
development. Thus, the future of peacebuilding
depends on our careful understanding of the nature of
all conflicts and on national ownership of all
peacebuilding and development efforts supported by
the international community. It is quite clear that the
success of the Commission's efforts will depend on the
support that it provides to post-conflict countries in the
area of sustainable development.

I wish to conclude by commending the results of
the visit made to the Central African Republic by the
Peacebuilding Commission under the chairmanship of
the representative of Belgium. That Visit led to an
agreement with local authorities concerning priority
areas for peacebuilding in the Central African
Republic. We hope that the Commission's second visit,
which is currently being prepared, will also be
successful.

