Mr. Al-Bader (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, Mr. President, I would like to thank you for
convening this important meeting. We welcome the
participation of His Excellency Mr. Abdal Mahdi, Vice-
President of the Republic of Iraq. Allow me as well to
thank Mr. Ashraf Qazi, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Iraq and His Excellency Mr.
Alejandro Wolff, representative of the United States,
for their briefings to the Security Council.

The place that brotherly Iraq occupies in our
hearts and minds does not need to be emphasized from
this rostrum. Iraq is a highly important country in our
region and one that enjoys considerable weight. We in
the State of Qatar are pained to see the suffering of our
brothers in Iraq, and it is not surprising that we
continue to appeal to all our Iraqi brothers throughout
the spectrum to put their national interests ahead of
other considerations. Political solutions to the current
problem cannot be imported from abroad. Rather, they
are available in the hands of Iraqis themselves, when
intentions are good and when these intentions are
translated into deeds on the ground.

The international community's support for the
efforts to achieve peace, security and development in
Iraq is very important to help extricate Iraq from the
crisis that threatens its unity and stability. In this
context, the International Compact with Iraq is a useful
initiative to consolidate peace and pursue the process
of economic, political and social development in Iraq
over the next five years. The meeting to be held here at
the United Nations Headquarters tomorrow morning
will be an opportunity to stress the importance of that
initiative. In order to realize the vision of the Compact,
it is important that support by the United Nations and
international partners be coordinated for the
implementation of the commitments made in the
Compact.

To overcome the deteriorating humanitarian
situation, the speedy improvement of the living
conditions of the Iraqi people is no less important than
the national reconciliation process in order to ensure
stability in Iraq.
The humanitarian situation in Iraq continues to
deteriorate. The crisis of Iraqi refugees has become a
real crisis of major proportions. The enormity of the

humanitarian disaster in Iraq calls for exerting all
efforts by international partners, the United Nations
intergovernmental institutions and other international
bodies, so as to alleviate the humanitarian crisis. In this
regard, we hope that the conference to be convened by
the Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees next
month in Geneva, which will deal with the
humanitarian needs of displaced Iraqis, would
contribute to raising awareness of the need to support
these displaced people as well as their host countries,
which bear great burdens because of this situation.

The State of Qatar has constantly stressed the
need to respect the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Iraq and to restore security and freedom to the Iraqi
people. We also stress that the root causes of the Iraqi
crisis must be identified in order to find a solution.

The way out of the Iraqi crisis starts with
focusing our attention on the elements of the political
process in Iraq, not on a military solution, and on
encouraging all groups to integrate into political life
and to combat sectarianism. The role of wise
leadership is crucial in this regard inasmuch as that
leaders of Iraq's sects must mobilize in order to heal
the rift in their country.

Although the serious security conditions in Iraq
restrict the work of the United Nations Assistance
Mission in Iraq (UNAMI), the Mission continues to
contribute effectively in such areas as constitutional
support, electoral assistance, reconstruction,
development, humanitarian assistance, human rights
and the rule of law, with a view to restoring stability,
security and prosperity in Iraq.

