Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
At present, the situation in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region is at a critical
juncture. It was therefore highly necessary that the
Security Council send a mission to visit this region. We
appreciate the unremitting efforts made by Ambassador
Levitte, as the head of the delegation, from the
beginning of the mission until this morning. He also
gave us a very helpful briefing on the visit. We believe
that Ambassador Levitte contributed to the mission's
success and that the visit has indeed achieved results,
as expected. It has helped us gain first-hand knowledge
of the situation in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Great Lakes region, to accurately take
stock of the situation and to determine our next steps.

The issue of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo involves more than one country. Many
countries, political parties and armed groups are
directly and indirectly involved. The situation is
extremely complex. In a region as vast as Africa and in
a conflict as complex as this one, the question of the
role to be played by the United Nations is a challenge
to the United Nations and in particular to the Security
Council. The United Nations must take action to
implement the outcome of the Millennium Summit and
pay more attention to African questions, including
peacekeeping in Africa.
I share the views expressed by the British
Ambassador. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has fulfilled his tasks in an excellent manner.
We hope that the Secretary-General will appoint a
worthy successor to the Special Representative.

It must be pointed out that in order for the
conflict to come to an early conclusion and in order to
move towards peace in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Burundi and the Great Lakes region, the key is
for peace initiatives to come first from the countries
involved in the Great Lakes region and all the parties to
the conflict, and for all of them to have a genuine will
and determination to achieve peace and reconciliation.
Peace initiatives must come first from the countries and
the various parties of the region. As the Secretary-
General pointed out this morning, the leaders in the
region should lead the way to peace. It is evident from
the mission that all the parties have a genuine desire
for peace. However, some parties have not made up
their minds to turn this desire into concrete action to
implement the Lusaka Agreement and the relevant
Security Council resolutions. Therefore, the United
Nations and the international community must continue
their efforts to ensure the provision of the various
resources needed to achieve peace.

Generally speaking, in order to find a solution to
the conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and to achieve a lasting peace in the Great Lakes
region, the key is to promote and achieve internal
reconciliation in the countries of the region, as well as
a broad-based reconciliation between the countries of
the region. Peaceful coexistence can be reached only
when reconciliation is achieved at these two levels.
Otherwise, even if peace is achieved, it will not last
long.

At this time, disengagement and peace have
basically been achieved and a window of opportunity
has been opened in the peace process. Under these
circumstances, we call upon the parties to the conflict
to exercise restraint and to refrain from using words or
taking actions that might be harmful to peace and
reconciliation. Without desire and action for peace and
reconciliation, political dialogue, demilitarization,
demobilization, resettlement and reintegration and the
withdrawal of foreign troops will encounter great
difficulties and obstacles.

Finally, there are a few points that are crucially
important to the latest developments, which I would
like to emphasize. First, disengagement and a ceasefire
have now been achieved in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. There must not be any violation of the
disengagement and ceasefire by any party and there
must be no backtracking. Secondly, the city of
Kisangani must be demilitarized as soon as possible.
This is an issue that will determine whether Kisangani
can be reached by the River Congo. Thirdly, the River
Congo must be reopened to navigation as planned.
Fourthly, we must follow the situation in Burundi in
order to prevent it from deteriorating.

